Half-bird half-woman monsters associated with storm winds For other uses, see API (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Harpy Grouping Legendary creature Sub grouping Hybrid In Greek mythology and Roman mythology, a harpy (plural harpies or Harpuiai, Greek: ἅρπυια,[1][2] harpyia, pronounced [hárpyi̯a]; Latin: harpȳia) is a half-human and half-bird personification of storm winds. They feature in Homeric poems.[3] Contents 1 Descriptions 1.1 Hesiod 1.2 Aeschylus 1.3 Virgil 1.4 Hyginus 2 Functions and abodes 3 Names and family 4 Mythology 4.1 Argonauts 4.2 Aeneid 5 Modern reception 5.1 Literature 5.2 Linguistic use and application 5.3 Heraldry 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Descriptions[edit] They were generally depicted as birds with the heads of maidens, faces pale with hunger and long claws on their hands. Roman and Byzantine writers detailed their ugliness.[4] Pottery art depicting the harpies featured beautiful women with wings. Ovid described them as human-vultures.[5] Hesiod[edit] To Hesiod, they were imagined as fair-locked and winged maidens, who surpassed winds and birds in the rapidity of their flight. "...the Harpyiai (Harpies) of the lovely hair, Okypete (Ocypete) and Aello, and these two in the speed of their wings keep pace with the blowing winds, or birds in flight, as they soar and swoop, high aloft."[6] Aeschylus[edit] But even as early as the time of Aeschylus, they are described as ugly creatures with wings, and later writers carry their notions of the harpies so far as to represent them as most disgusting monsters. The Pythian priestess of Apollo recounted the appearance of the harpies in the following lines: "Before this man an extraordinary band of women [i.e. harpies] slept, seated on thrones. No! Not women, but rather Gorgons I call them; and yet I cannot compare them to forms of Gorgons either. Once before I saw some creatures in a painting, carrying off the feast of Phineus; but these are wingless in appearance, black, altogether disgusting; they snore with repulsive breaths, they drip from their eyes hateful drops; their attire is not fit to bring either before the statues of the gods or into the homes of men. I have never seen the tribe that produced this company, nor the land that boasts of rearing this brood with impunity and does not grieve for its labor afterwards."[7] Virgil[edit] "Bird-bodied, girl-faced things they (Harpies) are; abominable their droppings, their hands are talons, their faces haggard with hunger insatiable"[8] Hyginus[edit] "They are said to have been feathered, with cocks' heads, wings, and human arms, with great claws; breasts, bellies, and female parts human."[9] Functions and abodes[edit] The harpies seem originally to have been wind spirits (personifications of the destructive nature of wind). Their name means "snatchers" or "swift robbers"[10] and they steal food from their victims while they are eating and carry evildoers (especially those who have killed their families) to the Erinyes. When a person suddenly disappeared from the Earth, it was said that he had been carried off by the harpies.[11] Thus, they carried off the daughters of king Pandareus and gave them as servants to the Erinyes.[12] In this form they were agents of punishment who abducted people and tortured them on their way to Tartarus. They were vicious, cruel and violent. The harpies were called "the hounds of mighty Zeus" thus "ministers of the Thunderer (Zeus)".[13] Later writers listed the harpies among the guardians of the underworld among other monstrosities including the Centaurs, Scylla, Briareus, Lernaean Hydra, Chimera, Gorgons and Geryon.[14] Their abode is either the islands called Strofades,[15] a place at the entrance of Orcus,[16] or a cave in Crete.[17] Names and family[edit] Hesiod calls them two "lovely-haired" creatures, the daughters of Thaumas and the Oceanid Electra and sisters of Iris.[6] Hyginus, however, cited a certain Ozomene[18] as the mother of the harpies but he also recounted that Electra was also the mother of these beings in the same source. This can be explained by the fact that Ozomene was another name for Electra. The harpies possibly were siblings of the river-god Hydaspes and Arke, as they were called sisters of Iris and children of Thaumas. According to Valerius, Typhoeus (Typhon) was said to be the father of these monsters[13] while a different version by Servius told that the harpies were daughters of Pontus and Gaea or of Poseidon.[19] They are named Aello ("storm swift") and Ocypete ("the swift wing"),[20][21] and Virgil added Celaeno ("the dark") as a third.[22] Homer knew of a harpy named Podarge ("fleet-foot").[23] Aello, is sometimes also spelled Aellopus or Nicothoe; Ocypete, sometimes also spelled Ocythoe or Ocypode. Homer called the harpy Podarge as the mother of the two horses (Balius and Xanthus) of Achilles sired by the West Wind Zephyrus[24] while according to Nonnus, Xanthus and Podarkes, horses of the Athenian king Erechtheus, were born to Aello and the North Wind Boreas.[25] Other progeny of Podarge were Phlogeus and Harpagos, horses given by Hermes to the Dioscuri, who competed for the chariot-race in celebration of the funeral games of Pelias.[26] The swift horse Arion was also said to begotten by loud-piping Zephyrus on a harpy (probably Podarge), as attested by Quintus Smyrnaeus.[27] COMPARATIVE TABLE OF NAMES AND FAMILY OF HARPIES ACCORDING TO VARIOUS SOURCES Name and Relation Hesiod Homer Stesichorus Virgil Valerius Apollodorus Hyginus Nonnus Quintus Servius Parents Thaumas and Electra not stated not stated not stated Typhoeus Thaumas and Electra Thaumas and Electra or Ozomene not stated not stated Pontus and Gaea or Poseidon Names Aello Podarge Podarge not stated Aello or Nicothoe Aellopus or Podarce Aellopos Podarge not stated Ocypete Ocypete, Ocythoe or Ocypode Ocypete - Celaeno Celaeno Mate - Zephyrus not stated - - - - Boreas Zephyrus - Progeny - Balius and Xanthus Phlogeus and Harpagos - - - - Xanthus and Podarkes Balius and Xanthus; Arion - Mythology[edit] A harpy in Ulisse Aldrovandi's Monstrorum Historia, Bologna, 1642 Argonauts[edit] A medieval depiction of a harpy as a bird-woman The most celebrated story in which the harpies play a part is that of King Phineus of Thrace, who was given the gift of prophecy by Zeus. Angry that Phineus gave away the god's secret plan, Zeus punished him by blinding him and putting him on an island with a buffet of food which he could never eat because the harpies always arrived to steal the food out of his hands before he could satisfy his hunger. Later writers add that they either devoured the food themselves, or that they dirtied it by dropping upon it some stinking substance, so as to render it unfit to be eaten. This continued until the arrival of Jason and the Argonauts. Phineus promised to instruct them respecting the course they had to take, if they would deliver him from the harpies. The Boreads, sons of Boreas, the North Wind, who also could fly, succeeded in driving off the harpies. According to an ancient oracle, the harpies were to perish by the hands of the Boreades, but the latter were to die if they could not overtake the harpies. The latter fled, but one fell into the river Tigris, which was hence called Harpys, and the other reached the Echinades, and as she never returned, the islands were called Strophades. But being worn out with fatigue, she fell down simultaneously with her pursuer; and, as they promised no further to molest Phineus, the two harpies were not deprived of their lives.[28] According to others, the Boreades were on the point of killing the harpies, when Iris or Hermes appeared and commanded the conquerors to set them free, promising that Phineus would not be bothered by the harpies again. "The dogs of great Zeus" then returned to their "cave in Minoan Crete". Other accounts said that both the harpies as well as the Boreades died.[29] Thankful for their help, Phineus told the Argonauts how to pass the Symplegades.[30] Tzetzes explained the origin of the myth pertaining to Phineus, the harpies, and the Boreades in his account. In this late version of the myth it was said that Phineus, due to his old age, became blind, and he has two daughters named Eraseia and Harpyreia. These maidens lived a very libertine and lazy life, abandoning themselves to poverty and fatal famine. Then Zetes and Calais snatched them away somehow, and they disappeared from those places ever since. From this account all myths about them [i.e., the harpies] started, as was also retold by Apollonius in his own story of the Argonauts.[31] Aeneid[edit] Aeneas encountered harpies on the Strophades as they repeatedly made off with the feast the Trojans were setting. Celaeno utters a prophecy: the Trojans will be so hungry they will eat their tables before they reach the end of their journey. The Trojans fled in fear. Modern reception[edit] Harpies in the infernal wood, from Inferno XIII, by Gustave Doré, 1861 Literature[edit] Harpies remained vivid in the Middle Ages. In Canto XIII of his Inferno, Dante Alighieri envisages the tortured wood infested with harpies, where the suicides have their punishment in the seventh ring of Hell: Here the repellent harpies make their nests, Who drove the Trojans from the Strophades With dire announcements of the coming woe. They have broad wings, with razor sharp talons and a human neck and face, Clawed feet and swollen, feathered bellies; they caw Their lamentations in the eerie trees.[32] William Blake was inspired by Dante's description in his pencil, ink and watercolour "The Wood of the Self-Murderers: The Harpies and the Suicides" (Tate Gallery, London). Harpies also found a role in Shakespeare's Tempest, where the spirit Ariel tortured the antagonists Antonio, Sebastian and Alonso for their crimes by staging a banquet scene similar to that in the Aeneid. Linguistic use and application[edit] The harpy eagle is a real bird named after the mythological animal. The term is often used metaphorically to refer to a nasty or annoying woman. In Shakespeare's Much Ado About Nothing, Benedick spots the sharp-tongued Beatrice approaching and exclaims to the prince, Don Pedro, that he would do an assortment of arduous tasks for him "rather than hold three words conference with this harpy!" Heraldry[edit] Greater coat of arms of the city of Nuremberg In the Middle Ages, the harpy, often called the Jungfraunadler[33] or "maiden eagle" (although it may not have been modeled after the original harpy of Greek mythology), became a popular charge in heraldry, particularly in East Frisia, seen on, among others, the coats-of-arms of Rietberg, Liechtenstein, and the Cirksena. The harpy also appears in British heraldry, although it remains a peculiarly German device.[33] See also[edit] Alkonost Karura Kinnara Seraphim Siren (mythology) Sirin Tengu References[edit] ^ Of uncertain etymology; R. S. P. Beekes has suggested a Pre-Greek origin (Etymological Dictionary of Greek, Brill, 2009, p. 139). ^ ἅρπυια. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ Homer. Odyssey, Book 20.66 & 77 ^ Virgil. Aeneid, Book 3.216; Tzetzes. ad Lycoph. 653; Ovid. Metamorphoses Book 7.4, Fasti, Book 6.132; Hyginus. Fabulae, 14 ^ Ovid. Metamorphoses vii.4 ^ a b Hesiod, Theogony, 265–267. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. ^ Aeschylus. Eumenides, 50 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. ^ Virgil. Aeneid, Book 3.216 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.' ^ Hyginus. Fabulae, 14 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. ^ Adrian Room, Who's Who in Classical Mythology, p. 147 ISBN 0-517-22256-6 ^ Homer Odyssey, Book 1.241, 14.371 ^ Homer. Odyssey, Book 20.78 ^ a b Valerius Flaccus. Argonautica Book 4.425 ^ Virgil. Aeneid 6.287 ff; Seneca. Hercules Furens 747 ff ^ Virgil. Aeneid, Book 3.210 ^ Virgil. Aeneid, Book 6.289 ^ Apollonius. Argonautica, Book 2.298 ^ Hyginus. Fabulae 14 ^ Servius. ad Aeneid, Book 3.241 ^ Hesiod. Theogony 265 ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus. Bibliotheca, Book 1.121-123. ^ Virgil, Aeneid 3.209 ^ Homer, Iliad 16.148 ^ Homer. Iliad, Book 16.150; Quintus Smyrnaeus. Fall of Troy, Book 3.743 ff ^ Nonnus. Dionysiaca Book 37.155 ^ Stesichorus. Fragments 178 ^ Quintus Smyrnaeus. Fall of Troy, Book 4.569 ff ^ Apollodorus. Bibliotheca, Book 1.9.21 ^ Scholia. ad Apollon. Rhod. i. 286, 297; Tzetzes. Chiliades, i. 217 ^ Argonautica, book II; Ovid XIII, 710; Virgil III, 211, 245 ^ Tzetzes. ad Lycophron, 166, Chiliades, 1.220; Palaephaust. 23. 3 ^ Translation of Robert Pinsky, Boston Review Archived 2014-11-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Arthur Fox-Davies, A Complete Guide to Heraldry, T.C. and E.C. Jack, London, 1909, p 229, https://archive.org/details/completeguidetoh00foxduoft. External links[edit] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Harpies . Media related to Harpies Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Classical religious forms Ancient Greek religion Gnosticism Paleo-Balkan mythology Hellenistic religion Orphism Pythagoreanism Mycenaean deities Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Samothracian Mysteries Main beliefs Ages of Man Apotheosis Euhemerism Eusebeia Greek Heroic Age Interpretatio graeca Monism Mythology Nympholepsy Paganism Paradoxography Polytheism Theism Texts/epic poems/odes Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Cyranides Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Ehoiai Greek Magical Papyri Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Interpretation of Dreams (Antiphon) Oneirocritica Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Telegony The golden verses of Pythagoras Theogony Works and Days Epic Cycle Theban Cycle Rites and practices Amphidromia Animal sacrifice Apotheosis Baptes Curse tablet Daduchos Delphinion Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Hymns Hero cult Heroon Hierophany Hierophant Hierophylakes Hieros gamos Hypsistarians Iatromantis Interpretatio graeca Kanephoros Kykeon Libations Mystagogue Nekyia Necromancy Necromanteion Nymphaeum Panegyris Pharmakos Prayers Orgia Sacrifices Temenos Thyia Temples Votive offerings Sacred places Oracles, sanctuaries, Necromanteion Aornum Delphi Didymaion Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros island Oracle of Menestheus Tegyra Mountain Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Cave of Zeus, Crete Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Achilles island Delos Diomedes island Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Others Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Mythical beings Dragons in Greek mythology Greek mythological creatures Greek mythological figures List of minor Greek mythological figures Deities Primordial deities Aether Aion Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Aquatic deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Potamoi Potamides Proteus Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Hermanubis Hermes Thanatos Achlys Angelos Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Macaria Melinoë Persephone Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Dolos Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Other major deities Azone Eileithyia The Erinyes Harmonia The Muses Nemesis Pan Unknown God Zelus Heroes/heroines Abderus Achilles Actaeon Aeneas Argonauts Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Mythical tribes Amazons Anthropophage Atlantians Bebryces Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Telchines Oracles/seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Delphic Sibyl Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyl Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Magic Apotropaic magic Greek Magical Papyri Pella curse tablet Philia Mythical realms Aethiopia Atlantis Erytheia Hyperborea Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Scheria Scythia Themiscyra Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Fields of Punishment Isles of the Blessed Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Ferryman Charon Charon's obol Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Animals, daemons and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Hade's cattle Mythological wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Cranes-Pygmies war Gigantomachy Indian War (it is described at Dionysiaca) Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Mythological and religious objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Ara Baetylus Caduceus Cornucopia Dragon's teeth Diipetes Galatea Golden apple Golden Fleece Gorgoneion Greek terracotta figurines Harpe Ichor Lotus tree Minoan seals Moly Necklace of Harmonia Omphalos Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos (Winged helmet) Philosopher's stone Ring of Gyges Rod of Asclepius Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thymiaterion Thyrsus Trident Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of Fortune Wheel of fire Xoanon Symbols Arkalochori Axe Labrys Ouroboros Owl of Athena Mythological powers Divination Eidolon Eternal youth Evocation Fortune-telling Immortality Language of the birds Nympholepsy Magic Ornithomancy Shamanism Shapeshifting Weather modification Storage containers, cups, vases Amphora Calathus Chalice Ciborium Cotyla Hydria Hydriske Kalpis Kantharos Kernos Kylix Lebes Lekythos Loutrophoros Oenochoe Pelike Pithos Skyphos Stamnos Urn Musical Instruments Aulos Barbiton Chelys Cithara Cochilia Crotalum (Castanets) Epigonion Kollops Lyre Pan flute Pandura Phorminx Psaltery Salpinx Sistrum Tambourine Trigonon Tympanum Water organ Games Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Festivals/feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Vessels Argo Phaeacian ships Modern offshoot religions Discordianism Gaianism Feraferia Hellenism Modern popular culture Greek mythology in popular culture v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125