This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article consists almost entirely of a plot summary. It should be expanded to provide more balanced coverage that includes real-world context. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (October 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Rock Monster Written by Berkeley Anderson Ron Fernandez Declan O'Brien Directed by Declan O'Brien Starring Chad Collins Jon Polito Theme music composer Tom Hiel Country of origin United States Original language English Production Producers Jeffery Beach Phillip J. Roth Cinematography Anton Bakarski Dylan Editor Matt Michael Release Original network Syfy Channel Original release March 22, 2008 (2008-03-22) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Rock Monster is a 2008 television film directed by Declan O'Brien. It is a Syfy Channel original was premiered on March 22, 2008. Plot[edit] A group of traveling college students arrive at an Eastern European small village called Ivanovo after their bus broke down. One of the students, Jason, pulls a sword from a stone, unwittingly reviving a giant monster whose body is composed of rock. The monster goes on a killing spree, regenerating and blending in with mountain and stony hill features. Later at night, the one of his friends, Warren, having an injured ankle, goes missing alone in the woods and gets killed by the Rock Monster. Jason learns that an ancestor of his, Knight Jakivar Lazar, had slain a similar monster, as the evil Wizard Elas's spirit was imprisoned of the earth and stones from 800 years ago before their time, using the same sword. When Jason called the police for help to find Warren at Cassandra’s father's office, the phone line goes out due to being cut by criminal gypsies. On the way to another town to make a phone call, Jason and his friends see the gypsies laying dead on the road. The Rock Monster reforms and reveals itself before rising to attack them. They escape back to the village before the car explodes. During a meeting in the town city hall, the Colonel gave his personal speech to villagers about being scared and hide inside their homes or to fight back against the monster together. The Colonel thought Jason's weapon was just a sword he tells him that this is no ordinary sword, but a powerful one, and it's the only one can kill the monster. Toni defends Jason by telling everyone that he's sorry for everything. He decides to stay to help them to destroy the monster. Toni reveals to him that she truly likes him, leaving for Jason to say goodbye to Benny, and that he won't leave Cassandra and Toni to fight the monster alone. Back on the main road, they learn that the monster grows stronger after feeding on the blood of its victims, and that Dimitar was using black magic from the Elas's spell books. Jason's friend, Benny, was killed by a monster while he was walking alone in attempt to go home. The Rock Monster came to them in the woods as the villagers begin to fire at it. It starts to go after Jason, but Toni distracted the monster using a bomb launcher so that Jason can kill him. Eventually, Jason defeats the Rock monster by stabbing it in the ankle, and it shatters into pieces on the ground. At night back in the village at the pub restaurant, the mayor and the villagers are celebrating that Jason killed the monster. Jason explains to everyone how to defeat the monster, then goes outside where they’re sitting on a bench where he asked Cassandra come back to America with him after he graduates from college. His plan involves him moving to Los Angeles for a new start, but his plan to marry her has to wait. Drinking with the Colonel and the mayor, Jason confesses that he loves his daughter, leading for him to ask the mayor for her hand in marriage. Dimitar tries to kill Jason with a sword at his great-aunt Sophie's cottage when he sleeps, but Toni and the Farm Boy have come to save him by knocking Dimitar unconscious. In the jail cell bound with shackles on his hands and ankles, Dimitar told Jason that he can't kill the monster without a red jewel keystone. Jason punches him because of the taunting, and leaves while Dimitar laughs with a red jewel keystone around in his neck. The next morning in her father’s office, Jason asked Cassandra to come with him back to America. He's looking at his ancestor with a sword and keystone on the ground in a picture portrait hanging on a wall before packing their belongings. Jason and Toni hear the gunshots firing, and see Cassandra holding her dead father in her arms. The Colonel tells Jason that the monster came back to open the jail cell and free Dimitar. Jason finally starts realizes that Dimitar was telling the truth a whole time and Dimitar was behind it all, giving a warning that the monster came back to kill everyone until Jason dies, and he inherits the sword. As the Rock Monster comes back to the village, Toni and the Colonel use a bigger military tank to fire at Jason. He and the monster are buried in the rocks. Cassandra, Toni and the Colonel decided to go back the village sadly after Jason's supposed death, and the male barkeeper becomes the new mayor. The Colonel mentions that they've run out of shells for a tank, and that there's no army, and that they need to contact the other villages. Without any other choices, he has to make a deal with Dimitar for peace. Cassandra refuses to accept this bad idea, because Dimitar will enslave the village and offer the villagers to the monster. Dimitar summons the monster to get him out of the rocks. Later at night, Jason, unconscious but still alive from the rocks, travels to a secret lair in a mountain cave. Dimitar took the sword and added the red jewel keystone. He reveals that he's decided to not kill him yet, and that the monster's soul will be freed from the stone prison to be transferred into him to make him into a powerful sorcerer. Dimitar tells him that he's the last descendant of the Lazar family to witness for Elas's evil soul of his new ultimate abilities and immortality. Leaving Jason behind at his lair as he's getting away, he returns to the village with an injured leg. The new mayor, with his two men, makes a deal with Dimitar to have a peace. Dimitar debates on either sparing the village and people, or killing them. Cassandra is kidnapped, knocked out, and carried away from her father's house by a new mayor, revealing him to be a traitor. He ties her up and to leaves her alone in the woods. Jason angrily asks him where Cassandra is, and punches him, before finding out that Cassandra's has been carried away into Dimitar's lair. Toni told Jason that if Dimitar wants audience to show in a whole town to see him at the sunrise tomorrow. Cassandra refuses Dimitar's proposal. Dimitar possesses a keystone that has the power to both kill and control the monster. He hopes to transfer the rock monster's spirit into his own body, letting its spirit make him "omnipotent". It then follows Dimitar to the village with Cassandra, to begin the soul transference. In the midst of the process, Jason reacquires the sword and kills Dimitar with it. With sword having little effect on the creature in combat Jason remembering the painting depicting his ancestor impaling the ground, he does this and opens the ground under the monster and later throwing the sword at it's chest defeating the creature. The sword is revealed to be Excalibur. In the end Jason departs the village along with Cassandra, Toni and the Farm Boy, who proposed to Toni which she accepted. Cast[edit] Chad Michael Collins as Jason Natalie Denise Sperl as Cassandra Alicia Lagano as Toni David Figlioli as Dimitar Jon Polito as The Colonel Harry Anichkin as Mayor Michael Flemming as Benny Daniel Hembling as Warren Niki Iliev as Farm Boy Vladimir Kolev as Barkeeper Philip Avramov as Bus Driver External links[edit] API at IMDb v t e Films directed by Declan O'Brien Rock Monster (2008) Monster Ark (2008) Cyclops (2008) Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead (2009) Sharktopus (2010) Wrong Turn 4: Bloody Beginnings (2011) Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines (2012) Joy Ride 3: Roadkill (2014) v t e Films produced by Phillip J. Roth Prototype (1992) A.P.E.X. (1994) Total Reality (1997) Storm (1999) Velocity Trap (1999) Python (2000) Escape Under Pressure (2000) Deep Core (2000) Epoch (2001) Falcon Down (2001) New Alcatraz (2001) Lost Voyage (2001) Pythons 2 (2002) Interceptor Force 2 (2002) Antibody (2002) Landspeed (2002) Dark Descent (2002) Deep Shock (2003) Dragon Fighter (2003) Epoch: Evolution (2003) Silent Warnings (2003) Darklight (2004) Post Impact (2004) Boa vs. Python (2004) Locusts: The 8th Plague (2005) Path of Destruction (2005) Manticore (2005) S.S. Doomtrooper (2006) Magma: Volcanic Disaster (2006) Reign of the Gargoyles (2007) Bats: Human Harvest (2007) Lake Placid 2 (2007) Grendel (2007) Ghost Voyage (2008) Rock Monster (2008) Copperhead (2008) Monster Ark (2008) Star Runners (2009) Thor: Hammer of the Gods (2009) Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead (2009) Triassic Attack (2010) Dark Relic (2010) Lake Placid 3 (2010) Rage of the Yeti (2011) Lake Placid: The Final Chapter (2012) Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines (2012) Invasion Roswell (2013) Company of Heroes (2013) Supercollider (2013) Taken: The Search for Sophie Parker (2013) Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort (2014) Firequake (2014) Lake Placid vs. Anaconda (2015) The Throwaways (2015) Jarhead 3: The Siege (2016) Jarhead: Law of Return (2019)