Defacement of a coat of arms The shield of the Portuguese town of Castello Rodrigo, inverted for the town's treachery in the 1383–1385 Crisis An abatement (or rebatement) is a modification of a coat of arms, representing a less-than honorable augmentation,[1][2] imposed by an heraldic authority (such as the Court of Chivalry in England) or by royal decree for misconduct. The practice of inverting the entire escutcheon of an armiger found guilty of high treason has been attested since the Middle Ages and is generally accepted as reliable, and medieval heraldic sources cite at least one instance of removing an honourable charge from a coat of arms by royal decree as an abatement of honour. Other abatements of honour implied by the addition of dishonourable stains and charges, appearing in late 16th-century texts, have never been reliably attested in actual practice. Additionally, as many heraldic writers note, the use of arms is not compulsory, so armigers are more likely to relinquish a dishonored coat of arms than to advertise their dishonor. Contents 1 Inverted arms 2 Theoretical abatements 3 Breaking or erasing charges 4 Reported historical examples 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Inverted arms[edit] The earliest mention in heraldic writing of a dishonorable display of arms (and, according to Fox-Davies, the only one reliably attested in actual use; see historical examples below)[3] was inverting the entire shield, first documented by Johannes de Bado Aureo in his heraldic treatise Tractatus de armis (c. 1394).[4] Contemporary accounts of executions for treason describe the traitor being marched to his execution in a paper tabard displaying his inverted arms,[3] and other accounts tell of displaying the inverted arms of prisoners, released on parole, who refuse to pay their ransom.[4] Note that inverted arms can also indicate the death of the holder, and do not necessarily indicate dishonour.[5][6] Theoretical abatements[edit] Eight other abatements were introduced in the late 16th century, each prescribing a specific charge in a specific stain for a specific offense; though the charges themselves were uncommon but no less honourable than any other charge (if colored in any standard tincture or fur), it was only when displayed in the prescribed position and stain that these charges were supposed to be considered dishonourable. Leigh (1562) enumerated the nine abatements thus:[7] Point dexter parted tenné, for false claims of valor Point champaine tenné, for killing a prisoner who has demanded quarter Plain point sanguine, for one who lies to his sovereign Point in point sanguine, for cowardice Gusset sanguine borne to dexter, for adultery, or to sinister for a drunkard [a truncation of the shield] Gore sinister tenné, for cowardice in the face of the enemy Delf [shovelful of earth] tenné, for revoking a challenge Inescutcheon reversed sanguine, for any man who "discourteously entreateth eyther maid or widow against her will, or flieth from his Soveraignes banner"[8] The entire escutcheon inverted, for treason Scottish herald Thomas Innes of Learney mentioned abatements in marital situations: "The law of arms provides for abating the arms of an adulterer by two gussets sanguine, and where the bearing of arms is necessary this, and one gusset (they will be close-gussets) for non-adulterous divorcees, are, at least in Patents, applied in the case of divorcees."[9] Several notable modern heraldists have asserted that the execution of this system of abatements has never been attested in fact, and that the whole system was in all likelihood a theoretical exercise created by heralds for the purpose of discouraging armigers from committing dishonourable acts.[3][7] Breaking or erasing charges[edit] A lion couard is said to denote dishonor or cowardice. As another form of abatement, some coats of arms were reportedly modified through breaking or cutting, reversing, or altogether erasing some existing charges, at least as they occur in patents, though the armiger's actual display of these defaced arms has not been documented and is unlikely. In French heraldry the term diffamé is used to denote a lion or other animal whose tail is cut off, or may refer more broadly to arms which have been altered to signify loss of honor. A lion with its tail between its hind legs is termed "couard" (coward), and has also been cited as a mark of infamy.[9] Though lions are traditionally depicted with male genitals, a recent trend toward omitting the genitals has been controversial, prodding claims that emasculated lions have also been an historical form of abatement. Commenting on the newly castrated lion in the arms of the Nordic Battle Group in 2007, Vladimir Sagerlund, heraldic artist at the Swedish National Archives since 1994, was critical of the politically motivated decision, stating, "once upon a time coats of arms containing lions without genitalia were given to those who betrayed the Crown."[10][11] The Times in London, however, noted a growing recent trend toward heraldic "castration", pointing to the lions passant on the royal coat of arms of England, as well as the lions rampant on those of Norway, Finland, Belgium, Luxembourg and Scotland, all of which have recently been depicted without genitals; in conclusion, The Times wrote, "some crests are ambiguous, but the message remains clear: the lions are supposed to display courage and nothing else."[12] While such arms are clearly not intended as an abatement in modern times, no known examples of castrated lions have been found in medieval heraldry. Reported historical examples[edit] A few examples of historical abatements of arms have been recorded, though none of these reflect the addition of stained ordinaries as detailed above. Rather, these include broken chevrons, disarmed lions, and reversed or erased charges. One of these rare historical examples was Amery of Pavy, who was appointed governor of Calais by King Edward III of England in 1347, and whose arms were abated by royal decree in 1349 after the failed French siege of Calais on the last day of December 1348, which resulted from Sir Amery's attempt to sell Calais to Sir Geffrey Charney, the French governor of nearby Saint-Omer, for 20,000 crowns.[13][14][15] As stated by Sir George Mackenzie: "And Edward the Third of England ordained two of six stars which a gentleman had in his arms to be effaced, because he had sold a seaport of which he was made governor."[9][16] Pursuivant of arms John Guillim, writing circa 1610, gave the story in considerable detail, adding that Sir Amery's arms were also inverted for his treachery. Guillim further explained that this humiliation is not inherited by the traitor's heirs, up to and including capital crimes, except in cases of high treason.[17] An example of a lion diffamée is that of Jean d'Avesnes who insulted his mother, Margaret II, Countess of Flanders, in the presence of King Louis IX. He is supposed to have seen the lion in his arms diffamée (i.e. the tail removed) and morné (i.e. the teeth and claws removed).[9] See also[edit] Augmentation of honour Bend sinister (heraldry) Stain (heraldry) References[edit] ^ Boutell, Charles & Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1914). The handbook to English heraldry. Reeves & Turner. p. 207. Abatement is a term which was unknown until it made its appearance in certain heraldic writings of the sixteenth century, when it was used to denote such marks or devices as, by the writers in question, were held to be the reverse of honourable Augmentation—Augmentations of dishonour indeed, and tokens of degradation. ^ Boutell, Charles (1864), Heraldry, historical and popular, With 975 Illustrations (3rd ed.), Richard Bentley, p. 77, Abatement: - any sign of degradation ^ a b c Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1909). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. London: T.C. & E.C. Jack. pp. 72–3. ^ a b Levin, Craig (2004). "Abatements and Augmentations of Honor". Retrieved 2012-08-11. ^ "Digitised Manuscripts". www.bl.uk. ^ Rollo-Koster, Joelle (October 4, 2016). Death in Medieval Europe: Death Scripted and Death Choreographed. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781315466842 – via Google Books. ^ a b Woodcock, Thomas; Robinson, John Martin (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 68. ISBN 0192116584. ^ Leigh, G. The Accedence of Armory, 1st ed. (London:1562). Quoted in Woodcock (1988), p.68. ^ a b c d "Abatements". InternationalHeraldry.com. Retrieved 2012-08-12. ^ O'Mahony, Paul (2007-12-13). "Army castrates heraldic lion". The Local: Sweden's News in English. The Local Europe AB (Stockholm). Retrieved 2009-03-30. ^ Ullgren, Sven (2007-12-12). "Kvinnor fick lejonet stympat". Göteborgs Posten (in Swedish). Göteborgs-Posten (Gothenburg, Sweden). Archived from the original on December 17, 2007. Retrieved 2009-03-30. ^ Boyes, Roger (2007-12-15). "Military lion shorn of his equipment after women troops protest". Times Online. Times Newspapers Ltd. (London). Retrieved 2009-03-30. ^ Bicknell, W. I. (1846). Payne's Illustrated London. London: Brain and Payne. pp. 146–7. ^ Froissart, John (1844). The Chronicles of England, France and Spain. London: William Smith. pp. 192–5. ^ Gifford, John (1792). The History of France: From the Earliest Times to the Present Important Era. Volume II. London: C. Lowndes and W. Locke. p. 53. |volume= has extra text (help) ^ Parker, James. "Abatements". Parker's Heraldry. Karl B. Wilcox. Retrieved 2012-08-12. ^ Guillim, John (1611). "Section I Chapter VIII". A Display of Heraldrie. London: Printed by William Hall for Raphe Mab. Archived from the original on 2008-10-15. External links[edit] "Abatements". http://www.heraldica.org: Heraldica.org. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 2011-05-15. abatements appear to be a pure fiction (albeit a fairly old one). v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources