A naiad in Greek mythology "Anchiroe" redirects here. For the genus of moth, see Anchiroe (moth). For other uses, see Anchiroe (mythology). Achiroe Naiad Queen of Egypt Member of the Argive family Abode River Nile in Egypt Personal information Parents Nilus Siblings Memphis, Telephassa, Chione, Caliadne (possibly), Polyxo (possibly) Consort Belus Offspring Danaus, Aegyptus, Cepheus, Phineus Achiroë /əˈkɪroʊiː/ or Anchirrhoë (Ancient Greek: Ἀχιρ(ρ)όη), or according to the Bibliotheca Anchinoë (Ἀγχινόη),[1] which is perhaps a mistake for Anchiroë, was in Greek mythology a naiad, a daughter of the river-god Nilus. She was also the wife of Belus, by whom she became the mother of Aegyptus and Danaus, and, according to some accounts, Cepheus, and Phineus. Otherwise, the possible mother of this children and spouse of Belus was called Side, eponym of Sidon in Phoenicia. Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e Mythology[edit] Anchinoe was a minor figure in Greek accounts and only mentioned by Apollodorus in his Bibliotheca: But Belus remained in Egypt, reigned over the country, and married Anchinoe, daughter of Nile, by whom he had twin sons, Egyptus and Danaus, but according to Euripides, he had also Cepheus and Phineus. Notes[edit] ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 2.1.4 ' References[edit] Pseudo-Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Stephanus of Byzantium, Stephani Byzantii Ethnicorum quae supersunt, edited by August Meineike (1790-1870), published 1849. A few entries from this important ancient handbook of place names have been translated by Brady Kiesling. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Argive genealogy[edit] Argive genealogy in Greek mythology v t e Inachus Melia Zeus Io Phoroneus Epaphus Memphis Libya Poseidon Belus Achiroë Agenor Telephassa Danaus Pieria Aegyptus Cadmus Cilix Europa Phoenix Mantineus Hypermnestra Lynceus Harmonia Zeus Polydorus Sparta Lacedaemon Ocalea Abas Agave Sarpedon Rhadamanthus Autonoë Eurydice Acrisius Ino Minos Zeus Danaë Semele Zeus Perseus Dionysus Colour key:   Male   Female   Deity  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Achiroe". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This article relating to Greek mythology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e