Three chapters found in the Septuagint but not found in the Hebrew/Aramaic text of Daniel Tanakh (Judaism) Torah  (Instruction) Genesis Bereshit Exodus Shemot Leviticus Wayiqra Numbers Bemidbar Deuteronomy Devarim Nevi'im  (Prophets) Former Joshua Yehoshua Judges Shofetim Samuel Shemuel Kings Melakhim Latter Isaiah Yeshayahu Jeremiah Yirmeyahu Ezekiel Yekhezqel Minor Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Ketuvim  (Writings) Poetic Psalms Tehillim Proverbs Mishlei Job Iyov Five Megillot (Scrolls) Song of Songs Shir Hashirim Ruth Rut Lamentations Eikhah Ecclesiastes Qohelet Esther Ester Historical Daniel Daniyyel Ezra–Nehemiah Ezra Chronicles Divre Hayyamim Old Testament (Christianity) Pentateuch Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Historical Joshua Judges Ruth 1 and 2 Samuel 1 and 2 Kings 1 and 2 Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Wisdom Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Songs Prophetic Major prophets Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Minor prophets Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Deuterocanonical Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom of Solomon Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Orthodox only 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Odes Orthodox Tewahedo 1 Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Bible portal v t e The additions to Daniel comprise three chapters not found in the Hebrew/Aramaic text of Daniel. The text of these chapters is found in the Koine Greek Septuagint, the earliest Old Greek translation. The three additions are as follows. The Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children: Daniel 3:24–90 inserted between verses 23 and 24 in the Protestant canon (v. 24 becomes v. 91), incorporated within the Fiery Furnace episode. When Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego are thrown into a furnace for declining to worship an idol, they are rescued by an angel and sing a song of worship.[1] In some Greek Bibles, the Prayer and the Song appear in an appendix to the book of Psalms.[2] Susanna and the Elders: before Daniel 1:1, a prologue in early Greek manuscripts; chapter 13 in the Vulgate. This episode, along with Bel and the Dragon, is one of "the two earliest examples" of a detective story, according to Christopher Booker. In it, two men attempt to coerce a young woman into having sexual relations with them through blackmail, but are foiled under close questioning by Daniel.[3] Bel and the Dragon: after Daniel 12:13 in Greek, an epilogue; chapter 14 in the Vulgate. In this tale, Daniel's detective work reveals that a brass idol believed to miraculously consume sacrifices is in fact a front for a corrupt priesthood which is stealing the offerings.[3] Contents 1 See also 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links See also[edit] Deuterocanonical books References[edit] ^ Emil Schürer (1987 edition). Edited by Géza Vermes et al. The History of the Jewish People in the Age of Jesus Christ, Vol. III, Part 2. Pages 722–730. ^ James C. VanderKam (2001), An Introduction to Early Judaism. Eerdmans. p. 133. ^ a b Christopher Book (2004), The Seven Basic Plots, pages 505–506 Further reading[edit] R. H. Charles, ed. (2004 [1913]). The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament. Volume I: Apocrypha. Originally by Clarendon Press, 2004 edition by The Apocryphile Press. pp. 625–664. J. C. Dancy, ed. (1972). The Shorter Books of the Apocrypha. The Cambridge Bible Commentary on the New English Bible. pp. 210–241. Alison Salvesen (2006). "The Growth of the Apocrypha". In J. W. Rogerson and Judith M. Lieu, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Biblical Studies. pp. 508–509. External links[edit] NRSV: Prayer of Azariah NRSV: Susanna NRSV: Bel and the Dragon Daniel (including Azariah and the Song), Sousanna, Bel and the Dragon in the New English Translation of the Septuagint. Additions to Daniel public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Jewish apocrypha Apocrypha in the Torah Genesis Apocryphon Life of Adam and Eve Testament of Qahat Visions of Amram Book of Jubilees 1 Enoch 2 Enoch 3 Enoch Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs Testament of Abraham Apocalypse of Abraham Assumption of Moses Joseph and Aseneth Apocrypha in Nevi'im Book of Gad the Seer Book of Wisdom Psalms of Solomon Letter of Jeremiah Ascension of Isaiah 1 Baruch 2 Baruch 3 Baruch Apocrypha in Ketuvim Testament of Job 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Psalm 151 Psalms 152–155 Additions to the Book of Esther Additions to Daniel Prayer of Manasseh Other apocrypha Sirach Book of Judith Book of Tobit 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Letter of Aristeas Sibylline Oracles Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum v t e Books of the Bible Principal divisions Hebrew Bible Torah Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Nevi'im Joshua Judges Samuel Kings Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel Minor Prophets Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Ketuvim Psalms Proverbs Job Song Ruth Lamentations Ecclesiastes Esther Daniel Ezra-Nehemiah Ezra Nehemiah Chronicles Deuterocanon and apocrypha Catholic Eastern Orthodox Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Susanna Song of the Three Children Bel and the Dragon Eastern Orthodox only 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Odes Orthodox Tewahedo Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Syriac Letter of Baruch Psalms 152–155 New Testament Matthew Mark Luke John Acts Romans 1 Corinthians 2 Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1 Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians 1 Timothy 2 Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James 1 Peter 2 Peter 1 John 2 John 3 John Jude Revelation Subdivisions Chapters and verses Pentateuch Historical books Wisdom books Prophetic books Major prophets Minor prophets Gospels Synoptic Epistles Pauline Johannine Pastoral Catholic Apocalyptic literature Development Old Testament canon New Testament canon Antilegomena Jewish canon Christian canon Dating the Bible Manuscripts Dead Sea Scrolls Samaritan Pentateuch Septuagint Targum Diatessaron Muratorian fragment Peshitta Vetus Latina Vulgate Masoretic Text New Testament manuscript categories New Testament papyri New Testament uncials Related Authorship Bible version debate English Bible translations Other books referenced in the Bible Pseudepigrapha list New Testament apocrypha Studies Biblical and Quranic narratives Synod of Hippo Textual criticism Category Portal WikiProject Book Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125