Part of a series on Zoroastrianism Atar (fire), a primary symbol of Zoroastrianism Primary topics Ahura Mazda Zarathustra Asha Vohu Manah Persia/Iran Faravahar Avestan Divine entities Amesha Spentas Yazatas Ahuras Daevas Angra Mainyu Scripture and worship Avesta Ashem Vohu Ahuna Vairya Yenghe hatam Airyaman ishya Fire Temples 101 Names of Ahura Mazda Adur Burzen-Mihr Adur Farnbag Adur Gushnasp Cypress of Kashmar Gathas Yasna Vendidad Visperad Yashts Khordeh Avesta The Revayats Ab-Zohr Accounts and legends Dēnkard Bundahišn Book of Arda Viraf Book of Jamasp Story of Sanjan Chinvat Bridge Frashokereti History and culture Zurvanism Mazdakism Khurramites Calendar Festivals Marriage Burial Adherents Zoroastrians in India Zoroastrians in Iran Parsis Zoroastrianism in the United States Iranis Persecution of Zoroastrians Related topics Criticism of Zoroastrianism  Religion portal v t e Adur Burzen-Mihr (Middle Iranian) or Azar Barzin (Persian: آذر برزین‎) was an Atash Bahram (a Zoroastrian fire temple of the highest grade) located in Parthia. In the Sasanian period it was one of the three Great Fires and was associated with the farmer class; the other two were Adur Farnbag in Persis which was associated with the priest class, and Adur Gushnasp in Media, which was associated with the warrior class.[1] Its establishment can be dated to the late 5th or early 4th century BC. Adur means "Holy Fire", and Burzēn-Mihr is a Parthian given name which literally means "Exalted is Mihr" and is probably the name of the temple's founder. This Fire is described in Bundahishn. Its location is given as Mount Rēvand (in Avestan: Raēvant), probably a spur of the Nishapur mountains in the district formerly known as Rēvand in Khurasan.[2][3] An element of the name is preserved in the name of the nearby village Borzinan may. Another identification is Mount Mehr, five miles from the village Mehr on the Shahrud–Sabzevar Highway. The Fire is mentioned several times in Shahnameh as Mehr-Barzīn (مهر برزین), Mehr (مهر), and Barzīn (برزین), and is used also as a simile for fiery fierceness. The Fire is thought to have been a major center of pilgrimage, even after the Arsacids' fall. In the Sasanian period, although its name was always placed third in texts and the fire was associated with the lowliest class of the society, (farmers; the other two being warriors and priests), it still maintained its importance. Its history in the Islamic period is not known. See also[edit] Cypress of Kashmar Atashgah castle References[edit] ^ Canepa, Matthew P. (2020). IRANIAN EXPANSE : transforming royal identity through architecture, landscape, and the built ... environment, 550 bce-642 ce. University of California Press. p. 283. ISBN 9780520379206. ^ Boyce, Mary (2001). Zoroastrians : their religious beliefs and practices. London: Routledge. p. 88. ISBN 9780415239028. ^ The Oxford dictionary of late Antiquity (First ed.). OUP Oxford. 19 April 2018. p. 600. ISBN 9780192562463. M. Boyce, “ĀDUR BURZĒN-MIHR,” Encyclopædia Iranica, I/5, pp. 472-473; an updated version is available online at http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/adur-burzen-mihr-an-atas-bahram-see-atas-i (accessed on 28 February 2014). v t e Zoroastrianism Primary topics Ahura Mazda Zarathustra Asha Vohu Manah Persia/Iran Faravahar Avestan Divine entities Amesha Spentas Yazatas Ahuras Daevas Angra Mainyu Scripture and worship Avesta Gathas Ashem Vohu Ahuna Vairya Yenghe hatam Airyaman ishya Fire Temples 101 Names of Ahura Mazda Udvada Atash Behram Adur Burzen-Mihr Adur Farnbag Adur Gushnasp Cypress of Kashmar Yasna Vendidad Visperad Yashts Khordeh Avesta The Revayats Ab-Zohr Accounts and legends Dēnkard Bundahišn Book of Arda Viraf Book of Jamasp Story of Sanjan Chinvat Bridge Frashokereti Cities Balkh Kashmar Yazd History and culture Parsis Zurvanism Mazdakism Khurramites Calendar Festivals Marriage Burial Adherents Persecution of Zoroastrians Zoroastrianism in India Irani Parsis Zoroastrianism in Iran Zoroastrianism in Pakistan Zoroastrianism in the United States Zoroastrianism in Iraq Zoroastrianism in Armenia Zoroastrianism in Azerbaijan Lists Fire temples in Iran Fire temples in India Category v t e Fire temples in Iran Adrian Adur Burzen-Mihr (Fire Temple of Kashmar) Adur Farnbag Adur Gushnasp Espi Mazget Fire Temple of Amol Fire Temple of Aspakhu Fire Temple of Ateshkuh Fire Temple of Azar Ju Fire Temple of Bardneshandeh Fire Temple of Baze Hoor Fire Temple of Cham Namesht Fire Temple of Farashband Fire Temple of Fishvar Fire Temple of Harpak Fire Temple of Ij Fire Temple of Isfahan Fire Temple of Izadkhast Fire Temple of Jereh Fire Temple of Karkuyeh Fire Temple of Kazerun Fire Temple of Kerman Fire Temple of Khaneh Div Fire Temple of Kheyrabad Fire Temple of Konar Siah Fire Temple of Kusan Fire Temple of Mil Azhdeha Fire Temple of Mil Milgeh Fire Temple of Nagharekhaneh Fire Temple of Natanz Fire Temple of Neyasar Fire Temple of Qotbabad Fire Temple of Shiyan Fire Temple of Siah Gol Fire Temple of Takht-e Rostam Fire Temple of Tashvir Fire Temple of Yazd Noushijan (Fire Temple of Noushijan) Tarikhaneh Temple of Khvorheh Temple of Mehr Temple of Mehri Temple of Sorkh Dom Luri