Ancient Greek mythological figure Aganippe by Philip Galle (Holland, Haarlem, 1537-1612) Aganippe (/æɡəˈnɪpiː/; Ancient Greek: Ἀγανίππη) was the name of both a spring and the Naiad (a Crinaea) associated with it. The spring is in Boeotia, near Thespiae, at the base of Mount Helicon,[1] and was associated with the Muses who were sometimes called Aganippides. Drinking from it was considered to be a source of poetic inspiration. The nymph is called a daughter of the river-god Permessus (called Termessus by Pausanias).[2] Ovid associates Aganippe with Hippocrene.[3] Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e Notes[edit] ^ Pliny the Elder, Natural History, 4.12.1. ^ Smith, "Aganippe" 1.; Pausanias. Description of Greece, 9.29.5; Virgil. Eclogues 10.12 ^ Ovid, Fasti 5.7. References[edit] Pliny the Elder, The Natural History. John Bostock, M.D., F.R.S. H.T. Riley, Esq., B.A. London. Taylor and Francis, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. 1855. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Ovidius Naso, Fasti translated by James G. Frazer. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Publius Ovidius Naso, Fasti. Sir James George Frazer. London; Cambridge, MA. William Heinemann Ltd.; Harvard University Press. 1933. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Smith, William; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, London (1873). Aganippe 1  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Aganippe 1". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. Portals Access related topics Ancient Greece portal Myths portal This article relating to a Greek deity is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e