This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2019) Uchiura Bay and Mount Komagatake near Yakumo town, Hokkaidō, looking southeast Gigantic octopus-like monster from Ainu folklore This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese. (February 2018) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:アッコロカムイ]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|アッコロカムイ}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. The Akkorokamui (アッコロカムイ, At-kor-kamuy) is a gigantic octopus-like monster from Ainu folklore, equivalent to the Nordic Kraken, which supposedly lurks in Uchiura Bay in Hokkaido.[citation needed] It is said that its enormous body can reach sizes of up to 33 metres (108 feet) in length.[1] In Shintoism[edit] Ainu reverence of this monster has permeated into Shinto, which has incorporated Akkorokamui as a minor kami. Self purification practices for Akkorokamui are often strictly followed. While Akkorokamui is often presented as a benevolent kami with powers to heal and bestow knowledge, it is fickle and has the propensity to do harm. Akkorokamui's nature as an octopus means that it is persistent and it is near impossible to escape its grasp without permission.[citation needed] Akkorokamui enjoys the sea and offerings which reflect this: fish, crab, mollusks, and the like are particular favorites of Akkorokamui, which give back that which it gave. Homage to Akkorokamui is often for ailments of the limbs or skin, but mental purification and spiritual release is particularly important.[citation needed] Akkorokamui is characteristically described with the ability to self-amputate, like several octopus species, and regenerate limbs. This characteristic manifests in the belief in Shinto that Akkorokamui has healing powers. Consequently, it is believed among followers that giving offerings to Akkorokamui will heal ailments of the body, in particular, disfigurements and broken limbs.[2] Shrines in dedication to Akkorokamui and associated octopus deities are found throughout Japan.[citation needed] See also[edit] Kraken List of cryptids Asia portal Society portal Japan portal Religion portal References[edit] ^ Swancer, Brent."The Mystery Monster Octopus of Japan’s Far North" April 28, 2017 ^ Crump, Marty (2018). A year with nature : an almanac. University of Chicago Press. p. 282. ISBN 9780226449708. v t e Japanese folklore Folktales Awa Tanuki Gassen Bunbuku Chagama Hakuzōsu Hanasaka Jiisan Issun-bōshi Kachi-kachi Yama Kasa Jizō Kintarō Kobutori Jiisan Kurozuka Momotarō Nezumi no Sumō Saru Kani Gassen Shita-kiri Suzume Taketori Monogatari Tamamo-no-Mae Tawara Tōda Tsuru no Ongaeshi Urashima Tarō Yamata no Orochi Yotsuya Kaidan Oto-hime Texts Konjaku Monogatarishū Otogi-zōshi Uji Shūi Monogatari Legendary creatures Abura-akago Abura-sumashi Aka Manto Akaname Akashita Akateko Akuma Amabie Amanojaku Amazake-babaa Amefurikozō Ameonna Amikiri Aobōzu Aonyōbō Aosaginohi Ashinagatenaga Ayakashi Azukiarai Bake-kujira Bakeneko Baku Basan Binbōgami Chimimōryō Daidarabotchi Dodomeki Dragon Enenra Funayūrei Furaribi Fūri Futakuchi-onna Gagoze Gashadokuro Goryō Hanako-san Harionago Hibagon Hiderigami Hitogitsune Hitotsume-kozō Hitotsume-nyūdō Hone-onna Hyōsube Ikiryō Ikuchi Inugami Ishinagenjo Isonade Janjanbi Jinmenju Jorōgumo Jubokko Kamaitachi Kamikiri Kappa Kasa-obake Kasha Kawauso Keukegen Kijimuna Kinoko Kirin Kitsune Hakuzōsu Kitsunebi Kodama Komainu Konaki-jiji Korpokkur Koromodako Kotobuki Kuchisake-onna Kuda-gitsune Kudan Kyubi Mikaribaba Mikoshi-nyūdō Miage-nyūdō Misaki Mizuchi Mokumokuren Mononoke Mōryō Mujina Namahage Namazu Nekomata Ningyo Noderabō Noppera-bō Nue Nuppeppō Nurarihyon Nure-onna Nurikabe Nyūdō-bōzu Obake Oboroguruma Oiwa Okiku Ōmukade Oni Ibaraki-dōji Kijo/Onibaba Kidōmaru Rashōmon no oni Shuten-dōji Onibi Onikuma Onryō Ōnyūdō Osaki Otoroshi Ouni Raijū Rokurokubi Samebito Sankai Satori Sazae-oni Shachihoko Shidaidaka Shikigami Shinigami Shiranui Shirime Shiryō Shōjō Shōkera Sōjōbō Sunekosuri Takaonna Tanuki Danzaburou-danuki Inugami Gyōbu Shibaemon-tanuki Yashima no Hage-tanuki Ten Tengu Tennin Tenome Tesso Tōfu-kozō Tsuchigumo Tsuchinoko Tsukumogami Abumi-guchi Bakezōri Biwa-bokuboku Boroboroton Chōchin-obake Ittan-momen Kasa-obake Koto-furunushi Menreiki Ungaikyō Tsurubebi Tsurara-onna Tsurube-otoshi Ubagabi Ubume Umi zatō Umibōzu Ushi-oni Uwan Waira Wanyūdō Yamabiko Yamawaro Yamajijii Yama-uba Yanari Yobuko Yōkai Yōsei Yosuzume Yuki-onna Yume no seirei Yūrei Zashiki-warashi Folklorists Kunio Yanagita Keigo Seki Lafcadio Hearn Shigeru Mizuki Inoue Enryō Mythology in popular culture