One of the Pleiades sisters, daughters of Atlas from Greek mythology For the star in the Pleiades cluster, see Alcyone (star). For other uses, see Alcyone (mythology). The Pleiades Alcyone (/ælˈsaɪ.əniː/; Ancient Greek Ἁλκυόνη Αlkuónē, derived from alkyon αλκυων "kingfisher"), in Greek mythology, was the name of one of the Pleiades, daughters of Atlas and Pleione or, more rarely, Aethra.[1] She attracted the attention of the god Poseidon and bore him several children, variously named in the sources: Hyrieus, Hyperenor, and Aethusa;[2] Hyperes and Anthas;[3] and Epopeus.[4][5] By a mortal, Anthedon, Alcyone became the mother of the fisherman Glaucus, who was later transformed into a marine god.[6] There are various etymological interpretations of her name's origin.[7] Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e Comparative table of Alcyone's family Relation Names Sources Apollodorus Ovid Hyginus Pausanias Athenaeus Clement Parentage Atlas and Pleione ✓ ✓ ✓ Atlas and Aethra ✓ Consort Poseidon ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Anthedon ✓ Children Aethusa ✓ Hyrieus ✓ ✓ ✓ Hyperenor ✓ Epopeus ✓ Hyperes ✓ Anthas ✓ Glaucus ✓ Notes[edit] ^ Schmitz, Leonhard (1867). "Alcyone (1)". In William Smith (ed.). Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. 1. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. p. 108. Archived from the original on 2008-06-04. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus. Bibliotheca, Book 3.10.1 ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece ii. 30. § 7 ^ Gaius Julius Hyginus Praef. Fab. p. 11, ed. Staveren ^ Ovid, Heroides xix. 133 ^ Athenaeus, Deipnosophistae vii ^ Alcyone at Theoi.com References[edit] Athenaeus of Naucratis. The Deipnosophists or Banquet of the Learned. London. Henry G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden. 1854. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Athenaeus of Naucratis. Deipnosophistae. Kaibel. In Aedibus B.G. Teubneri. Lipsiae. 1887. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Hyginus, Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project. M. Grant and J. Hazel, Who's Who in Greek Mythology, David McKay and Co Inc, 1979 Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio. 3 vols. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pseudo-Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Publius Ovidius Naso, The Epistles of Ovid. London. J. Nunn, Great-Queen-Street; R. Priestly, 143, High-Holborn; R. Lea, Greek-Street, Soho; and J. Rodwell, New-Bond-Street. 1813. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. External links[edit] Theoi Project – Nymphe Alcyone This article relating to Greek mythology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e