Aliens: Nightmare Asylum Paperback edition Author Steve Perry Country United States Language English Genre Science fiction Publisher Bantam Books Publication date April 1, 1993 Media type Print (Paperback) Pages 277 pp ISBN 978-0553561586 Preceded by Aliens: Earth Hive  Followed by Aliens: The Female War  Aliens: Nightmare Asylum is the title of a sci-fi novel by Steve Perry, set in the fictional Alien movie universe. It is a sequel to Aliens: Earth Hive.[1] The book was published by Bantam Books on April 1, 1993. Its plot, involving an insane military attempt to train aliens, is virtually identical to the 1985 film Day of the Dead. Plot[edit] Wilks, Billie, and Bueller are the last survivors of a devastating assault on the aliens' home planet. They are again refugees when they return to the solar system, fleeing Earth's Alien infestation in a military transport that hurtles them through unknown space and an unknown destination. They are unaware that the remote colony and military outpost they will approach is at the mercy of a general named Spears with an agenda all his own. Now Billie, Wilks, and Bueller face a new nightmare, and it is nothing they could ever have imagined: a gift of madness from an alien world, an unbalanced mind and the experiences of a mysterious pilot named Lieutenant Ellen Ripley. References[edit] ^ "Nightmare Asylum (Aliens)". amazon.com. Retrieved 2015-02-24. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) v t e Alien Films Alien (1979) Aliens (1986) Alien 3 (1992) Alien Resurrection (1997) Prometheus (2012) Alien: Covenant (2017) Media Soundtracks Alien Aliens Alien 3 Alien Resurrection Prometheus Alien: Covenant Comics Alien: The Illustrated Story Dark Horse line Superman/Aliens Batman/Aliens WildC.A.T.s/Aliens Green Lantern Versus Aliens Judge Dredd vs. Aliens Novels Alien: Out of the Shadows Aliens: Earth Hive Aliens: Nightmare Asylum Aliens: The Female War Aliens: Phalanx Games Alien (1982) Alien (1984) Aliens: The Computer Game (Activision) Aliens: The Computer Game (Software Studios) Aliens (1990) Aliens Adventure Game (tabletop) Alien 3 Alien 3: The Gun Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Alien Trilogy Aliens Online Alien Resurrection Aliens: Thanatos Encounter Aliens Infestation Aliens: Colonial Marines Alien: Isolation Aliens: Fireteam Other media Aliens: Colonial Marines Technical Manual Alien: Isolation – The Digital Series Universe Characters Ellen Ripley Ash Bishop Amanda Ripley David 8 Corporal Dwayne Hicks Hudson Concepts USS Sulaco Alien Other Accolades for the film series Alien War Alien vs. Predator franchise Related Ripley (crater) Alien 2: On Earth Memory: The Origins of Alien Category This article about a 1990s science fiction novel is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. See guidelines for writing about novels. Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page. v t e