Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game is a three-player collectible card game (CCG) that was published in 1997. It was considered one of the more successful CCGs during the late 1990s and was Harper Prism's first foray into the CCG market.[1][2] Contents 1 Publication history 2 Gameplay 3 Reception 4 References Publication history[edit] Based on the Alien vs. Predator franchise created in the 1990s, Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game was published by Precedence Entertainment and Harper Prism.[3] Gameplay[edit] This is a three-player game. Each player, equipped with a game deck, takes on the role of either the Alien, the Predator or a Colonial Marine. Each role has slightly different rules which lead to different strategies.[4] Each player plays location cards, then moves from card to card, using decoy tokens to hide real movement. When each location is searched, character and equipment cards can be played to give in-game advantages. When two players meet in the same location, combat is resolved with a six-sided die.[4] Reception[edit] In the March 1998 edition of Dragon (Issue #245), Allen Varney found the game to be "exciting... easy to learn, flexible in its variety of scenarios, and fast playing." Varney concluded that it was an "endlessly replayable, adrenaline-pumping game. Bravo!"[4] References[edit] ^ Frank, Jane (2012), Role-Playing Game and Collectible Card Game Artists : A Biographical Dictionary, p. 49, retrieved 2019-10-18 CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Brown, Timothy (1999), Official Price Guide to Collectible Card Games, p. 9-12 ^ Miller, John Jackson (2003), Scrye Collectible Card Game Checklist & Price Guide, Second Edition, pp. 53–56. ^ a b c Varney, Allen (March 1998). "Roleplaying Reviews". Dragon. TSR, Inc. (245): 104. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) v t e Alien vs. Predator Films Alien vs. Predator (2004) Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (2007) Characters Alien Predator Music Alien vs. Predator Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem "Wach auf! Comics Aliens versus Predator Aliens/Predator: Deadliest of the Species Aliens versus Predator versus The Terminator Mindhunter Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Alien vs. Predator: Sand Trap Fire and Stone Novels Aliens vs. Predator: Prey Aliens vs. Predator: Hunter's Planet Aliens vs. Predator: War Games Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game Alien vs Predator (SNES) Alien vs. Predator (arcade) Alien vs Predator (Jaguar) Aliens versus Predator (1999) Aliens versus Predator 2 Aliens versus Predator: Extinction Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Aliens vs. Predator (2010) Other AVPX Franchises Alien Predator Related AVH: Alien vs. Hunter Alien Loves Predator Batman: Dead End Category