2007 film by Strause brothers This article is about the film. For the video game, see Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (video game). Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Theatrical release poster Directed by The Brothers Strause Produced by John Davis David Giler Walter Hill Written by Shane Salerno Based on Alien characters by Dan O'Bannon Ronald Shusett Predator characters by Jim Thomas John Thomas Starring Steven Pasquale Reiko Aylesworth John Ortiz Johnny Lewis Ariel Gade Music by Brian Tyler Cinematography Daniel C. Pearl Edited by Dan Zimmerman Production companies 20th Century Fox[1] Davis Entertainment Company[2] Brandywine[2] Dune Entertainment[2] Distributed by 20th Century Fox[1] Release date November 4, 2007 (2007-11-04) (Los Angeles) December 25, 2007 (2007-12-25) (United States) Running time 94 minutes[3] Country United States[1] Language English Budget $40 million[4] Box office $130.2 million[5] Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (stylized as AVPR: Aliens vs Predator - Requiem) is a 2007 American science fiction action film[5] directed by the Brothers Strause (Colin and Greg Strause) in their directorial debut and written by Shane Salerno. The film stars Steven Pasquale, Reiko Aylesworth, John Ortiz, Johnny Lewis and Ariel Gade. It is a sequel to Alien vs. Predator (2004), and the second and latest installment in the Alien vs. Predator franchise, continuing the crossover between the Alien and Predator franchises. Set immediately after the events of the previous film, the film begins with a Predator ship crashing into a forest outside of Gunnison, Colorado, where an Alien-Predator hybrid known as the Predalien escapes and makes its way to the nearby small town. A skilled veteran Predator is dispatched to kill the Predalien, and the townspeople try to escape the ensuing carnage. Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem premiered on November 4, 2007 in Los Angeles. It was released theatrically on December 25 in the United States, to negative reviews, grossing $130.2 million worldwide against a production budget of $40 million. Plans for a further sequel were put on hold indefinitely. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Music 5 Release 5.1 Theatrical 5.2 Home media 6 Reception 6.1 Box office 6.2 Critical response 6.3 Accolades 7 Other media 7.1 Video game 8 Future 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Plot[edit] Following the events of the previous film, a Predator ship leaves Earth carrying Alien facehuggers, and the dead body of Scar, the Predator that helped Lex defeat the Xenomorph Queen. A chestburster with traits of both species erupts from Scar's body. It quickly matures into an adult Predalien and starts killing the Predators on board (in the extended cut, this happens on a scout ship that has been detached from the mother ship). A Predator's weapon punctures the hull and the ship crashes in the forest outside of Gunnison, Colorado, killing all but one of the Predators, who is severely injured and sends a distress signal before being killed by the Predalien. The Predalien and several facehuggers escape, implanting embryos into a nearby father and son who are out hunting in the forest, as well as several homeless people who live in the sewers. On the Predator homeworld, a skilled veteran Predator, Wolf, receives the signal and takes it upon himself to travel to Earth to hunt and kill Xenomorphs. He arrives at the crashed Predator ship, uses a blue acid-like liquid to dissolve and erase evidence of Xenomorphs' presence, and triggers an implosion to completely destroy the vessel. Meanwhile, ex-convict Dallas Howard has just returned to Gunnison after serving time in prison. He is greeted by Sheriff Eddie Morales and reunites with his younger brother Ricky. Ricky has a romantic interest in his classmate Jesse, but is constantly harassed by her boyfriend Dale and his two friends. Kelly O'Brien has also just returned to Gunnison after serving in the US Army's 101st Airborne Division, and reunites with her husband Tim and daughter Molly. Darcy Benson, the wife of the killed father, begins searching for her missing husband and son. Meanwhile, local waitress Carrie Adams discovers she is pregnant, but her police officer husband, Ray, is killed by Wolf after witnessing him dissolving the bodies of Darcy's husband and son while he was searching for them in the forest. Wolf skins his corpse and hangs him upside down from a tree branch for sport. Wolf tracks several Xenomorphs in the sewer and defeats two of them, but as the battle reaches the surface, four disperse into the town. Wolf pursues some to the power plant, where collateral damage from his plasma-caster weapon causes a citywide power outage. Ricky and Jesse meet at the high school swimming pool but are interrupted by Dale and his cohorts just as the power goes out, and a Xenomorph enters the pool area, killing Dale's friends. Another Xenomorph invades the O'Brien home, killing Tim while Kelly escapes with Molly. After the fry cook at the local diner where Carrie works is attacked by Xenomorphs, Carrie is also attacked after hearing the cook's screams, and is impregnated by the Predalien with a chestburster. Darcy discovers her body in horror, but Sheriff Morales arrives and brings her with him. Kelly, Molly, Ricky, Jesse, Dale, Dallas, and Sheriff Morales gather at a sporting goods store to collect weapons. Troops from the Colorado Army National Guard arrive but are quickly slaughtered by Xenomorphs. Wolf briefly captures Dallas inside the store to use as bait to lure Xenomorphs, but Dallas escapes. Several Xenomorphs arrive and Wolf handily defeats them. Dale is killed by a Xenomorph during the battle and one of Wolf's shoulder plasma-casters is damaged. He removes his remaining one and modifies it into a hand-held blaster. As the survivors attempt to escape Gunnison, they make radio contact with Colonel Stevens, and are told that an air evacuation is being staged at the center of town. Dallas and Kelly are skeptical since going there would cause them to become surrounded by Xenomorphs, so they, along with Ricky, Jesse, Molly and a few others go for the helicopter at the hospital to get out of town, while Sheriff Morales and Darcy head to the evacuation zone. However, the hospital has been invaded and overrun by Xenomorphs and the Predalien, who has impregnated some pregnant women to breed more Xenomorphs. Wolf soon arrives at the hospital where he dispatches more Xenomorphs and, during the battle, the Predator accidentally impales Jesse with one of his shuriken weapons. Distraught, Ricky rushes Wolf with rifle fire only to be injured by the Predalien. The Predator is attacked by a Xenomorph and both tumble down an elevator shaft. Dallas takes possession of Wolf's plasma blaster. Dallas, Ricky, Kelly, and Molly reach the roof and fight off several Xenomorphs before escaping in the helicopter, while Wolf, having survived the fall, battles the Predalien on the roof in hand-to-hand combat. Wolf and the Predalien mortally wound each other just as a military jet arrives. Rather than a rescue mission, the F-22 Raptor executes a tactical nuclear strike that levels the entire city, instantly killing Sheriff Morales, Darcy, and everyone else gathered at ground zero. The shock wave causes the fleeing helicopter to crash in a clearing, where the survivors are rescued by the military. Wolf's plasma blaster is confiscated, and Colonel Stevens presents it to Ms. Yutani. Cast[edit] Main article: List of Alien vs. Predator (franchise) characters Steven Pasquale as Dallas Howard, a recently released convict, Ricky's brother. Reiko Aylesworth as Kelly O'Brien, a soldier returning to her family. John Ortiz as Eddie Morales, the sheriff of Gunnison. Johnny Lewis as Ricky Howard, student and younger brother of Dallas. Sam Trammell as Tim O'Brien, husband to Kelly and father of Molly. Ariel Gade as Molly O'Brien, daughter of Kelly and Tim O'Brien. Robert Joy as Colonel Stevens, commander of the military forces. Kristen Hager as Jesse Salinger, love interest of Ricky, angering her boyfriend, Dale. David Paetkau as Dale Collins, Jesse's boyfriend who bullies Ricky. Matt Ward as Mark, one of Dale's friends. Michal Suchánek as Nick, one of Dale's friends. David Hornsby as Drew Roberts, a pizza parlor supervisor. Gina Holden as Carrie Adams, a pregnant waitress; Deputy Ray Adams' wife. Chris William Martin as Deputy Ray Adams, Carrie's husband. Chelah Horsdal as Darcy Benson, a mother searching for her son and husband. Liam James as Sam Benson Kurt Max Runte as Buddy Benson James Chutter as Deputy Joe Tim Henry as Dr. Lennon Tom McBeath as Karl Ty Olsson as Nathan Rainbow Sun Francks as Earl Juan Riedinger as Scotty Dalias Blake as Lt. Peter Wood Curtis Caravaggio as Special Forces Commander Françoise Yip as Ms. Yutani, the CEO of the Yutani Corporation. Tom Woodruff Jr. as the Aliens and the Predalien. Having previously portrayed the Aliens in Alien 3, Alien: Resurrection, and Alien vs. Predator. Woodruff reprised the role for the film. Ian Whyte as The Predator / "Wolf", the main Predator who arrives on Earth to eliminate the Aliens and all traces of their presence. The production team nicknamed the character "Wolf" after Harvey Keitel's character in Pulp Fiction, whose role is also that of a "cleaner."[6] Matthew Charles Santoro provided the voice of Wolf. Whyte portrayed the four Predators in the previous film. Bobby "Slim" Jones ("Bull") and Ian Feuer ("Atomic") as the additional Predators. Production[edit] Inspired by Terminator 2: Judgment Day, brothers Colin and Greg Strause moved to Los Angeles to break into the film business. After an unsuccessful attempt to find employment at Industrial Light & Magic, the brothers worked on The X-Files film and founded their own special effects company, Hydraulx. The company produced special effects for films such as Volcano, The Day After Tomorrow, Poseidon and 300 and the brothers began a career directing commercials and music videos. Colin believes Hydraulx secured a strong relationship with 20th Century Fox, which owns the Alien and Predator franchises.[7] The brothers unsuccessfully pitched an idea for the first Alien vs. Predator film and Fox almost bought a film titled Wolfenstein suggested by the brothers, "When the script came up for this movie, they thought we'd be perfect for it because it's an ambitious movie for the budget that they had and they knew that having our visual effects background was going to be a huge thing."[7] The brothers were hired to direct the sequel to Alien vs. Predator in late spring 2006 and had limited time to start filming in the fall.[7] The film's original title was Alien vs. Predator: Survival of the Fittest, but was later dropped.[8] Filming on Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem on September 23, 2006 in Vancouver, Canada[9] for a 52-day schedule.[10] During filming breaks, the brothers supervised visual effects work on 300, Shooter and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer by using in-house supervisors and a system called Mavis and Lucy, which let the brothers track, view and approve dailies. Colin estimates Hydraulx produced 460 of the 500 visual effects shots including the nuclear explosion which was created using Maya fluids and BA Volume Shader. The interior of the Predator ship was created using CGI, as the brothers felt it would be more cost effective than building a set.[10] The visual effects team peaked at 110 people for several months and averaged 70, almost all of the entire Hydraulx staff.[11] Using their knowledge in visual effects and making use of principal photography, the brothers tried to film as much as they could on camera without resorting to CGI, Colin said "other than the exterior spaceship shots, there are no pure CG shots." CGI was used for the Alien tails and inner jaws, whereas they required puppeteers and wire removal on previous films. The main visual effects of the film included set design, a nuclear explosion, the Predator's ship crashing and the Predator cloak, about which Colin stated: "We wanted to make sure it didn't look too digital."[10] As a side-note, in the DVD commentary the brothers explained that they wanted actor Adam Baldwin to reprise his role as Garber in Predator 2, but were unable to do so, instead using Robert Joy as a new character. Additionally, while the previous installment attracted casual moviegoers as well as fans of the franchises, the film catered exclusively to Alien and Predator fans with many references to the previous films appearing in the film. Music[edit] Main article: Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (soundtrack) Composer Brian Tyler, was hired to the score for the film.[12] The film's main theme track is a clash of two main themes, one consisting of the Predator type theme (bongos and basses) and the second of the Aliens (high pitched violins, violas and flutes). The directors Colin and Greg Strause wanted to take a new direction from Harald Kloser's Alien vs. Predator score and wanted Tyler to use some reference to the three films' original score pieces, such as the horrific violas and percussion from James Horner's Aliens and the primitive tribal percussion from Alan Silvestri's Predator and Predator 2.[13] Tyler also referenced composer John Frizzel's Alien: Resurrection into the score, in the tracks of "National Guard" and "Taking Sides". The soundtrack album was released on December 11, 2007 by Varèse Sarabande.[14] "The Chopper" and "Grim Discovery", the two tracks from Predator was listed in the film's end credits, both composed by Silvestri. The tracks are not included in the film's soundtrack and the Predator soundtrack, but can be found only on YouTube.[15] The song "Wach auf!" ("Wake Up") by German band Oomph!, was released as a promo in January 2008, with the music video using clips from the film.[16] The song has only appeared in the band's album Monster. Release[edit] Theatrical[edit] Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem had its premiere at the Los Angeles Comic Book and Sci Fi Convention in Los Angeles on November 4, 2007.[17] The Brothers Strause attended the event, presenting the film to an audience for the first time.[18] The film was later released in the United States and in other territories on December 25, 2007. Home media[edit] Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem was released on DVD, Blu-ray and PSP UMD Disc on April 15, 2008, in North America and May 12, 2008, in the United Kingdom by Fox Home Entertainment. It was released in three versions: a single-disc, R-rated version of the 94-minute theatrical presentation, a single-disc unrated version extended to 101 minutes and a two-disc unrated version with the 101-minute film and a second disc of special features. Extra features on the single-disc editions include two audio commentary tracks: one by the directors and producer John Davis and a second by creature effects designers and creators Tom Woodruff Jr. and Alec Gillis. Disc one of the two-disc unrated edition includes both commentary tracks as well as both cuts of the film seamlessly branched and an exclusive "Weyland-Yutani archives" picture-in-picture reference guide to the warring alien races;[19] five behind-the-scenes featurettes: Prepare for War: Development & Production, Fight to the Finish, The Nightmare Returns: Creating the Aliens, Crossbreed: The Predalien and Building the Predator Homeworld; multiple galleries of still photos showing the creature designs and sets; and the film's theatrical trailer. The second disc includes a "digital copy" download feature. In its first week of release, Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem debuted at number two on the DVD charts, earning $7.7 million and number one on the Blu-ray charts. The film has made $27,403,705 in DVD sales in the United States.[4][20] Reception[edit] Box office[edit] The film opened in North America in 2,563 theaters alongside with The Bucket List and The Water Horse: Legend of the Deep. It was rated R for violence, gore and language, unlike its predecessor, which was given a PG-13 rating.[21] In the UK and Australia, the BBFC's classification decision for the film is the same as the original (Rated 15), whilst the Australian ACB rated the film MA15+,[22] up from the original's M rating. The film grossed $9,515,615 on its opening day for an average of $3,707 per theater and was number six at the box office.[23] It grossed $5 million in Australia, $9 million in Japan and the United Kingdom and $7 million in Russia, and had an international total of $86,288,761. The film had a domestic gross of $41,797,066 and an international gross of $88,493,819, bringing it to a total of $130,290,885.[4] Critical response[edit] On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 12% based on reviews from 76 critics. The website's consensus states: "The increased gore and violence over the first Alien vs. Predator can't excuse Requiem's disorienting editing, excessively murky lighting, and lack of new ideas."[24] On Metacritic, the film has a score of 29 out of 100, based on reviews from 14 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".[25] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of "C" on an A+ to F scale.[26] Chris Hewitt of Empire called it an "early but strong contender for worst movie of 2008".[27] Stina Chyn of Film Threat felt the camerawork "is a smidge too shaky and the lighting/color design too dark for me to relish the Predator-on-Alien butt-kicking".[28] Josh Rosenblatt of The Austin Chronicle dismissed the film stating it was "An orgy of mindless violence, a random collection of bloody bodies, alien misanthropy and slobbering carnage designed to bore straight into the pleasure centers of 13-year-old boys and leave the rest of us wondering when the movies got so damn loud."[29] Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter contributor called it a "dull actioner that looks like a bad video game".[30] Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly felt it was a "B movie that truly earns its B," and gave it a grading of "B" on an A to F scale.[31] Variety contributor Joe Leydon said it "Provides enough cheap thrills and modest suspense to shake a few shekels from genre fans before really blasting off as homevid product".[32] Ryan Stewart of Cinematical said he "can't recommend it as a good movie on its own merits, stocked as it is with cardboard cutout characters and a barely coherent plot, but it's miles more interesting than the last Alien vs. Predator film."[33] Conversely, Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times stated: "It may not be classic sci-fi like the original Alien, which it has in its DNA, but it's a perfectly respectable next step in the series."[34] Accolades[edit] Year Ceremony Category Result Recipient(s) Ref. 2007 Golden Schmoes Awards Biggest Disappointment of the Year Nominated Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem 2008 Golden Raspberry Awards Worst Prequel or Sequel Nominated [35] Worst Excuse for a Horror Movie Nominated MTV Movie Awards Best Fight Sequence Nominated Alien vs. Predator [36] Teen Choice Awards Choice Movie: Rumble Nominated Other media[edit] Video game[edit] Main article: Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (video game) A tie-in video game for the film was released on November 13, 2007, in North America, November 30 in Europe and December 6 in Australia.[37] The game, developed by Rebellion Developments and published by Sierra Entertainment,[38] was a third-person action-adventure game, allowing players to take the role of the Predator from the film.[39] The game received generally negative reviews from the gaming press.[40] Future[edit] Further information: Alien vs. Predator (franchise) § Future During the production of Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem, the Brothers Strause expressed plans for a third Alien vs. Predator installment.[41] However, the planned sequel was put on hold indefinitely. The Predator franchise continued with Nimród Antal's Predators, and Shane Black's The Predator (the latter of which featured references to AVP such as shurikens and Lex's spear which Scar made out of an Alien tail), while the Alien franchise proceeded with Ridley Scott's Prometheus and Alien: Covenant. See also[edit] Film portal Science fiction portal Alien franchise Predator franchise List of action films of the 2000s List of horror films of 2007 List of science-fiction films of the 2000s References[edit] ^ a b c "Aliens vs. Predator -- Requiem (2007)". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Retrieved December 7, 2018. ^ a b c "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 5, 2020. ^ "AVPR - Aliens vs Predator - Requiem (15)". British Board of Film Classification. December 21, 2007. Retrieved October 16, 2007. ^ a b c "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". The Numbers. Retrieved August 23, 2009. ^ a b "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 24, 2009. ^ Carroll, Larry (2007-09-11). "'Alien vs. Predator' Sequel's R-Rated Secrets Revealed: 'Breaking Rules Is a Good Thing'". MTV. Retrieved 2010-11-30. ^ a b c McLean, Thomas (December 21, 2007). "AVP-R: The Strause Brothers Strike Back Page 1". Vfxworld. Retrieved 6 October 2020. ^ "Alien vs. Predator 2 Update". SuperheroHype. July 31, 2006. Retrieved May 12, 2018. ^ "AVP2 news: title, filming, etc". Cinescape. August 1, 2006. Archived from the original on August 5, 2006. Retrieved August 1, 2006. ^ a b c McLean, Thomas (December 21, 2007). "AVP-R: The Strause Brothers Strike Back Page 2". Vfxworld. Archived from the original on 4 March 2008. Retrieved February 21, 2008. ^ McLean, Thomas (December 21, 2007). "AVP-R: The Strause Brothers Strike Back Page 3". Vfxworld. Archived from the original on 6 March 2008. Retrieved February 21, 2008. ^ Carlsson, Mikael (September 26, 2006). "Brian Tyler to score "Alien vs. Predator 2"". Retrieved November 30, 2019. ^ Hubai, Gergely (January 30, 2008). "Rambo vs. Predator". Filmzene.net. Retrieved August 23, 2009. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)". AllMusic. Retrieved July 15, 2018. ^ "Predator (1987): Soundtrack". YouTube. Retrieved May 13, 2018. ^ "OOMPH! – Wach Auf". YouTube. Retrieved June 19, 2020. ^ Orange, B. Alan (October 22, 2007). "Aliens Vs. Predator - Requiem Makes Its First Appearance". MovieWeb. Retrieved May 16, 2020. ^ "Brothers Strause Presenting AVP-R at LA Con". ComingSoon.net. October 22, 2007. Retrieved May 16, 2020. ^ "Information about the Alien vs. Predator DVD and Blu-ray". Dvd.monstersandcritics.com. February 27, 2008. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved August 23, 2009. ^ K. Arnold, Thomas (April 23, 2008). "Juno, Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem lead the way". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 29 April 2008. Retrieved April 23, 2008. ^ "AVP2, FF2, DH4 & more". JoBlo.com. ^ [1][dead link] ^ Pandya, Gitesh (December 28, 2007). "Aliens and Debaters Join End-of-Year Lineup". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved February 20, 2008. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (AVP 2)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved February 20, 2008. ^ "CinemaScore". Archived from the original on February 6, 2018. Retrieved November 6, 2018. ^ "Aliens Vs Predator: Requiem Review | Movie - Empire". June 10, 2017. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017. ^ "ALIEN VS. PREDATOR: REQUIEM | Film Threat". December 30, 2007. ^ "Josh Rosenblatt — Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". The Austin Chronicle. Retrieved November 6, 2018. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". The Hollywood Reporter. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem". EW.com. ^ Leydon, Joe (December 27, 2007). "Aliens vs. Predator — Requiem". ^ "Review: Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem - Cinematical". December 29, 2007. Archived from the original on December 29, 2007. ^ Genzlinger, Neil (December 26, 2007). "Aliens and Predators Still Can't Seem to Get Along" – via NYTimes.com. ^ "Golden Raspberry Award Foundation". Golden Raspberry Awards. Archived from the original on April 14, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2009. ^ "MTV Awards 2008 — Best Fight". MTV. Archived from the original on 10 May 2008. Retrieved June 13, 2008. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Release Information for PSP". GameFAQs. Archived from the original on 16 February 2009. Retrieved March 19, 2009. ^ Magrino, Tom (August 14, 2007). "Aliens fighting Predator on PSP". GameSpot. Retrieved March 19, 2009. ^ Gibson, Ellie (October 12, 2007). "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Review". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on 16 February 2009. Retrieved March 20, 2009. ^ "Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved March 20, 2009. ^ "The Brothers Strause Reveal Their Plans for 'Alien Vs. Predator 3'". movieweb.com. December 11, 2007. External links[edit] API at IMDb API at AllMovie API at Metacritic API at Box Office Mojo API at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Alien vs. Predator Films Alien vs. Predator (2004) Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (2007) Characters Alien Predator Music Alien vs. Predator Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem "Wach auf! Comics Aliens versus Predator Aliens/Predator: Deadliest of the Species Aliens versus Predator versus The Terminator Mindhunter Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Alien vs. Predator: Sand Trap Fire and Stone Novels Aliens vs. Predator: Prey Aliens vs. Predator: Hunter's Planet Aliens vs. Predator: War Games Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game Alien vs Predator (SNES) Alien vs. Predator (arcade) Alien vs Predator (Jaguar) Aliens versus Predator (1999) Aliens versus Predator 2 Aliens versus Predator: Extinction Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Aliens vs. Predator (2010) Other AVPX Franchises Alien Predator Related AVH: Alien vs. Hunter Alien Loves Predator Batman: Dead End Category v t e Films based on Dark Horse Comics Single films Tank Girl Barb Wire Virus Mystery Men G-Men from Hell American Splendor R.I.P.D. Polar Franchises 300 300 300: Rise of an Empire Alien vs. Predator Alien vs. Predator Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Hellboy Hellboy (2004) Hellboy II: The Golden Army (2008) Hellboy (2019) Animated Hellboy: Sword of Storms Hellboy: Blood and Iron The Mask The Mask Son of the Mask Sin City Sin City Sin City: A Dame to Kill For Timecop Timecop Timecop 2: The Berlin Decision Category