Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Developer(s) Cryo Interactive Publisher(s) Mindscape Producer(s) David Locke Jean-Martial Lefranc Steve Hutchins Designer(s) Olivier Venet Olivier Train Cyrille Thomas Programmer(s) Nicolas Choukroun Artist(s) Bernard Bittler Platform(s) MS-DOS Release May 25, 1995 Genre(s) Adventure game Mode(s) Single player Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure is a 1995 adventure game developed by Cryo Interactive Entertainment and published by Mindscape for MS-DOS. It is loosely based on the Aliens comic book series with many references to the graphic novel Labyrinth. Contents 1 Gameplay 2 Plot 3 Development and release 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Gameplay[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (July 2015) Plot[edit] Players take on the role of Lt. Col. Henry Hericksen, an ex-Colonial Marine aboard the USS Sheridan who is now the commander of a three-man terraforming team. Your objective is to travel to the remote outpost on B54C in order to find the cause of a distress call your vessel received. You must search the mining complex and piece together the scattered evidence to learn exactly what and who is behind the sinister experiments that have gone horribly wrong. Development and release[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In 1994, Jean Martial Lefranc who was the CEO of Cryo Interactive charged Nicolas Choukroun, a French video game author, to build a small team in order to create an adventure game based on the Aliens comic book published by Dark Horse Comics. Mindscape was the publisher and Fox gave their authorization as long as the game would not have any characters from the movies and would have a realistic movie style. The new ideas from the Dark Horse comic inspired the team who created an adventure with a lot of innovation. In the game, the player can use synthetic Aliens in order to study the real Aliens. Also the concept of a military base, using the Aliens to build an army against the Earth was original and was opening new horizons. The main protagonist, Lt. Col. Henricksen, is a nod to famed sci-fi actor Lance Henriksen, who played the android Bishop in Aliens and Alien³, and Charles Bishop Weyland in Alien vs. Predator. This game had some interesting and innovative concepts. At the end of the game, the "Space Jockey", the huge dead creature found in the spaceship in the first Alien movie appeared, rendered in a 3D modeled form, and was coming to save the player in extremis. This game created the concept of a war between the two Alien races shown in the first Alien movies but was never exploited by Fox. In October 1994, the USA version was finished and Mindscape duplicated 120,000 pieces for Christmas sales. In December 1994, Fox sued Mindscape for copyright violation and gave Mindscape the right to sell the stock, but not to continue to duplicate and market the product. The whole staff in Mindscape US and Mindscape UK were fired and the German and French version of the game were released unfinished. Reception[edit] Upon its release, the game received mixed and mostly mediocre reviews, but also got some good scores such as an 80% in Polish magazine Secret Service.[1] In a retrospective article, Alexa Ray Corriea and Danielle Riendeau of Polygon wrote Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure "not only made the Aliens feel scary, but added a little more to the franchise by spinning different plot threads through the game."[2] According to Pete Worth of Thunderbolt, "The game featured some high-end graphics and a certain degree of tension but the inventory-based puzzles and grid-based combat were often tedious. Still, it was interesting to see xenomorphs regain their fear-inducing deadliness after being reduced to mere cannon-fodder so often in other games."[3] On the other hand, Stephen Cleckner of GamesBeat opined "Aliens: The Comic Book Adventure is a frustratingly plodding and tedious excuse of a game." He recommended to "sit through a Let's Play video if you need to experience this thing. For your sake, don’t actually try to play it."[4] In 1996, Computer Gaming World ranked it as the #24 Worst Game of All Time as "bad art, plot and action shame the Dark Horse comic series on which it was based."[5] References[edit] ^ "Gambler Magazine (May 1996)". Archive.org. Retrieved 2015-07-23. ^ "From Atari to Isolation: A video and written history of Alien games". Polygon. Retrieved 2015-07-23. ^ Pete Worth (2013-02-11). "An Alien Retrospective - feature at Thunderbolt". Thunderboltgames.com. Archived from the original on 2015-07-22. Retrieved 2015-07-23. ^ Stephen Kleckner (2014-10-06). "Games of the Alien franchise, Part 1: The bad, the canceled, and the weirdly cool page 2 | GamesBeat | Games | by Stephen Kleckner". Venturebeat.com. Retrieved 2015-07-23. ^ Computer Gaming World No. 148, page 94. External links[edit] Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure at MobyGames v t e Alien Films Alien (1979) Aliens (1986) Alien 3 (1992) Alien Resurrection (1997) Prometheus (2012) Alien: Covenant (2017) Media Soundtracks Alien Aliens Alien 3 Alien Resurrection Prometheus Alien: Covenant Comics Alien: The Illustrated Story Dark Horse line Superman/Aliens Batman/Aliens WildC.A.T.s/Aliens Green Lantern Versus Aliens Judge Dredd vs. Aliens Novels Alien: Out of the Shadows Aliens: Earth Hive Aliens: Nightmare Asylum Aliens: The Female War Aliens: Phalanx Games Alien (1982) Alien (1984) Aliens: The Computer Game (Activision) Aliens: The Computer Game (Software Studios) Aliens (1990) Aliens Adventure Game (tabletop) Alien 3 Alien 3: The Gun Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Alien Trilogy Aliens Online Alien Resurrection Aliens: Thanatos Encounter Aliens Infestation Aliens: Colonial Marines Alien: Isolation Aliens: Fireteam Other media Aliens: Colonial Marines Technical Manual Alien: Isolation – The Digital Series Universe Characters Ellen Ripley Ash Bishop Amanda Ripley David 8 Corporal Dwayne Hicks Hudson Concepts USS Sulaco Alien Other Accolades for the film series Alien War Alien vs. Predator franchise Related Ripley (crater) Alien 2: On Earth Memory: The Origins of Alien Category v t e Adventure games developed by Cryo Interactive Arthur's Knights series Tales of Chivalry II: The Secret of Merlin Atlantis series The Lost Tales II III: The New World Captain Blood series Commander Blood Dune series Dune Frank Herbert's Dune Egypt series 1156 B.C. II: The Heliopolis Prophecy Versailles series Versailles 1685 II: Testament of the King Other titles KGB Dragon Lore Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Lost Eden Dreams to Reality Treasure Hunter China ZeroZone Aztec The New Adventures of the Time Machine Odyssey Thorgal: Curse of Atlantis The Secret of the Nautilus Salammbo Related Kheops Studio The Adventure Company Egypt III Atlantis Evolution The Secrets of Atlantis: The Sacred Legacy