This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize its key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (July 2015) application programming interface Developer(s) Mythic Entertainment Kesmai Publisher(s) GameStorm Kesmai Fox Interactive Director(s) Paul Provenzano Producer(s) Matt Firor Jason Bell Nick Laiacona Designer(s) Mark Jacobs Programmer(s) Rob Denton Artist(s) Bob Frizzell Missy Castro Platform(s) Microsoft Windows Release March 31, 1998 Genre(s) First-person shooter Mode(s) Single player, multiplayer Aliens Online was a 1998 massively multiplayer first-person shooter video game released for Microsoft Windows. It was based on the science fiction horror film Aliens.[1] Contents 1 Gameplay 2 Release 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Gameplay[edit] Aliens Online included asymmetric teams, teams consisting of more players than found in most first-person shooters of its era, job/class specialization, and RPG elements. Players could fight on either the side of the United States Colonial Marines or on the side of the Aliens.[2] Scenarios were played in one of six different maps, with three more added over the game's lifespan. The Colonial Marine faction had the Medic, Scout, Soldier, and Heavy Weapons classes. More advanced weaponry were available when grouping as a "fireteam," and increased hit points became available as a character progressed in rank. Marines' equipment included the motion detector from the film Aliens, which was their sole method to locate Aliens, but would not locate Aliens which were not moving. In later versions of the game, the Marines could also drop proximity mines. The Hive Alien faction had the Face Hugger, Drone, Queen, and Empress classes. Their capabilities included leaping easily to vents and speeding through cramped ducts, and radar of the entire map, representing the aliens' greater awareness and hive-like mentality. They attacked only at close range using tail strikes and with claws. Each map allowed one alien player to fill the role as Queen or Empress, and that player could freely swap from drone to drone. Players gained points for killing Marines and lost them by dying, except when playing as a face hugger, which loses no points for dying. Release[edit] The software was free to download and was automatically updated. Joining GameStorm for $9.95 per month was required to play the game.[3] Online play was shut down in 2000 after the GameStorm network was sold to Electronic Arts.[4] Reception[edit] Aliens Online was well received upon its release. Chris Gregson of GameSpot gave it a review score of 7.2/10, opining "With so much to gain and absolutely nothing to lose, any self-respecting Aliens fan should give Aliens Online a try."[3] Brooks Peck and Craig E. Engler from Science Fiction Weekly gave the beta version the perfect A score. Noting the game's bugs, they nevertheless opined "it's clear that Kesmai has what it takes to satisfy both the Aliens fan and the hardcore gamer. This is one of those titles that cashes in on some of the Internet's promises of multiplayer action, and it's sure to be a hit with SF lovers."[5] According to a retrospective by Stephen Kleckner of GamesBeat, "Aliens Online, unfortunately, was riddled with balancing issues and bad level design. (...) Ancient ’90s computing technology and Internet infrastructure and these issues worse, resulting in incredibly laggy connectivity."[6] Next Generation reviewed the game, rating it three stars out of five, and stated that "Overall, this is a wonderful addition to GameStorm. We just wish there was more variety so the thrill could last."[7] References[edit] ^ "Aliens Merchandise". Jamescamerononline.com. Retrieved 2015-07-17. ^ Action Grrl (November 1997). "Aliens Online: In Cyberspace, No One Can Hear You Scream". GamePro. No. 110. IDG. pp. 36, 38. ^ a b Gregson, Chris (1998-04-16). "Aliens Online Review". GameSpot. Retrieved 2015-07-17. ^ "From Atari to Isolation: A video and written history of Alien games". Polygon. Retrieved 2015-07-17. ^ "Science Fiction Game Reviews: Aliens Online". 2009-03-04. Archived from the original on March 4, 2009. Retrieved 2015-07-17. ^ Stephen Kleckner (2014-10-06). "Games of the Alien franchise, Part 1: The bad, the canceled, and the weirdly cool | GamesBeat". Venturebeat.com. Retrieved 2015-07-17. ^ "Finals". Next Generation. No. 43. Imagine Media. July 1998. p. 120. External links[edit] Aliens Online at MobyGames v t e Alien Films Alien (1979) Aliens (1986) Alien 3 (1992) Alien Resurrection (1997) Prometheus (2012) Alien: Covenant (2017) Media Soundtracks Alien Aliens Alien 3 Alien Resurrection Prometheus Alien: Covenant Comics Alien: The Illustrated Story Dark Horse line Superman/Aliens Batman/Aliens WildC.A.T.s/Aliens Green Lantern Versus Aliens Judge Dredd vs. Aliens Novels Alien: Out of the Shadows Aliens: Earth Hive Aliens: Nightmare Asylum Aliens: The Female War Aliens: Phalanx Games Alien (1982) Alien (1984) Aliens: The Computer Game (Activision) Aliens: The Computer Game (Software Studios) Aliens (1990) Aliens Adventure Game (tabletop) Alien 3 Alien 3: The Gun Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Alien Trilogy Aliens Online Alien Resurrection Aliens: Thanatos Encounter Aliens Infestation Aliens: Colonial Marines Alien: Isolation Aliens: Fireteam Other media Aliens: Colonial Marines Technical Manual Alien: Isolation – The Digital Series Universe Characters Ellen Ripley Ash Bishop Amanda Ripley David 8 Corporal Dwayne Hicks Hudson Concepts USS Sulaco Alien Other Accolades for the film series Alien War Alien vs. Predator franchise Related Ripley (crater) Alien 2: On Earth Memory: The Origins of Alien Category