This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) API Publication information Publisher Dark Horse Comics Schedule Monthly Format Limited series Genre Science fiction Publication date November 27, 2007 No. of issues 1 Creative team Written by Mike Kennedy Artist(s) Davide Fabbri Alien vs. Predator: Sand Trap is a comic book series by Mike Kennedy. It was released as a one-shot comic issue published by Dark Horse Comics, on November 27, 2007. This series was included on the Alien vs. Predator: The Ultimate Showdown DVD box set. Description[edit] An unfortunate desert platoon gets more war than they bargained for when they unwittingly end up in the middle of a battle where the warriors are not human. The soldiers soon discover that this chaotic region has proven to be an ideal hunting ground for the Predators' latest conquest, and even Blackwater was no match for the forces unleashed in the thrill of the game. Will the new squad fare any better than the band of brothers before them? In space, nobody can hear you scream. On Earth, it won't matter.[1] References[edit] ^ Paul "Nomad" Nicholasi (October 28, 2007). "New AVP Comic on the Way!". Dark Horse Comics. Retrieved July 16, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) v t e Alien vs. Predator Films Alien vs. Predator (2004) Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (2007) Characters Alien Predator Music Alien vs. Predator Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem "Wach auf! Comics Aliens versus Predator Aliens/Predator: Deadliest of the Species Aliens versus Predator versus The Terminator Mindhunter Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Alien vs. Predator: Sand Trap Fire and Stone Novels Aliens vs. Predator: Prey Aliens vs. Predator: Hunter's Planet Aliens vs. Predator: War Games Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game Alien vs Predator (SNES) Alien vs. Predator (arcade) Alien vs Predator (Jaguar) Aliens versus Predator (1999) Aliens versus Predator 2 Aliens versus Predator: Extinction Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Aliens vs. Predator (2010) Other AVPX Franchises Alien Predator Related AVH: Alien vs. Hunter Alien Loves Predator Batman: Dead End Category