For the Italian vehicle manufacturer, see Alkè. "Alce" redirects here. For the legendary beast, see Griffin. Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e In Greek mythology, the name Alke /ˈælkiː/ (Ancient Greek: Ἁλκή means "prowess, courage"), also transliterated as Alce, may refer to: Alke, the spirit and personification of the abstract concept of courage and battle-strength. In the Iliad, she was depicted on Athena's aegis alongside Ioke, Eris and Phobos.[1][2] Alke, daughter of Cybele and Olympus. She was given a second name, Cybele, after her mother.[3] Alke, an Amazon.[4] Alke, one of Actaeon's dogs.[5][6] Notes[edit] ^ Homer, Iliad 5.738 ff ^ Theoi Project - Alke ^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca historica 5.49.3 ^ Latin Anthology, 392 ^ Ovid, Metamorphoses 3.217 ^ Hyginus, Fabulae 181 References[edit] Diodorus Siculus, The Library of History translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer's Web Site Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Gaius Julius Hyginus, Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Homer, The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Homer, Homeri Opera in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses translated by Brookes More (1859-1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses. Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library. This article includes a list of Greek mythological figures with the same or similar names. If an internal link for a specific Greek mythology article referred you to this page, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended Greek mythology article, if one exists.