American publishing company This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) API Parent company Andrews McMeel Universal Founded 1975; 46 years ago (1975) Founder Jim Andrews and John McMeel Country of origin United States Headquarters location Kansas City, Missouri Distribution Simon & Schuster[1] Key people John P. McMeel (Chairman) Hugh T. Andrews (Owner) Kirsty E. Melville (President and Publisher, Book Division) Publication types Books, Calendars Imprints Accord Official website publishing.andrewsmcmeel.com Andrews McMeel Publishing, LLC (formerly Andrews, McMeel and Parker (1975–1986) and Andrews and McMeel (1986–1997)) is a company that publishes books, calendars, and related toys. It is a part of Andrews McMeel Universal (which comprises AMP, Andrews McMeel Syndication, and Amuse). Andrews McMeel is the general publisher of books of comic strips produced by Andrews McMeel Syndication including The Far Side, Calvin and Hobbes and FoxTrot. However, the company also produces book collections for some comic strips which are owned by other syndicates. History[edit] Founded in 1970 by Jim Andrews and John McMeel, entered the book business with the 1973 acquisition of Sheed and Ward. The publishing arm began in 1975 as Andrews McMeel Publishing.[2] (The Sheed and Ward name and backlist were divested).[3] References[edit] ^ Our Valued Clients ^ "The History of Andrews McMeel Universal". Andrews McMeel Universal. Retrieved July 23, 2018. ^ McMeel, John P. (1997-01-01). "A Voice from the Heartland - Alive and Well, Thank You". In Everette E. Dennis; Craig L. LaMay; Edward C. Pease (eds.). Publishing Books. Transaction Publishers. pp. 41–47. ISBN 978-1-4128-3251-9. External links[edit] Official website v t e Andrews McMeel Universal Andrews McMeel Andrews McMeel Syndication Universal Press Syndicate Uclick Atlantic Syndication Comic strips (current) Adam@home Argyle Sweater Baldo Biographic Breaking Cat News C'est la Vie Close to Home Compu-toon Cornered Dilbert Doonesbury The Duplex The 5th Wave FoxTrot Fred Basset The Fusco Brothers Garfield Gaturro Ginger Meggs In the Bleachers Judge Dredd La Cucaracha Liō Mutt and Jeff (reruns) Nancy New Adventures of Queen Victoria Non Sequitur Off the Mark Overboard Peanuts (reruns) Pearls Before Swine Phoebe and Her Unicorn Pibgorn Pooch Café Real Life Adventures Red and Rover Stone Soup Tank McNamara Thatababy Tiny Sepuku Tom the Dancing Bug Wallace the Brave Ziggy Comic strips (historical) The Boondocks Brainwaves Calvin and Hobbes Cathy Citizen Dog Cleats Condorito Cul de Sac Downstown Encyclopedia Brown The Far Side For Better or For Worse Geech Ink Pen James Bond Kelly & Duke Kudzu Lucky Cow Maintaining Mullets PreTeena Ronaldinho Gaucho W. T. Duck Van Von Hunter Where I'm Coming From You Can with Beakman and Jax Editorial cartoons Tony Auth Bad Reporter Stuart Carlson Lalo Alcaraz Glenn McCoy Pat Oliphant Ted Rall Ben Sargent Tom Toles Kerry Waghorn Lifestyle Ask the Headhunter Dear Abby Focus on the Family On Ethics News of the Weird Scott Burns Other Earthweek Hidato The Independent Magic Eye The Mini Page The Motley Fool Timothy Parker Religion News Service Wonderword Zweihänder Grim & Perilous RPG Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125