historical society This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (December 2019) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize its key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (December 2019) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society or HPLHS is the organization that hosts Cthulhu Lives!, a group of live-action roleplayers for the Cthulhu Live version of Call of Cthulhu. Founded in Colorado in 1984, it is now based in Glendale, California.[1] Their motto is Ludo Fore Putavimus ("We thought it would be fun").[2] HPLHS produces a number of Cthulhu Mythos films, including the eponymous The Call of Cthulhu, as well as sound recordings, under its Mythoscope and Mythophone labels, respectively. They also offer props, both for sale and for free download. Originally a hobbyist group, HPLHS has become a for profit company dedicated to creating content faithful to the spirit of the Gothic 1920s source material but leavening it with some humour. Contents 1 Productions 1.1 Printed work 1.2 Audio 1.2.1 Dark Adventure Radio Theatre 1.3 Film 2 See also 3 Notes 4 External links Productions[edit] Printed work[edit] Strange Eons** (1986-1990) The Spirit of Revision - Lovecraft's Letters to Zealia Brown Reed Bishop (2015) A Shoggoth on the Roof Libretto (2005) Miskatonic University Monographs Archeological Interpretations of Myth Patterns in the Iconography of the Codex Beltrán-Escavy The Curious Sea Shanty Variants of Innsmouth, Mass. Audio[edit] The H.P. Lovecraft Historical Society has created music based on the writings of HP Lovecraft.[3] A Shoggoth on the Roof (2005) A Very Scary Solstice (2003)[4] "Carol of the Old Ones" An Even Scarier Solstice (2006) Live at the Gilman House (2011) Dreams in the Witch House: A Lovecraftian Rock Opera (2013) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre[edit] The H.P. Lovecraft Historical Society has produced a series of Mercury Theatre-style radio dramas entitled "Dark Adventure Radio Theatre". Currently produced episodes: Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: At the Mountains of Madness (2006) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Dunwich Horror (2008) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Shadow Out of Time (2008) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Shadow Over Innsmouth (2008) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Call of Cthulhu (2012) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Case of Charles Dexter Ward (2013) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Colour Out of Space (2013) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: Herbert West - Reanimator (2013) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Dreams in the Witch House (2014) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: Imprisoned with the Pharaohs (2014) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Horror at Red Hook (2015) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: Dagon - War of Worlds (2015) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: A Solstice Carol (2015) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The White Tree (2016) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Brotherhood of the Beast (2016) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Haunter of the Dark (2017) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Rats in the Walls (2018) Dark Adventure Radio Theatre: The Lurking Fear (2019) Film[edit] The Testimony of Randolph Carter[5] The Call of Cthulhu (2005) – Directed by Andrew Leman and described by one reviewer as the most successful adaptation of this story, this silent movie was filmed in black and white.[6] It was created over the course of two years on a very small budget. The DVD version allowed the viewer to watch the movie with the intertitle cards translated into any one of 24 languages.[7] The Whisperer in Darkness (2011) – Some filming for this production was undertaken at Mount Holyoke College in Massachusetts.[8] See also[edit] H. P. Lovecraft Notes[edit] ^ John Brownlee (March 2, 2007), Interview with Cthulhu, Wired ^ "Who are we and what is Cthulhu Lives?". The H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society. Archived from the original on 2008-07-19. Retrieved 2009-01-01. ^ The Strange Sound of Cthulhu: Music Inspired by the Writings of H.P. Lovecraft Gary Hill, 2006 ^ Ray Zablocki (December 23, 2006), For the H.P. Lovecraft fan in your life, Hampton Roads ^ The Testimony of Randolph Carter Archived 2010-03-02 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 26/2/10 ^ The Call of Cthulhu: A Genuine H.P. Lovecraft Adaptation Review by David Austin, 31 October 2006, accessed 1 March 2010 Archived 2 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Call of Cuthulhu [2005] Dr Freex, Attack of the 50 Foot DVD, 28 July 2007, accessed 1 March 2010 ^ Film Shoot at MHC accessed 1 March 2010 Archived 25 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine External links[edit] Official site v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category v t e Western U.S. Historical Societies Mountain Arizona Arizona Historical Society (Tempe) Colorado Denver Colorado Aviation Historical Society History Colorado Pueblo Bessemer Historical Society Pueblo Historical Aircraft Society Others Adventures in Preservation (Boulder) Society for French Historical Studies (Colorado Springs) St. Vrain Historical Society (Longmont) Idaho Idaho State Historical Society (Moscow) Montana Helena Montana Historical Society Society of Montana Pioneers Nevada Las Vegas Historical Society (Las Vegas) New Mexico New Mexico Historic Preservation Division (Santa Fe) Utah Salt Lake City Church History Library Daughters of Utah Pioneers Utah State Historical Society Others Mormon History Association (Heber City) Utah Aviation Hall of Fame (Roy) Washington County Historical Society (St. George) Wyoming Wyoming Division of State Parks and Historic Sites (Cheyenne) Pacific California Berkeley Berkeley Architectural Heritage Association Berkeley Historical Society La Jolla Association of Ancient Historians La Jolla Historical Society Los Angeles Association of Moving Image Archivists Chinese Historical Society of Southern California Getty Conservation Institute Los Angeles Conservancy Society for the Preservation of Downtown Los Angeles West Adams Heritage Association San Diego The Conference on Faith and History San Diego History Center Save Our Heritage Organisation San Francisco California Historical Society GLBT Historical Society Native Sons of the Golden West San Francisco Museum and Historical Society Society of California Pioneers Santa Clara South Bay Historical Railroad Society Western Society for French History Others American Aviation Historical Society (Santa Ana) California Register of Historical Resources (Sacramento) California Trolley and Railroad Corporation (San Jose) Fort Tejon Historical Association (Kern County) Glendora Historical Society (Glendora) H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society (Glendale) Hayward Area Historical Society (Hayward) Humboldt County Historical Society (Eureka) IT History Society (Tiburon) Oakland Heritage Alliance (Oakland) Pajaro Valley Historical Association (Watsonville) Perris Valley Historical and Museum Association (Perris) San Buenaventura Conservancy (Ventura) San Fernando Valley Historical Society (Mission Hills) San Joaquin County Historical Society and Museum (Lodi) Santee Historical Society Museum (Santee) Silicon Valley Historical Association (Menlo Park) Whittier Conservancy (Whittier) Hawaii Hawaiian Historical Society (Honolulu) Oregon Association for Recorded Sound Collections (Eugene) Oregon Electric Railway Historical Society Oregon Historical Society (Portland) Restore Oregon (Eugene) Washington Olympia Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation Washington Women's History Consortium Seattle Historic Seattle Puget Sound Maritime Historical Society Tacoma American Society for Environmental History Washington State Historical Society Others Disability History Association (Mountlake Terrace) Eastside Heritage Center (Bellevue) Mercer Island Historical Society (Mercer Island) United States Lighthouse Society (Hansville) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125