A group of Greek gods "Notus" and "Four winds" redirect here. For the United States town, see Notus, Idaho. For other uses, see Four Winds (disambiguation). Wind rose of ancient Greece, created by the scholar Adamantios Korais around 1796 This article contains special characters. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols. In ancient Greek religion and myth, the Anemoi (Greek: Ἄνεμοι, "Winds") were wind gods who were each ascribed a cardinal direction from which their respective winds came (see Classical compass winds), and were each associated with various seasons and weather conditions. They were the progeny of Eos and Astraeus.[1] Contents 1 Etymology 2 Mythology 2.1 Boreas 2.1.1 Aquilo (Septentrio) 2.2 Zephyrus 2.3 Notus (Auster) 2.4 Eurus 3 Lesser winds 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Etymology[edit] The earliest attestation of the word in Greek and of the worship of the winds by the Greeks, are perhaps the Mycenaean Greek word-forms 𐀀𐀚𐀗𐀂𐀋𐀩𐀊, a-ne-mo-i-je-re-ja, 𐀀𐀚𐀗𐄀𐀂𐀋𐀩𐀊, a-ne-mo,i-je-re-ja, i.e. "priestess of the winds". These words, written in Linear B, are found on the KN Fp 1 and KN Fp 13 tablets.[2][3] Mythology[edit] Tower of the Winds in ancient Athens, part of the frieze depicting the Greek wind gods Boreas (north wind, on the left) and Skiron (northwesterly wind, on the right) The Anemoi are minor gods and are subject to the god Aeolus. They were sometimes represented as gusts of wind, and at other times were personified as winged men. They were also sometimes depicted as horses kept in the stables of the storm god Aeolus, who provided Odysseus with the Anemoi in the Odyssey. The Spartans were reported to sacrifice a horse to the winds on Mount Taygetus.[4] Astraeus, the astrological deity (sometimes associated with Aeolus), and Eos/Aurora, the goddess of the dawn, were the parents of the Anemoi, according to the Greek poet Hesiod. Of the four chief Anemoi, Boreas (Aquilo in Roman mythology) is the north wind and bringer of cold winter air, Zephyrus (Favonius in Latin)[5] is the west wind and bringer of light spring and early-summer breezes, and Notus (Auster in Latin) is the south wind and bringer of the storms of late summer and autumn; Eurus, the southeast[6] (or according to some,[7] the east) wind, was not associated with any of the three Greek seasons, and is the only one of these four Anemoi not mentioned in Hesiod's Theogony or in the Orphic hymns. The deities equivalent to the Anemoi in Roman mythology were the Venti (Latin, "winds"). These gods had different names, but were otherwise very similar to their Greek counterparts, borrowing their attributes and being frequently conflated with them. Ptolomy's world map listed 12 winds: Septentrio (N), Aquilo (NNE), Vulturnus (NE), Subsolanus (E), Eurus (SE), Euroauster (SSE), Austerulnotus (S), Euronotus (SSW), Affricus (SW), Ephirus (W), Eurus (NW), Circius (NNW). Boreas[edit] Greco-Buddhist fragment of the god Boreas with billowing cloak (velificatio) overhead. Hadda, Afghanistan Boreas (Βορέας, Boréas; also Βορρᾶς, Borrhâs)[8] is the Greek god of the cold north wind and the bringer of winter. Although he was normally taken as the north wind, the Roman writers Aulus Gellius and Pliny the Elder both took Boreas as a northeast wind, equivalent to the Roman Aquilo.[9] Boreas is depicted as being very strong, with a violent temper to match. He was frequently shown as a winged old man with shaggy hair and beard, holding a conch shell and wearing a billowing cloak.[3] Pausanias wrote that Boreas had snakes instead of feet, though in art he was usually depicted with winged human feet. Boreas' two sons Calaïs and Zetes (the Boreads) were in the crew of the Argo as Argonauts.[10][11] Boreas was closely associated with horses. He was said to have fathered twelve colts after taking the form of a stallion, to the mares of Erichthonius, king of Dardania. These were said to be able to run across a field of grain without trampling the plants. Pliny the Elder (Natural History iv.35 and viii.67) thought that mares might stand with their hindquarters to the North Wind and bear foals without a stallion. The Greeks believed that his home was in Thrace, and Herodotus and Pliny both describe a northern land known as Hyperborea "Beyond the North Wind" where people lived in complete happiness and had extraordinarily long lifespans. He is said to have fathered three giant Hyperborean priests of Apollo by Chione. Boreas was also said to have kidnapped Orithyia, an Athenian princess, from the Ilisos. Boreas had taken a fancy to Orithyia and had initially pleaded for her favours, hoping to persuade her. When this failed, he reverted to his usual temper and abducted her as she danced on the banks of the Ilisos. Boreas wrapped Orithyia up in a cloud, married her, and with her, Boreas fathered two sons—the Boreads, Zethes and Calais—and two daughters—Chione, goddess of snow, and Cleopatra. From then on, the Athenians saw Boreas as a relative by marriage. When Athens was threatened by Xerxes, the people prayed to Boreas, who was said to have then caused winds to sink 400 Persian ships. A cult was established in Athens in 480 B. C. E. in gratitude to the Boreas for destroying the approaching Persian fleet.[12] A similar event had occurred twelve years earlier, and Herodotus writes:[13] Now I cannot say if this was really why the Persians were caught at anchor by the stormwind, but the Athenians are quite positive that, just as Boreas helped them before, so Boreas was responsible for what happened on this occasion also. And when they went home they built the god a shrine by the River Ilissus. The abduction of Orithyia was popular in Athens before and after the Persian War, and was frequently depicted on vase paintings. In these paintings, Boreas was portrayed as a bearded man in a tunic, with shaggy hair that is sometimes frosted and spiked. The abduction was also dramatized in Aeschylus's lost play Oreithyia. In other accounts, Boreas was the father of Butes (by another woman) and the lover of the nymph Pitys. Aquilo (Septentrio)[edit] The Roman equivalent of Boreas was Aquilo.[14] This north (and slightly east) wind[15] was associated with winter. The poet Virgil writes:[16] Interea magnum sol circumvolvitur annum, et glacialis hiemps aquilonibus asperat undas. Now had the sun rolled through the year's full circle, and the waves were rough with icy winter's northern gales[17] For the wind which came directly from the north the Romans sometimes used the name Septentrio, which refers to the seven (septem) stars of the Plow or Big Dipper constellation. The name "Septentrio" gave rise to the pre-modern compass point Septentrionalis.[18] Zephyrus, the Greek god of the west wind and the goddess Chloris, from an 1875 oil painting by William-Adolphe Bouguereau Zephyrus[edit] Zephyrus and Hyacinth; Attic red-figure cup from Tarquinia, c. 480 BCE, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Zephyr and Flora, c. 1720, by Antonio Corradini, Victoria and Albert Museum Zephyrus, sometimes known in English as just Zephyr (Ζέφυρος, Zéphyros), in Latin Favonius,[5] is the Greek god of the west wind. The gentlest of the winds, Zephyrus is known as the fructifying wind, the messenger of spring. It was thought that Zephyrus lived in a cave in Thrace. Zephyrus was reported as having several wives in different stories. He was said to be the husband of Iris, goddess of the rainbow. He abducted the goddess Chloris, and gave her the domain of flowers. With Chloris, he fathered Karpos ("fruit"). He is said to have vied for Chloris's love with his brother Boreas, eventually winning her devotion. Additionally, with yet another sister and lover, the harpy Podarge (also known as Celaeno), Zephyrus was said to be the father of Balius and Xanthus, Achilles' horses. In the story of Eros and Psyche, Zephyrus served Eros (or Cupid) by transporting Psyche to his abode. Zephyrus was also claimed to have killed one of Apollo's many male lovers Hyacinth out of jealousy. Hyacinth was killed by a discus thrown by Apollo. Though according to some sources, his death was said to be an accident, others said that Zephyrus was the true culprit, having blown the discus off course. Zephyrus' Roman equivalent was Favonius (the 'favouring') who held dominion over plants and flowers. The Roman poet Horace writes:[19] quid fles, Asterie, quem tibi candidi primo restituent vere Favonii? Why do you weep, Asterie, for the man whom the bright west winds will restore to you at the beginning of spring? Notus (Auster)[edit] Notus (Νότος, Nótos) was the Greek god of the south wind. He was associated with the desiccating hot wind of the rise of Sirius after midsummer, was thought to bring the storms of late summer and autumn, and was feared as a destroyer of crops.[20] A statue of Notus. Notus' equivalent in Roman mythology was Auster, the embodiment of the sirocco wind, a southerly wind which brings cloudy weather, powerful winds and rain to southern Europe. (Auster named the compass point Australis and the country's name Australia.) The Auster winds are mentioned in Virgil's Aeneid Book II, lines 304–307: in segetem veluti cum flamma furentibus Austris incidit, aut rapidus montano flumine torrens sternit agros, sternit sata laeta boumque labores, praecipitesque trahit silvas Just as when a flame falls on the standing grain while the South Winds rage, or a rushing mountain stream lays low the fields, lays low the glad crops and labors of oxen, and drags down forests headlong. Another Roman poet, Tibullus 1.1, lines 47–48, speaks of the pleasure of lying in bed on rainy winter days: aut, gelidas hibernus aquas cum fuderit Auster, securum somnos igne iuvante sequi or when the winter South Wind has poured out his cold waters, to fall asleep carefree with the help of a fire. The name "Australia" (the 'southern land') is derived from Auster.[21] Eurus[edit] Eurus (Εὖρος, Euros) according to some was the southeast wind, but according to others the east wind.[7] On the Tower of the Winds in Athens, Eurus occupies the southeast side, while Apeliotes is in the east. However, it is widely accepted[who?] that Eurus is the east wind, while Apeliotes is the southeast wind. Eurus' Roman counterpart is Vulturnus, according to Pliny the Elder;[22] but for Aulus Gellius Volturnus was the equivalent of the southeast wind Euronotus.[23] Generally in the Latin poets the name Eurus is used for the east or southeast wind, as in Greek.[24] Eurus is a wind of storm, described as a turbulent wind during storms and tossing ships on the sea.[25][26] He is referred to as the “savior of Sparta” in a Homeric paean, or poem.[27] Eurus is also called the “hot wind” by Nonnus in Dionysiaca. Eurus is closely related to Helios in passages of the Dionysiaca, being called from his place near Helios’ palace, Phaethon, where the sun rose in the east.[28] Lesser winds[edit] Four lesser wind deities appear in a few ancient sources, such as at the Tower of the Winds in Athens: Kaikias (or Caecius) is the Greek deity of the northeast wind. He is shown on the monument as a bearded man with a shield full of hailstones. Apeliotes [29] (or Apheliotes; the name means 'from the (rising) sun') is the Greek deity of the southeast wind.[30] As this wind was thought to cause a refreshing rain particularly beneficial to farmers, he is often depicted wearing high boots and carrying fruit, draped in a light cloth concealing some flowers or grain. He is clean-shaven, with curly hair and a friendly expression. Because Apeliotes is a minor god, he was often syncretized with Eurus, the east wind.[citation needed] The Roman counterpart of Apeliotes is Subsolanus.[31] Skiron was the name used in Athens for the wind which blew from the Scironian rocks (a geographical feature near Kineta to the west of Athens).[32] On the Tower of the Winds, however, he appears on the northwest side. His name is related to Skirophorion, the last of the three months of spring in the Attic calendar. He is depicted as a bearded man tilting a cauldron, representing the onset of winter. His Roman counterpart is Caurus[33] or Corus.[34] Caurus is also one of the oldest Roman wind-deities, and numbered among the di indigetes ("indigenous gods"), a group of abstract and largely minor numinous entities. The Roman poet Virgil writes when describing steppe winter weather near the Sea of Azov:[35] Semper hiemps, semper spirantes frigora cauri Always winter, always the northwest winds breathing cold Lips is the Greek deity of the southwest wind, often depicted holding the stern of a ship. His Roman equivalent was Africus, due to the Roman province Africa being to the southwest of Italy. This name is thought to be derived from the name of a North African tribe, the Afri. Other minor wind deities included: Argestes "clearing", a wind blowing from about the same direction as Skiron (Caurus), and probably another name for it Aparctias, sometimes called the north wind instead of Boreas Thrascias, the north-northwest wind (sometimes called in Latin Circius) Euronotus, the wind blowing from the direction, as its name suggests, between Euros and Notus, that is, a south-southeast wind (Euroauster to the Romans) Iapyx, the northwest wind about the same as Caurus. It was this wind, according to Virgil, that carried the fleeing Cleopatra home to Egypt after she was defeated at the battle of Actium.[13] Libonotus, the south-southwest wind, known as Austro-Africus to the Romans Meses, another name for the northwest wind Olympias, apparently identified with Skiron/Argestes Phoenicias, another name for the southeast wind ("the one blowing from Phoenicia", due to this land lying to the southeast of Greece) In popular culture[edit] The Anemoi are occasionally referenced in popular culture. Notably, they make appearances in Percy Jackson & the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus, two fantasy series by Rick Riordan. In Riordan's first novel, Zephyrus (referred to as "Zephyr") is said to have a role in bringing the demigod children of female Greek gods down to Earth, from Mount Olympus.[36] In The Last Olympian, all four Anemoi and several minor wind gods are involved in the defense of Mount Olympus against Kronos (the Titan Cronus), the first series's chief antagonist.[37] Both the Greek and the Roman forms of the Anemoi appear in Riordan's second series. Boreas is a central character in The Lost Hero, and his children Khione, Calais, and Zetes continue to have important roles throughout the series. He resides in Quebec City, and is described as "sturdily built...with dark purple wings" when in his Greek form, and as "taller and thinner" when Roman.[38] Notus/Auster appears in The House of Hades as a counselor of sorts to the protagonists. His Roman form is described as laid-back, disinterested in mortal affairs, and stormy; while his Greek form is quick to anger, more in-touch with the human world, and wears a wreath of barley. Favonius/Zephyros also appears in that novel, described as a deeply tanned man with wings the colors of a sunset and holding a basket of unripe fruit. He takes two of the protagonists to meet his master, Cupid, whom he serves as punishment for accidentally killing a man he and Apollo loved during a game of quoits.[39] Eurus was the name of Sherlock Holmes's sister in the BBC adaptation. Red letters interspersed in the credits at the end of the Sherlock episode "The Final Problem" spelled out Anemoi. The California Zephyr, a renowned American cross-country passenger train route, was named after Zephyrus. In the 2014 video game Ryse: Son of Rome, Aquilo is featured as an antagonist to the main character, attempting to bring about the fall of Rome. He was disguised initially as Commodus' assistant, then was alongside Nero during the duel, and later on was behind the Barbarian attack upon Marius's family's estate and the aftermath. In the American animated television series, The Venture Bros., Lips, Caecius, and Skiron of the lesser winds are represented by the characters "The Investors", though these characters may be related to their respective Anemoi in name only. The Investors are depicted as a trio of mysterious men in business suits who possess mysterious powers and abilities. Their behavior and appearance is almost demonic in nature, making them a formidable and ominous presence within the series. The fourth Anemos (specifically, Apeliotes the southeast wind) is implied to be the character Dr. Henry Killinger, as he is explained to be the fourth brother of the said trio. Dr. Henry Killinger is removed in appearance and action from his brothers, as he is seemingly depicted as benevolent, while the Investors appear to be generally malevolent in nature.[40] See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anemoi. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikisource has the text of the 1920 Encyclopedia Americana article Zephyrus. Anemometer, modern device to measure wind Bacab Classical compass winds Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór Hyperborea Norðri, Suðri, Austri and Vestri Vayu List of wind deities References[edit] ^ Roman, L., & Roman, M. (2010). Encyclopedia of Greek and Roman mythology., p. 66, at Google Books ^ Raymoure, K.A. "a-ne-mo". Linear B Transliterations. Deaditerranean. Dead Languages of the Mediterranean. Archived from the original on 2019-02-12. Retrieved 2014-03-28. "KN Fp 1 + 31". "KN 13 Fp(1) (138)". ^ "DĀMOS: Database of Mycenaean at Oslo - Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas". ^ Pausanias 2.34.2 compared by Festus to the Roman sacrifice of the October Horse, 190 in the edition of Lindsay. ^ a b Aulus Gellius 2.22.12. ^ Liddell, Scott, & Jones Greek Lexicon. ^ a b Lewis and Short, Latin Dictionary. ^ Βορέας, Βορρᾶς. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project. ^ [1]Aulus Gellius, 2.22.9; [2]Pliny the Elder N.H. 2.46. ^ Diodorus Siculus, Library, 4.44.2; Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica 1.211–223, 2.231–239. ^ Βορεάδης in Liddell and Scott. ^ Roman, Luke; Roman, Monica (2010). Encyclopedia of Greek and Roman Mythology. Infobase Publishing. p. 105. ISBN 978-1-4381-2639-5. ^ a b Hdt. 7.189.3. ^ Aulus Gellius, 2.22.9; Pliny the Elder N.H. 2.46. ^ Lewis and Short, s.v. aquilo. ^ Aeneid 3, lines 284–285. ^ "P. Vergilius Maro, Aeneid, Book 3, line 278". www.perseus.tufts.edu. ^ Vitruvius 1.6.13; Pliny the Elder 2.51. ^ Horace, Odes 3.7. ^ "Google Image Result for". Google.ca. Retrieved 2013-05-07. ^ Online etymological dictionary. ^ Pliny the Elder 2.46; cf. Columella 15 ^ Aulus Gellius, 2.22.1. ^ e.g. Virgil, Aen. 12.730, Horace, Odes 2.16, Ovid, Met. 15.552. ^ "EURUS (Euros) - Greek God of the East Wind". www.theoi.com. Retrieved 2020-04-28. ^ Valerius Flaccus. The Argonautica.  Translation by Mozley, J. H. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. Book 1, ff 346, 574, 640. Book 2, ff 356. ^ Greek Lyric V New School of Poetry and Anonymous Songs. Translation by Campbell, D. A. Loeb Classical Library Vol 144. Frag. 858 (from Strasbourg papyrus). Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ^ Nonnus, Dionysiaca. Translated by Rouse, W H D. Book 3(ff 55) and 37 (ff. 55, ff 86). Loeb Classical Library Volumes 344, 354, 356. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1940. ^ "Apeliotes". www.hellenicaworld.com. Retrieved 2021-01-11. ^ Liddell, Scott & Jones, Greek Lexicon. ^ Aulus Gellius 2.22.1; Pliny the Elder 2.46. ^ Liddell, Scott, & Jones, Greek Lexicon. ^ Vitruvius 1.6.13. ^ Lucretius 1.405. Pliny the Elder 2.48. ^ Virgil, Georgics, 3.356. ^ Riordan, Rick (2005). The Lightning Thief. New York, New York: Hyperion Books. ISBN 0-7868-3865-5. ^ Riordan, Rick (2009). The Last Olympian. New York, New York: Hyperion Books. ISBN 978-1-4231-0147-5. ^ Riordan, Rick (2010). The Lost Hero. New York, New York: Disney-Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4231-1339-3. ^ Riordan, Rick (2013). The House of Hades. New York, New York: Disney-Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4231-4672-8. ^ Williams Street (Firm) Warner Home Video (Firm), publisher., The Venture Bros., OCLC 957180308 Further reading[edit] Aristotle, Meteorologica, 2.6 Aulus Gellius, Attic Nights, 2. 22 March, J. (1999). Cassell's Dictionary Of Classical Mythology. London. ISBN 0-304-35161-X. Herodotus, The Histories with an English translation by A. D. Godley. Cambridge. Harvard University Press. 1920. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Greek text available at Perseus Digital Library. Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio. 3 vols. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pliny the Elder, The Natural History. John Bostock, M.D., F.R.S. H.T. Riley, Esq., B.A. London. Taylor and Francis, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. 1855. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia. Karl Friedrich Theodor Mayhoff. Lipsiae. Teubner. 1906. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Vergilius Maro, Aeneid. Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Vergilius Maro, Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn & Co. 1900. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Vergilius Maro, Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics of Vergil. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn & Co. 1900. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. External links[edit] Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 40 images of Boreas) Drawings of the eight winds on the Tower of the Winds at Athens Myths read aloud by storytellers Bibliography of reconstruction: Homer, Iliad ii.595–600 (c. 700 BCE); Various 5th century BCE vase paintings; Palaephatus, On Unbelievable Tales 46. Hyacinthus (330 BCE); Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 1.3.3; Ovid, Metamorphoses 10. 162–219 (1–8 CE); Pausanias, Description of Greece 3.1.3, 3.19.4 (160–176 CE); Philostratus the Elder, Images i.24 Hyacinthus (170–245 CE); Philostratus the Younger, Images 14. Hyacinthus (170–245 CE); Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods 14 (170 CE); First Vatican Mythographer, 197. Thamyris et Musae v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Classical religious forms Ancient Greek religion Gnosticism Paleo-Balkan mythology Hellenistic religion Orphism Pythagoreanism Mycenaean deities Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Samothracian Mysteries Main beliefs Ages of Man Apotheosis Euhemerism Eusebeia Greek Heroic Age Interpretatio graeca Monism Mythology Nympholepsy Paganism Paradoxography Polytheism Theism Texts/epic poems/odes Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Cyranides Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Ehoiai Greek Magical Papyri Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Interpretation of Dreams (Antiphon) Oneirocritica Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Telegony The golden verses of Pythagoras Theogony Works and Days Epic Cycle Theban Cycle Rites and practices Amphidromia Animal sacrifice Apotheosis Baptes Curse tablet Daduchos Delphinion Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Hymns Hero cult Heroon Hierophany Hierophant Hierophylakes Hieros gamos Hypsistarians Iatromantis Interpretatio graeca Kanephoros Kykeon Libations Mystagogue Nekyia Necromancy Necromanteion Nymphaeum Panegyris Pharmakos Prayers Orgia Sacrifices Temenos Thyia Temples Votive offerings Sacred places Oracles, sanctuaries, Necromanteion Aornum Delphi Didymaion Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros island Oracle of Menestheus Tegyra Mountain Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Cave of Zeus, Crete Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Achilles island Delos Diomedes island Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Others Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Mythical beings Dragons in Greek mythology Greek mythological creatures Greek mythological figures List of minor Greek mythological figures Deities Primordial deities Aether Aion Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Aquatic deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Potamoi Potamides Proteus Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Hermanubis Hermes Thanatos Achlys Angelos Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Macaria Melinoë Persephone Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Dolos Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Other major deities Azone Eileithyia The Erinyes Harmonia The Muses Nemesis Pan Unknown God Zelus Heroes/heroines Abderus Achilles Actaeon Aeneas Argonauts Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Mythical tribes Amazons Anthropophage Atlantians Bebryces Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Telchines Oracles/seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Delphic Sibyl Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyl Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Magic Apotropaic magic Greek Magical Papyri Pella curse tablet Philia Mythical realms Aethiopia Atlantis Erytheia Hyperborea Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Scheria Scythia Themiscyra Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Fields of Punishment Isles of the Blessed Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Ferryman Charon Charon's obol Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Animals, daemons and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Hade's cattle Mythological wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Cranes-Pygmies war Gigantomachy Indian War (it is described at Dionysiaca) Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Mythological and religious objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Ara Baetylus Caduceus Cornucopia Dragon's teeth Diipetes Galatea Golden apple Golden Fleece Gorgoneion Greek terracotta figurines Harpe Ichor Lotus tree Minoan seals Moly Necklace of Harmonia Omphalos Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos (Winged helmet) Philosopher's stone Ring of Gyges Rod of Asclepius Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thymiaterion Thyrsus Trident Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of Fortune Wheel of fire Xoanon Symbols Arkalochori Axe Labrys Ouroboros Owl of Athena Mythological powers Divination Eidolon Eternal youth Evocation Fortune-telling Immortality Language of the birds Nympholepsy Magic Ornithomancy Shamanism Shapeshifting Weather modification Storage containers, cups, vases Amphora Calathus Chalice Ciborium Cotyla Hydria Hydriske Kalpis Kantharos Kernos Kylix Lebes Lekythos Loutrophoros Oenochoe Pelike Pithos Skyphos Stamnos Urn Musical Instruments Aulos Barbiton Chelys Cithara Cochilia Crotalum (Castanets) Epigonion Kollops Lyre Pan flute Pandura Phorminx Psaltery Salpinx Sistrum Tambourine Trigonon Tympanum Water organ Games Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Festivals/feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Vessels Argo Phaeacian ships Modern offshoot religions Discordianism Gaianism Feraferia Hellenism Modern popular culture Greek mythology in popular culture