Subgenre of television show This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (April 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) An animated sitcom is a subgenre of the sitcom that is animated instead of live action.[1] Contents 1 History 1.1 Early history 1.2 The Simpsons and expansion of the genre 1.3 21st century 2 References History[edit] Early history[edit] The Flintstones, which debuted in 1960, is considered the first example of the animated sitcom genre.[2] The similar cartoon The Jetsons, which took place in the future rather than the past, followed in 1962.[2] Animated sitcoms have been more controversial than traditional cartoons from the onset. The Flintstones was originally oriented at parents, as an animated version of The Honeymooners,[3] though it was primarily popular with children. The Japanese animated sitcom Sazae-san, based on the comic strip of the same title, began airing in 1969 and, as of 2013, is recognised to be the world's longest-running animated television series.[4] In the 1970s, the cartoon Wait Till Your Father Gets Home, often considered an influence on the contemporary Family Guy, debuted and further pushed the envelope. It ran from 1972 to 1974.[5] The Simpsons and expansion of the genre[edit] In 1987, The Simpsons shorts debuted on Fox's The Tracey Ullman Show. The first full-length episode, "Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire", debuted on December 17, 1989. It is the first American animated sitcom not to have a laugh track, unlike other animated sitcoms prior. It remained the sole English-language mainstream adult-oriented animated sitcom until the late 1990s, which saw the debuts of Beavis and Butt-Head, King of the Hill, South Park, Daria, Family Guy and Futurama. 21st century[edit] Canadian examples from the decade include Chilly Beach, Odd Job Jack, and, most recently, Fugget About It. Adult animation became more popular, premiering critically acclaimed shows such as Drawn Together, American Dad!, Archer, Bob's Burgers, Rick and Morty, BoJack Horseman, F is for Family, and Big Mouth. Certain franchises have expanded into the sitcom genre using animation, such as with Sonic Boom; The Looney Tunes Show; and the upcoming X-Files: Albuquerque. References[edit] ^ Mark - Art Institute (7 February 2011). "8 Great Animated Sitcoms That Should've Lasted Longer Than One Season". College Life, Hot Girls, Funny Pics, Sexy Cheerleaders: COED. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Retrieved 1 January 2012. ^ a b Cartoon Sitcom Face-Off Archived June 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ "A Brief History of Flintstones Vitamins". Mental Floss. Archived from the original on 2012-01-21. Retrieved 2012-01-01. ^ Nelkin, Sarah. "Guinness Certifies Sazae-san as Longest Running Animated Show". Anime News Network. Retrieved April 9, 2019. ^ "Wait Till Your Father Gets Home Description - Retro Junk". retrojunk.com. v t e Animation topics By country Bangladesh Bhutan China Czech Republic Estonia India Japan Malaysia Mexico North Korea Philippines Portugal Romania South Africa South Korea Spain Taiwan Thailand United States Vietnam History Azerbaijan Bangladesh Brazil Canada China France Hungary Iran Japan Korea Russia United Kingdom United States Silent Era The Golden Age World War II Early TV broadcast era Modern TV cable and streaming era Industry Animator List Animation department Animation director Story artist Animation studios List Animation database Art pipeline Biologist simulators Animation film festivals international regional Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends) Outsourcing International Animation Day Works Films Based on cartoons Computer-animated Feature-length Lost or unfinished Package Short Short series Stop-motion Series Direct-to-video Internet Television Techniques Traditional Barrier grid Flip book Limited animation Masking Rotoscoping Exposure sheet Stop motion Clay clay painting, strata-cut Cutout (silhouette) Graphic Model go motion Object Pixilation Puppetoon Computer (history, timeline) 2D Flash PowerPoint SVG CSS Multi-sketch Onion skinning Digital puppetry 3D T-pose Cel shading Crowd Morph target Motion capture Non-photorealistic rendering Physically based animation Procedural Skeletal Machinima Digital puppetry Virtual cinematography Puppetry Puppet Digital puppetry Other methods Blocking Chuckimation Drawn-on-film Inbetweening Paint-on-glass Pinscreen Pixel art Pose to pose Straight ahead Rubber hose Sand Syncro-Vox Zoetrope Variants Abstract animation (visual music) Adult animation Animated cartoon Animated sitcom Animated documentary Anime Educational animation Erotic animation Independent animation Instructional animation Related topics Animation music Bouncing ball Mickey Mousing Key frame Cel Character animation model sheet walk cycle lip sync off-model Creature animation Twelve principles Motion comic Films with live action and animation highest grossing Cartoon physics Cartoon violence Most expensive animated films List of animated films by box office admissions List of animated series by episode count anime series anime franchises Category Portal This article related to television terminology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This animation-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e