This article may be confusing or unclear to readers. Please help clarify the article. There might be a discussion about this on the talk page. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Animal X Country of origin Australia Original language English No. of series 2 Production Running time 22 minutes Release Original network Discovery Channel Original release 1997 (1997) – 2002 (2002) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Animal X is an Australian made documentary television series that aired in more than 120 countries. It began in 1997 with its first series of thirteen (13) half-hour episodes. In 2002, Discovery Channel in the U.S. co-produced the 2nd series of 13 half-hour episodes with the creators of the series, Australia's Storyteller Productions, for Animal Planet.[1] At this point Animal X episodes generally had 3 stories, with one exception: "The Skookum Cast". This was a joint expedition between Animal X and the BFRO which discovered the Skookum Cast, said to be an imprint of the body of a bigfoot. Contents 1 Animal X: Natural Mystery Unit 1.1 Episode list 1.1.1 Series One 1.1.2 Series Two 1.1.3 Natural Mystery Unit 2 Series facts 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Animal X: Natural Mystery Unit[edit] In 2004 Animal X spin off, the Natural Mystery Unit, was born. Also a co-production between Discovery and Storyteller, it was again aired on the Animal Planet Network in the United States, as well as numerous other networks in countries around the world. AX NMU features a male and female investigation team composed of Daniel Searle and Natalie Schmitt.[2] They visited locations of cryptid sightings and provided background on the possible existence of the legendary animals. A 'controller' character played by the actor Bill Kerr[3] ET tells the story, provides directions and gives orders to the team. Kerr always ends the show with the same line; "There are stranger things in Heaven and Earth. And you've just seen one of them on Animal X." 'Animal X Classica' (as the first two series have become known) [4] and Animal X Natural Mystery Unit are produced in segments that often feature eye-witness testimony. AX NMU episodes routinely show the Animal X Team planting motion-activated infrared video cameras to try to capture evidence of the creatures they seek; or discovering some form of physical evidence which they would then send off for analysis. Even so, episodes are careful to avoid making definitive conclusions and the new evidence presented by the Team is usually described as inconclusive or unable to be classified. Animal X adopts a cautious believer approach to Cryptids and rarely features outright skeptical viewpoints. In 2007 the show is on air in various countries, including Poland, Norway, USA (reruns starting again soon) and soon to be available on the web through Google Video and YouTube. Episode list[edit] Series One[edit] Chupacabra, magic cows, Black Dogs Killer crocodiles, Fizo, Inkanyamba Rainbow Serpent, Lake Van Monster, killer wolves Cattle Mutilations, croc horror, Black cat Dingoes, fish, Bigfoot Komodo dragon, ghost lions, Canadian Lake Monster Cat worshipers, alien animals, killer bees Salawa, dolphin therapy, Jersey Devil Goatman, Phar Lap, psychic animals Beast of Bodmin, Giant Squid, psychic animals part two Yeti, hypnotising dog, Thylacine Mad elephants, Biblical lions, Yowie Caddy, Red Heifer, big cats in Australia Series Two[edit] Chupacabra in Puerto Rico, Panthers in Essex, Dogs who diagnose disease Marsupial lion, Thunderbirds, Animals sealed in stone Megalodon, pets that save lives, plagues of animals A Bigfoot special New England sea serpent, hominids around the world, Beaching whales Skunk Ape, animal emotion, frog and fish rain Incredible dog journeys, thylacine, Swedish lake monster Carnivorous herbivores, Megalania, Animal memories Animal heroes, Yowie, Telepathic parrot England's sea monster, Singing whales, Gremlins Moa, Animal superstitions, Drain Monster Minnesota Iceman, Psychic pets, Golden frogs Giant Squid, Animal Phantoms, and Kamikaze sex Natural Mystery Unit[edit] Animal Ghosts Monster or Murderer The Mystery of the Thylacine Texas Bigfoot Winged creatures (Winged Humanoids, Mothman, Thunderbird) Monsters of the Deep (Bloop, Sea Serpent, Altamaha-ha) Reptilian creatures (Lizard Man of Scape Ore Swamp, Aliens) El Chupacabra Australia's Alien Big cats Animal Super Powers Series facts[edit] Series Premiered: UK: Channel Five 1998, Discovery Channel (reversioned with the "spookiness" removed), then in its original form on Animal Planet worldwide. It has been seen in more than 120 countries. See also[edit] Monster Quest References[edit] ^ "Animal X - Series One, Two, Three (The Natural Mystery Unit)". Storyteller Media Group. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved April 11, 2008. ^ The Investigators Archived July 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine from AminalX.Net, the Official Series Website. Accessed April 11. 2008 ^ Bill Kerr, Australian actor and radio star, dies aged 92 BBC NEWS: Entertainment & Arts (online) 29 August 2014 Last updated at 05:44. Accessed online August 29, 2014 ^ AnimalX.Net Supporters: Archived February 14, 2008, at the Wayback Machine A message of thanks from Mike Searle Creator and Executive Producer of Animal X (page is dated 2004) Accessed April 11, 2008 External links[edit] Official Site - Now with Apps for streaming the past shows. v t e Cryptozoology Core topics Cryptozoology List of cryptids Cryptozoologists Henry H. Bauer Jon-Erik Beckjord John Bindernagel David Hatcher Childress Loren Coleman William R. Corliss Peter Costello Tim Dinsdale Richard Ellis Richard Freeman Charles Gould Rupert Gould John Willison Green Richard Greenwell Bernard Heuvelmans Ralph Izzard John Keel Aleksandr Kondratov Grover Krantz Willy Ley Roy Mackal Vladimir Markotic Jeffrey Meldrum John R. Napier Michael Newton Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans Boris Porshnev Ivan T. Sanderson Karl Shuker Gardner Soule Roderick Sprague Odette Tchernine Books and television Animal X Animalia Paradoxa Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World Beast Hunter Beast Legends Destination Truth Exotic Zoology Extinct or Alive Fact or Faked: Paranormal Files Fortean TV In Search of... Is It Real? Lost Tapes MonsterQuest Monsters and Mysteries in America On the Track of Unknown Animals Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science Strange Abominable Snowmen The Hunt for the Buru The Sasquatch and Other Unknown Hominoids The X Creatures The Secret Saturdays Weird Travels Skeptics Joshua Blu Buhs Robert Todd Carroll Steuart Campbell Peter Dendle Brian Dunning Sharon A. Hill Henry Lee Daniel Loxton Sherrie Lynne Lyons Darren Naish Joe Nickell Donald Prothero Benjamin Radford Brian Regal Michael Shermer George Gaylord Simpson See also Biology Fearsome critters Folklore studies Hypothetical species Pseudoscience Young Earth creationism Zoology Commons Category