Set of animated works with a common series title For the technology, see History of animation. An animated series is a set of animated works with a common series title, usually related to one another. These episodes should typically share the same main characters, some different secondary characters and a basic theme. Series can have either a finite number of episodes like a miniseries, a definite end, or be open-ended, without a predetermined number of episodes. They can be broadcast on television, shown in movie theatres, released direct-to-video or on the internet. Like animated films, animated series can be of a wide variety of genres and can also have different demographic target audiences, from males to females ranging children to adults. Contents 1 Television 1.1 Children's broadcast network 2 Theatrical 3 Video 4 Web series 5 See also 6 References Television[edit] See also: Lists of animated television series Animated television series are regularly presented and can appear as much as up to once a week or daily during a prescribed time slot. The time slot may vary including morning, like saturday-morning cartoons, prime time, like prime time cartoons, to late night, like late night anime. They may also be broadcast on weekdays (weekday cartoons) or only on weekends. The duration of each episode varies depending on the series. Traditionally, series are produced as complete half-hour or nearly half-hour programs; however, many are produced as animated shorts of 10–11 minutes, which can then paired with other shorts to fill a set time period. If on television 15-20 minutes based on commercial time. A full half hour would cut into advertisement time frames. Note that Netflix and other streaming companies that don't show commercials may require a full 30 minute cartoon the length depends on the company that airs the cartoon. There are also some short series with a length of approximately five minutes; these have recently become more common in Japanese animation. They are sometimes grouped together according to network programming demands. Thus a particular series may appear in a number of formats or time blocks. Animated television series had historically been used for comedy, like the cartoons, a piece of art, usually developed for humorous intent, and so, called cartoon series. However, more recently animated television series have fallen into other genres, such as action / adventure series like Speed Racer and G.I. Joe. The first animated television series was Crusader Rabbit. Animated sitcoms first appeared in the 1960s, with The Flintstones (1960–1966), followed by The Jetsons (1962–1987). From 1972 to 1974, Hanna-Barbera produced Wait Till Your Father Gets Home, an adult-oriented sitcom in the style of All in the Family. Children's broadcast network[edit] The 1980s and 1990s was a renaissance of the animation children's television series and adult's television series. Various broadcast networks and media companies began creating television channels and formats designed specifically for airing cartoon series. Companies that already had these types of formats in place began to revamp their existing models during this time. Examples of current networks are: Kids Station Tooniverse Cartoon Network Discovery Family Nickelodeon Nick Jr. Nicktoons Disney Channel Disney XD Disney Junior DIY Network Boomerang Cartoonito Teletoon Universal Kids CITV CBeebies CBBC PBS Kids Pop Tiny Pop During the 1990s, more mature content than those of traditional cartoon series began to appear more widely, extending beyond a primary audience of children. These cartoon series included The Simpsons, The Ren & Stimpy Show, Rocko's Modern Life, Beavis and Butt-Head, King of the Hill, Duckman, South Park and Family Guy. ReBoot, which began as a child-friendly show, shifted its target age group to ages 12 and up, resulting in a darker and more mature storyline.[1] Theatrical[edit] See also: List of animated short series Animated series shown in movie theatres include the Tom and Jerry animated cartoon short films that appeared in movie theaters from 1940 to 1967. Video[edit] See also: List of animated direct-to-video series Direct-to-video animated series include most Japanese original video animations (OVAs). The first OVA series (and also the first overall OVA) was Dallos (1983). Almost all hentai (pornographic) anime series are released as OVAs. Web series[edit] Animated web series are animated series designed and produced for streaming services, and called "web series". Examples include Happy Tree Friends from 1999 and Eddsworld in 2004. See also[edit] Animation portal Cartoon portal References[edit] ^ Hetherington, Janet L. "As Mainframe's technology reaches adolescence, there's a 'ReBoot' Renaissance". Animation Magazine #59. Vol. 11, Issue #8, September 1997. v t e Animation topics By country Bangladesh Bhutan China Czech Republic Estonia India Japan Malaysia Mexico North Korea Philippines Portugal Romania South Africa South Korea Spain Taiwan Thailand United States Vietnam History Azerbaijan Bangladesh Brazil Canada China France Hungary Iran Japan Korea Russia United Kingdom United States Silent Era The Golden Age World War II Early TV broadcast era Modern TV cable and streaming era Industry Animator List Animation department Animation director Story artist Animation studios List Animation database Art pipeline Biologist simulators Animation film festivals international regional Highest-grossing films (Openings weekends) Outsourcing International Animation Day Works Films Based on cartoons Computer-animated Feature-length Lost or unfinished Package Short Short series Stop-motion Series Direct-to-video Internet Television Techniques Traditional Barrier grid Flip book Limited animation Masking Rotoscoping Exposure sheet Stop motion Clay clay painting, strata-cut Cutout (silhouette) Graphic Model go motion Object Pixilation Puppetoon Computer (history, timeline) 2D Flash PowerPoint SVG CSS Multi-sketch Onion skinning Digital puppetry 3D T-pose Cel shading Crowd Morph target Motion capture Non-photorealistic rendering Physically based animation Procedural Skeletal Machinima Digital puppetry Virtual cinematography Puppetry Puppet Digital puppetry Other methods Blocking Chuckimation Drawn-on-film Inbetweening Paint-on-glass Pinscreen Pixel art Pose to pose Straight ahead Rubber hose Sand Syncro-Vox Zoetrope Variants Abstract animation (visual music) Adult animation Animated cartoon Animated sitcom Animated documentary Anime Educational animation Erotic animation Independent animation Instructional animation Related topics Animation music Bouncing ball Mickey Mousing Key frame Cel Character animation model sheet walk cycle lip sync off-model Creature animation Twelve principles Motion comic Films with live action and animation highest grossing Cartoon physics Cartoon violence Most expensive animated films List of animated films by box office admissions List of animated series by episode count anime series anime franchises Category Portal v t e Media franchises Media series Animated series anime series Book series Comic book series manga series Film series Media mix Radio program Television show web series Video game franchise Media lists Multimedia franchises Animated series anime direct-to-video Internet television Comic book series manga Film series Television shows most watched web Video game franchises longest-running Highest-grossing Media franchises Film series Mobile games Best-selling Comic book series manga series Video game franchises Category