Character of a work actively opposing the protagonist This article is about the literary term. For the pharmacological term, see Receptor antagonist. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). An antagonist is a character in a story who is presented as the chief foe of the protagonist.[1] Contents 1 Etymology 2 Types 2.1 Heroes and villains 2.2 Other characters 2.3 Aspects of the protagonist 2.4 Non-personal 2.5 Former protagonists 3 Usage 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Etymology[edit] The English word antagonist comes from the Greek ἀνταγωνιστής – antagonistēs, "opponent, competitor, villain, enemy, rival," which is derived from anti- ("against") and agonizesthai ("to contend for a prize").[2][3] Types[edit] Heroes and villains[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In the classic style of stories where the action consists of a hero fighting a villain or a antagonist, the two may be regarded as protagonist and antagonist, respectively. However, an antagonist is not always a villain or opponent, just a character provided for the purpose of thwarting or vexing the protagonist. In some narratives, the protagonist is a villain and the antagonist is an opposing hero. Antagonists are conventionally presented as making moral choices less savory than those of protagonists. This condition is often used by an author to create conflict within a story. This is merely a convention, however. An example in which this is reversed can be seen in the character Macduff from Macbeth, who is arguably morally correct in his desire to fight the tyrant Macbeth, the protagonist . Examples from television include J.R. Ewing (Larry Hagman) from Dallas and Alexis Colby (Joan Collins) from Dynasty. Both became breakout characters used as a device to increase their shows' ratings. Other characters[edit] Characters may be antagonists without being evil – they may simply be injudicious and unlikeable for the audience. In some stories, such as The Catcher in the Rye, almost every character other than the protagonist may be an antagonist.[4] Aspects of the protagonist[edit] Main article: Anti-Hero An aspect or trait of the protagonist may be considered an antagonist, such as morality or indecisiveness.[4] Non-personal[edit] An antagonist may not always be a person or people. In some cases, an antagonist may be a force, such as a tidal wave that destroys a city; a storm that causes havoc; or even a certain area's conditions that are the root cause of a problem. An antagonist also may or may not create obstacles for the protagonist.[5] Societal norms or other rules also may be antagonists.[4] Former protagonists[edit] A character once a protagonist can turn into an antagonist under extremely negative circumstances. Examples include Anakin Skywalker from the Star Wars franchise who turns from a protagonist Jedi to antagonist Sith Darth Vader. A supporting protagonist can become an antagonist by betraying a main protagonist. Usage[edit] An antagonist is used as a plot device, to set up conflicts, obstacles, or challenges for the protagonist.[4][6] Though not every story requires an antagonist, it often is used in plays to increase the level of drama. In tragedies, antagonists are often the cause of the protagonist's main problem, or lead a group of characters against the protagonist; in comedies, they are usually responsible for involving the protagonist in comedic situations.[6] See also[edit] Literature portal Archenemy Boss, a video game term that may refer to the game's antagonist Villain References[edit] ^ About.com, Literature: Contemporary "Antagonist." Online. 18 October 2007. "Protagonist and Antagonist definition". Grammarist.com. Retrieved 25 March 2015. "Glossary of Literary Terms". Archived from the original on 26 March 2015. Retrieved on 27 March 2015. "Glossary of Drama Terms". Online Learning Center. Retrieved on 27 March 2015. "Antagonist – Definition for Fiction Writers". About.com. Retrieved on 27 March 2015. ^ "Antagonist". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 28 November 2010. ^ "antagonist". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b c d Bulman, Colin (2007). Creative Writing: A Guide and/or Glossary to Fiction Writing. Polity Press. p. 17. ISBN 9780745636870 – via Google Books. ^ "The Elements of Literature". roanestate.edu. ^ a b Smiley, Sam (2005) [First published 1971 by Prentice-Hall]. Playwriting: The Structure of Action. Yale University Press. pp. 133–134. ISBN 0300107242 – via Google Books. External links[edit] Media related to Antagonists Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Antihero Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tragic hero Tritagonist Plot Act Act structure Three-act structure Action Backstory Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Exposition/Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax/Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Occam's razor Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-fulfilling prophecy Shaggy dog story Story arc Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe Utopia Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Motif Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Cantastoria Comics Epic Fable Fabliau Fairy tale Flash fiction Folktale Kamishibai Gamebook Legend Myth Novel Novella Parable Play Poem Screenplay Short story Tall tales Vignette (literature) Genre Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docufiction Epistolary Erotic Gothic Historical Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Saga Satire Speculative Fantasy Horror Magic realism Science Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Western List of writing genres Non-Fiction Narration First-person Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Unreliable Diegesis Self-insertion Tense Past Present Future Related Audience Author Creative nonfiction Fiction writing Literary science Literary theory Narratology Political narrative Rhetoric Screenwriting Storytelling Tellability