This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (August 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Ape Cognition and Conservation Initiative Formation September 28, 2004; 16 years ago (2004-09-28) Type Sanctuary Legal status 501(c)(3) Purpose understanding the origins and future of culture, language, tools and intelligence Headquarters USA Location Des Moines Website http://apeinitiative.org/ Ape Cognition and Conservation Initiative is a sanctuary and scientific research facility in Des Moines, Iowa. It is dedicated to understanding the origins and future of culture, language, tools and intelligence. The facility was announced in 2002 and received its first ape residents in 2004, and is currently home to a colony of seven bonobos involved in non-invasive interdisciplinary studies of their cognitive and communicative capabilities. Facility[edit] Ape Cognition and Conservation Initiative is situated on 230 acres and houses a family of seven bonobos: Kanzi, Elikya, Maisha, Nyota, Teco, Clara, and Mali. Three of the bonobos learned important elements of human culture during their crucial first year of life. As a youngster, Kanzi acquired language competency by simply watching humans attempt to teach language to Matata, the wild-caught grandmother of the family. Nyota is the first ape reared both by humans and a language-competent ape mother. The youngest, Teco, provides a unique look into the epigenetic effects of language acquisition. All three of these bonobos communicate with humans using a collection of over 400 "lexigram" symbols printed on paper or appearing on computer touch screens. It has been repeatedly claimed that these bonobos can think, make plans and understand simple spoken English. Kanzi has been filmed making music, building a fire, and crafting simple stone tools. More than 400 scientific papers and many books document the near-human capabilities of the bonobos, and films portraying their achievements have been broadcast worldwide. Television coverage includes features with Oprah, Anderson Cooper, 60 Minutes (in Australia), BBC, Paul McCartney and Peter Gabriel. References[edit] External links[edit] Official site v t e Apes Extant ape species Human (Homo sapiens) Pan (genus) Bonobo (Pan paniscus) Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) Gorilla (Gorilla spp.) Western gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) Eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei) Orangutan (Pongo spp.) Sumatran orangutan (Pongo abelii) Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) Tapanuli orangutan (Pongo tapanuliensis) Gibbon (family: Hylobatidae) Study of apes Ape language Dian Fossey Birutė Galdikas Jane Goodall Chimpanzee genome project Human genome project Neanderthal genome project Willie Smits Lone Drøscher Nielsen Ian Redmond Elgin Center Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary Borneo Orangutan Survival Legal and social status Personhood Research ban Kinshasa Declaration Great Ape Project Survival Project International Primate Day Related List of individual apes (non-human) Apes in space (non-human) Bigfoot Bushmeat Chimpanzee–human last common ancestor Gorilla–human last common ancestor Orangutan–human last common ancestor Gibbon–human last common ancestor List of fictional primates (non-human) Great apes Human evolution Monkey Day Mythic humanoids Sasquatch Yeren Yeti Yowie Category v t e Great ape language Languages taught to non-human apes American Sign Language Yerkish Non-human apes taught simple languages Bonobos Kanzi Nyota Panbanisha Chimpanzees Lana Loulis Lucy Nim Chimpsky Sarah Viki Washoe Gorillas Koko Michael Ndume Orangutans Azy Chantek Researchers Francine Patterson Sue Savage-Rumbaugh Maurice K. Temerlin Roger Fouts Tetsuro Matsuzawa William M. Fields Research centers Chimpanzee and Human Communication Institute Elgin Center Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary The Gorilla Foundation Media Koko: A Talking Gorilla (1978 film) The Mind of an Ape (1983 book) Next of Kin (1997 book) Project Nim (2011 film) See also Animal language Animal communication Primate cognition Animal cognition Human–animal communication Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125