anomalous experience in parapsychology "Apparitional" redirects here. For the 2013 film, see Apparitional (film). In parapsychology, an apparitional experience is an anomalous experience characterized by the apparent perception of either a living being or an inanimate object without there being any material stimulus for such a perception. In academic discussion, the term "apparitional experience" is to be preferred to the term "ghost" in respect of the following points: The term ghost implies that some element of the human being survives death and, at least under certain circumstances, can make itself perceptible to living human beings. There are other competing explanations of apparitional experiences. Firsthand accounts of apparitional experiences differ in many respects from their fictional counterparts in literary or traditional ghost stories and films (see below). The content of apparitional experiences includes living beings, both human and animal, and even inanimate objects.[1] Contents 1 History of the concept 2 Psychological implications 2.1 Psychological theories of perception 2.2 The concept of schizotypy 3 Philosophical implications 3.1 Direct realism 3.2 Representationalism 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources History of the concept[edit] Attempts to apply modern scientific or investigative standards to the study of apparitional experiences began with the work of Edmund Gurney, Frederic W. H. Myers and Frank Podmore,[2] who were leading figures in the early years of the Society for Psychical Research (founded in 1882). Their motive, as with most of the early work of the Society,[3] was to provide evidence for human survival after death. For this reason they had a particular interest in what are known as ‘crisis cases’. These are cases in which a person reports having a hallucinatory experience, visual or otherwise, which apparently represents someone at a distance, this experience subsequently being considered to have coincided with that person's death, or a significant life event of some kind. If the temporal coincidence of the crisis and the distant apparitional experience cannot be explained by any conventional means, then in parapsychology the presumption is made that some as yet unknown form of communication, such as telepathy (a term coined by Myers[4]) has taken place. While it may be said that the work of Gurney and his colleagues failed to provide convincing evidence for either telepathy or survival of death, the large collection of firsthand written accounts which resulted from their methods may nevertheless be regarded as providing a valuable body of data concerning the phenomenology of hallucinations in the sane. A notable later discussion of apparitional experiences was that of G. N. M. Tyrrell,[5] also a leading member of the Society for Psychical Research of his day. Tyrrell accepted the hallucinatory character of the experience, pointing out that it is virtually unknown for firsthand accounts to claim that apparitional figures leave any of the normal physical effects, such as footprints in snow, that one would expect of a real person.[6] However, Tyrrell develops the idea that the apparition may be a way for the unconscious part of the mind to bring to consciousness information that has been paranormally acquired – in crisis cases, for example. He introduces an evocative metaphor of a mental ‘stage-carpenter’,[7] behind the scenes in the unconscious part of the mind, and constructing the quasi-perceptual experience that eventually appears on the stage of consciousness, so that it embodies paranormal information in a symbolic way, a person drowning at a distance appearing soaked in water, for example. The study and discussion of apparitions developed in a different direction in the 1970s, with the work of Celia Green and Charles McCreery.[8] They were not primarily interested in the question of whether apparitions could shed any light on the existence or otherwise of telepathy, or in the survival question; instead they were concerned to analyse a large number of cases with a view to providing a taxonomy of the different types of experience, viewed simply as a type of anomalous perceptual experience or hallucination. One of the points that was highlighted by their work was point (2) listed above, namely that ‘real-life’ accounts of apparitional experiences differ markedly from the traditional or literary ghost story. These are some of the more notable differences, at least as indicated by their own collection of 1800 firsthand accounts: Subjects of apparitional experiences are by no means always frightened by the experience; indeed they may find them soothing or reassuring at times of crisis or ongoing stress in their lives.[9] Spontaneous apparitional experiences tend to happen in humdrum or everyday surroundings, and under conditions of low central nervous system arousal, most often in the subject's own home - while doing housework, for example. By contrast, subjects who visit reputedly haunted locations in hopes of ‘seeing a ghost’ are more often than not disappointed.[10] Apparitions tend to be reported as appearing solid and not transparent; indeed they may be so realistic in a variety of ways as to deceive the percipient as to their hallucinatory nature; in some cases the subject only achieves insight after the experience has ended.[11] It is unusual for an apparitional figure to engage in any verbal interaction with the percipient; this is consistent with the finding that the majority of such experiences only involve one sense (most commonly the visual).[12] Psychological implications[edit] Psychological theories of perception[edit] Apparitional experiences have relevance to psychological theories of perception, and in particular to the distinction between top-down and bottom-up approaches (cf. article on Top-down and bottom-up design). Top-down theories, such as that of Richard Langton Gregory, who conceives of perception as a process whereby the brain makes a series of hypotheses about the external world,[13] stress the importance of central factors such as memory and expectation in determining the phenomenological content of perception; while the bottom-up approach, exemplified by the work of James J. Gibson, emphasises the role of the external sensory stimulus.[14] Apparitional experiences would seem to lend support to the importance of central factors, since they represent a form of quasi-perceptual experience in which the role of external stimuli is minimal or possibly non-existent, while the experience nevertheless continues to be phenomenologically indistinguishable from normal perception, at least in some cases.[15] The concept of schizotypy[edit] The interest of apparitional experiences to psychology has acquired an added dimension in recent years with the development of the concept of schizotypy or psychosis-proneness.[16] This is conceived of as a dimension of personality,[17] continuously distributed throughout the normal population, and analogous to the dimensions of extraversion or neuroticism. As long as mental illness is regarded under the disease model, according to which a person either does or does not ‘have’ schizophrenia or manic depression, just as a person either does or does not have syphilis or tuberculosis, then to talk of the occurrence of an apparitional or hallucinatory experience in a normal person is either an oxymoron, or to be taken as an indication of latent or incipient psychosis. If, on the contrary, a dimensional view of the matter is taken, it becomes easier to conceive of how normal people, more or less high on the putative schizotypy dimension, might be more or less prone to anomalous perceptual experiences, without their ever tipping over into psychosis.[18] Green and McCreery's identification of a class of what they called ‘reassuring apparitions’[9] is of particular interest in this regard, as it suggests that the experiencing of hallucinations may even have an adaptive effect in certain subjects, making them better able to cope with adverse life events. This would fit with the model of schizotypy as essentially a normal dimension of personality, and might help to explain why the proneness to anomalous perceptual experiences has apparently not been ‘weeded out’ by the process of natural selection. Philosophical implications[edit] Direct realism[edit] Apparitional experiences also have implications for the philosophy of perception. The occurrence of hallucinations, that is, perceptual experiences 'having the character of sense perception, but without relevant or adequate sensory stimulation [...]',[19] have long been one of the standard objections to the philosophical theory of direct realism. According to this theory we are in some sense in direct contact with the external world when we seem to be perceiving it, and not merely in direct contact with some mediating representation in our mind, such as a sense-datum or an image, which may or may not correspond to external reality. The psychologist J.J. Gibson, referred to above, became an advocate of the philosophical theory of direct realism.[20] Hallucinatory experiences reported by sane people do not pose any new problem in principle for the theory of direct realism, other than that posed already by the more widely discussed hallucinations reported by people in a state of psychosis or under other abnormal conditions such as sensory deprivation. However, they do pose the problem in a particularly stark way, for the following reasons: Scepticism about the status of verbal reports: In the case of hallucinations reported to have occurred in pathological or abnormal states there is some scope for uncertainty about the accuracy, or even the meaning, of the percipient's verbal report. Horowitz,[21] for example, summarising his experience of questioning chronic schizophrenic patients about their visual experiences during painting sessions, wrote: 'It was necessary to persist beyond initial verbal descriptions of their hallucinations, and insist that the patient describe and draw what he had seen. Initial descriptions of "vicious snakes" might then be drawn and redescribed as wavy lines. "Two armies struggling over my soul" arose from the subjective experience of seeing moving sets of dots. "Spiders" might be reduced, when the patient stated and drew what he actually saw, to a few radiating lines. In drawings of their hallucinations patients could often distinguish between those forms which duplicated what they saw with their eyes from those forms which were what they "made out of it".'[22] Such difficulties of interpretation are much less obvious in the case of written reports by ostensibly normal subjects, in good health and not medicated at the time of the experience. Extreme realism of the experience: As mentioned above, at least some of the apparitional experiences reported by normal subjects appear to mimic normal perception to such a degree that the subject is deceived into thinking that what they are experiencing actually is normal perception. Similar close mimicking of normal perception is reported by some of the subjects of a lucid dream[23] and out-of-body experiences,[24] which therefore pose similar problems for the theory of direct realism. Representationalism[edit] Apparitional experiences appear prima facie more compatible with the philosophical theory of representationalism. According to this theory, the immediate objects of experience when we are perceiving the world normally are representations of the world, rather than the world itself. These representations have been variously called sense-data or images. In the case of an apparitional experience one might say that the subject is aware of sense-data or images which happen not to correspond to, or represent, the external world in the normal way. The philosophical implications of hallucinatory experiences in the sane are discussed by McCreery.[25] He argues that they provide empirical support for the theory of representationalism rather than direct realism. See also[edit] Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune telling Ghost hunting Indigo children Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychokinesis Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Reportedly haunted locations: India United Kingdom United States World Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific skepticism Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend Parapsychology Death and culture Parapsychology Scientific literacy v t e Philosophy of perception Bilocation Doppelgänger Etiäinen Marian apparition Private revelation Sleep paralysis Shadow person Vardøger List of parapsychology topics References[edit] ^ Bennett 1939. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBennett1939 (help) ^ Gurney, E., Myers, F.W.H. and Podmore, F. (1886). Phantasms of the Living, Vols. I and II. London: Trubner and Co. ^ Sidgwick, Eleanor; Johnson, Alice; and others (1894). Report on the Census of Hallucinations, London: Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. X. ^ Myers, F.W.H. (1903). Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death. London: Longmans Green. Reissued: Charlottesville, VA: Hampton Roads, 2002 ^ Tyrell & Price 1943. sfn error: no target: CITEREFTyrellPrice1943 (help) ^ Tyrell & Price 1943, pp. 53—60. sfn error: no target: CITEREFTyrellPrice1943 (help) ^ Tyrell & Price 1943, pp. 101—103. sfn error: no target: CITEREFTyrellPrice1943 (help) ^ Green & McCreery 1975. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGreenMcCreery1975 (help) ^ a b Green & McCreery 1975, pp. 200—203. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGreenMcCreery1975 (help) ^ Green & McCreery 1975, p. 123. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGreenMcCreery1975 (help) ^ Green & McCreery 1975, pp. 150—155. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGreenMcCreery1975 (help) ^ Green & McCreery 1975, pp. 95—101. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGreenMcCreery1975 (help) ^ Gregory, R. L. (1980). "Perceptions as hypotheses". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 290 (1038): 181–97. doi:10.1098/rstb.1980.0090. ^ Gibson, J.J. (1950). The Perception of the Visual World. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ^ Bennett 1939, pp. 173—177. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBennett1939 (help) ^ Eysenck, H.J. (1992). "The definition and measurement of psychoticism". Personality and Individual Differences. 13: 757–785. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(92)90050-y. ^ See, for example, Claridge, G. and Beech, T. (1995). ‘Fully and quasi-dimensional constructions of schizotypy.’ In Raine, A., Lencz, T., and Mednick, S.A., Schizotypal Personality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ^ Cf; McCreery, C.; Claridge, G. (2002). "Healthy schizotypy: the case of out-of-the-body experiences". Personality and Individual Differences. 32: 141–154. doi:10.1016/s0191-8869(01)00013-7. ^ Drever, (1952). A Dictionary of Psychology. London: Penguin. ^ Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ^ Horowitz 1964, pp. 513—523. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHorowitz1964 (help) ^ Horowitz 1964, p. 513. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHorowitz1964 (help) ^ Cf. Green, C.E. (1968). Lucid Dreams. London: Hamish Hamilton, pp. 70-78. ^ Cf. Green, C.E. (1968). Out-of-the-Body Experiences. London: Hamish Hamilton, pp. 71-80. ^ McCreery, C. (2006). "Perception and Hallucination: the Case for Continuity." Philosophical Paper No. 2006-1. Oxford: Oxford Forum.Online PDF Sources[edit] Bennett, Sir Ernest (1939). Apparitions and Haunted Houses: A Survey of Evidence. London: Faber and Faber. Tyrell, G. N. M.; Price, H. H. (1943). Apparitions. London: Gerald Duckworth. ISBN 978-1169829879. Horowitz, M. J. (1964). "The imagery of visual hallucinations". Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease. 138. doi:10.1097/00005053-196406000-00002. Green, Celia Elizabeth; McCreery, Charles (1975). Apparitions. London: Hamish Hamilton. ISBN 9780241891827. v t e Parapsychology Outline Topics Apparitional experience Astral projection Auras Bilocation Clairvoyance Deathbed phenomena Dermo-optical perception Dream telepathy Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Extrasensory perception Ganzfeld experiment Ghosts Kirlian photography Levitation Materialization Mediumship Near-death experience Orb Out-of-body experience Pam Reynolds case Parapsychology research at SRI Past life regression Plant perception (paranormal) Poltergeist Precognition Psychic Psychic detective Psychic reading Psychic surgery Psychokinesis Psychometry Pyrokinesis Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Second sight Sensory leakage Spoon bending Telepathy Thoughtography Xenoglossy Zener cards Active organizations American Society for Psychical Research Association for the Scientific Study of Anomalous Phenomena College of Psychic Studies Institut Métapsychique International Institute of Noetic Sciences International Association for Near-Death Studies Koestler Parapsychology Unit Parapsychological Association Parapsychology Foundation Rhine Research Center Society for Psychical Research The Ghost Club Defunct organizations American Psychical Institute British College of Psychic Science Cambridge Ghost Society International Club for Psychical Research International Institute for Psychical Research London Dialectical Society Metropolitan Psychical Society National Laboratory of Psychical Research Oxford Phasmatological Society Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory Society for the Study of Supernormal Pictures People List of parapsychologists Skeptics of parapsychology Publications An Experiment with Time Extrasensory Perception Irreducible Mind Journal of Near-Death Studies Journal of Parapsychology Journal of Scientific Exploration Life After Life (Moody book) Life Before Life Mental Radio Old Souls: The Scientific Evidence For Past Lives Parapsychology: Frontier Science of the Mind The Roots of Coincidence Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation Varieties of Anomalous Experience Category Commons v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category v t e Apparitions approved by the Catholic Church Approved for widespread veneration by the Holy See Jesus Divine Mercy Sacred Heart Mary Fátima Guadalupe Knock La Salette Lourdes Miraculous Medal Angels St. Michael the Archangel Approved Mary Akita Banneux Beauraing Cuapa Gietrzwałd Good Help Good Event Kibeho Laus Pontmain Reconciler of All Peoples San Nicolás Approved for veneration Mary All Nations Good Health La Vang Mount Carmel Pellevoisin Prayer Pillar Šiluva Walsingham Watch  Catholicism portal v t e Private revelation in the Catholic Church Revelations Apparitional experience Christian mysticism Locution interior Marian apparition Religious ecstasy Vision (spirituality) Visions of Jesus and Mary Miracles Bilocation Charism Gift of miracles Gifts of healing Glossolalia Interpretation of tongues Prophecy Word of Knowledge Word of wisdom Eucharistic miracle Miracle of Lanciano Levitation Lourdes water Miracle of the Sun Odour of sanctity Stigmata Tabor Light Thaumaturgy Weeping statue Discernment Documents Code of canon law Haurietis aquas Normae Congregationis Tribus circiter Magisterium Rule of Faith Sensus fidei Theology Bridal theology Christology Mariology Mystical theology Popular piety Acts of reparation Immaculate Heart of Mary Consecration First Saturdays Devotion Miraculous Medal Seven Dolors Pilgrimage Rosary Rosary of the Holy Wounds Sacred Heart Divine Mercy Chaplet of the Divine Mercy Divine Mercy novena Eucharistic adoration First Friday Devotion Holy Hour Saint Michael in the Catholic Church Chaplet of Saint Michael Prayer to Saint Michael Scapular Shrines Marian shrines Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe Cathedral-Basilica of Our Lady of the Pillar Chapel of Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal Knock Shrine Sanctuary of Our Lady of Fátima Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes Shrine of Our Lady of Good Help Sanctuary of Our Lady of Graces of Onuva Shrine of Our Lady of the Hens Shrine of the Virgin of the Rosary of Pompei Sanctuary of Our Lady of the Rosary of San Nicolás Others Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy Sanctuary of Christ the King Shrine of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo  Catholicism portal