2007 film directed by Matt Maiellaro and Dave Willis API Theatrical release poster by Julie Bell and Boris Vallejo Directed by Matt Maiellaro Dave Willis Produced by Dave Willis Matt Maiellaro Jay Wade Edwards Screenplay by Matt Maiellaro Dave Willis Based on Aqua Teen Hunger Force by Matt Maiellaro Dave Willis Starring Dana Snyder Dave Willis Carey Means Andy Merrill Mike Schatz Matt Maiellaro C. Martin Croker Neil Peart Edited by Jay Wade Edwards (supervising editor) John Brestan Ned Hastings Phil Samson Production company Williams Street[1] Distributed by First Look Pictures[1][2] Release date April 10, 2007 (2007-04-10) (New York City) April 13, 2007 (2007-04-13) (United States) Running time 85 minutes Country United States Language English Budget $750,000[2] Box office $5.5 million[2] Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters (also known as Aqua Teen Hunger Force: Movie Film for Theaters) is a 2007 American adult animated surreal black comedy film based on the Adult Swim animated series Aqua Teen Hunger Force. The film was written and directed by series creators Matt Maiellaro and Dave Willis, and features the voices of Dana Snyder, Carey Means, Willis, Maiellaro, Mike Schatz, Andy Merrill, C. Martin Croker, and Neil Peart of the Canadian rock band Rush, with Bruce Campbell, Tina Fey, Fred Armisen, and Chris Kattan making special appearances. The film centers around Master Shake, Frylock and Meatwad, better known as the Aqua Teens, as they join forces with the Plutonians and the Cybernetic Ghost of Christmas Past from the Future to prevent a one-eyed robot from destroying the world. The movie also brings a never-before-told origin story of the Aqua Teens. The film was theatrically released by First Look Pictures on April 13, 2007, and grossed $5.5 million on a $750,000 budget, making it the 8th highest-grossing R-rated animated film.[2] The film received mixed reviews from critics, prasing the humor, but criticize the plot and the running time. It marks the first and only time an Adult Swim series was adapted into a feature film, and is the second Cartoon Network series overall to receive a theatrical feature film adaptation after The Powerpuff Girls Movie (2002). Warner Home Video released the film on a two-disc DVD on August 14, 2007. The film was submitted for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature for the 80th Academy Awards, but was not nominated. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 3.1 Development 3.2 Rating 4 Soundtrack 5 Marketing 5.1 Boston Mooninite panic 5.2 April Fools' Day television "premiere" 5.3 Fake endings 6 Release 6.1 Home media 7 Reception 7.1 Box office 7.2 Critical response 8 Cancelled sequel 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Plot[edit] Before the main feature, a faux theatre concession stand advertisement plays. A group of anthropomorphic theater snacks, The Soda Dog Refreshment Band, sings a spoof of Let's All Go to the Lobby until they are interrupted by another snack band (performed by Mastodon). They proceed to loudly sing their own bizarre theater rules before finishing on a guitar solo. The film starts properly in Egypt in a purposely indeterminable time, where Master Shake, Frylock, and Meatwad break free from within the Sphinx and are attacked by an oversized poodle who kills Frylock before Shake defeats it. Shake and Meatwad flee with Frylock's corpse and meet "Time Lincoln", who revives Frylock. When government agents break into his house, Time Lincoln helps the Aqua Teens escape in a wooden rocket ship. Time Lincoln is shot, changing history and resulting in the Confederacy winning the American Civil War, with the government agents being made slaves to a Black Kentucky Colonel. All this, however, is just an elaborate story concocted by Shake to explain their origin to Meatwad. Meanwhile, a slice of watermelon named Walter Melon observes events of the Aqua Teens from his spaceship. When Shake plans to use his new exercise machine, Frylock notices that it is not assembled properly, and the instructions cannot be found. After searching for them online, he finds a message warning not to assemble the machine. Frylock calls the website's listed phone number, which is revealed to be that of Emory and Oglethorpe, the Plutonians. Before answering the phone, they discover the Cybernetic Ghost of Christmas Past from the Future on board with them. The Ghost explains to the two aliens that the machine, when assembled, will exercise a man into a super-being, who will attract all the women on Earth, leading to massive inbreeding and the eventual extinction of mankind. To prevent this, the Ghost travels to the past and steals a screw that holds the machine together. The Plutonians point out to him that the screw could easily be replaced. Back on Earth, Frylock finishes re-building the machine with a pencil in the screw hole, but he discovers the circuit board is missing. The trio visit Carl, from whom Shake had stolen the machine, to see if he has the missing piece. After Carl refuses to tell them, Meatwad finds the address in the machine's box. Dr. Weird is visited by Shake, Frylock, and Meatwad. Frylock retrieves the missing circuit board and installs it into the machine. Carl insists that as the rightful owner he should be the first to test the machine. The machine straps him in and transforms itself into a giant one-eyed robot. The robot plays techno music and heads for downtown Philadelphia, all while Carl is forced to exercise. Eventually, the robot begins laying metallic eggs, which hatch into smaller versions of the machine. The Aqua Teens, aided by an instructional workout video, find that the machine can be destroyed using music. The Aqua Teens have no choice but to have Shake play his music. Shake poorly plays his original song "Nude Love" on acoustic guitar, forcing the machine to commit suicide. Carl (now bulging with muscles) leaves with his newly found date, a bodybuilder named Linda, and they head back to her condo while the Aqua Teens try to figure out a way to stop the newly hatched machines from destroying the city. As they travel back to Dr. Weird, Frylock begins to tell the origin story of the Aqua Teens: they were created by Dr. Weird, along with a chicken nugget named Chicken Bittle. In the flashback, Dr. Weird proclaims that the Aqua Teens were created for one purpose: to crash a jet into a brick wall. Realizing the pointlessness of this mission, Frylock diverted the jet and set a course to Africa, where they would try to solve world hunger. Upon entering Africa, Bittle was eaten by a lion. After realizing they could not be much help, they returned to America and rented a house in New Jersey. Meanwhile, Carl and Linda recline in her room, where she reveals herself to be Dr. Weird in disguise. He cuts off Carl's muscles and grafts them onto his own body. Frylock and Dr. Weird do battle while they argue back and forth about who created whom. Dr. Weird claims that it was Frylock who created him, not the other way around. Dr. Weird shows Frylock a teddy bear filled with razor blades. Shake tries to take the teddy bear, but he loses his hand. Dr. Weird then reveals that the blue diamond on Frylock's back hides a VCR, in which a videotape with false memories of Dr. Weird creating Frylock had been playing in Frylock's head. Just then, Walter Melon arrives in his ship. Meatwad mentions he saw the ship earlier. Shake calls him a liar and shoots him with a shotgun. Shake gets concerned when Meatwad does not reform like always. Walter tells Neil to play the "Drum Solo Of Life" to bring Meatwad back to life. Meanwhile, Shake tries to pick up the teddy bear for the second time, losing his other hand. Melon explains he created the Aqua Teens and all the other characters, including the machine. His plan was that they would kill each other and Walter would inherit their real estate in order to create the "Insano-Gym". The others inform Walter that they rent and do not own property, proving Walter's plan pointless. Walter storms off. The Teens see their alleged mother standing before them, revealed to be a burrito. Shake suddenly jumps out the window upon hearing this news, Meatwad hugs her, and Frylock states, "That's neat". Cast[edit] Main article: List of Aqua Teen Hunger Force characters Dana Snyder as Master Shake Carey Means as Frylock Dave Willis as Meatwad, Carl Brutananadilewski, Ignignokt, Video Game Voice Matt Maiellaro as Err, Cybernetic Ghost, Satan Andy Merrill as Oglethorpe Mike Schatz as Emory C. Martin Croker as Dr. Weird, Steve Bruce Campbell as Chicken Bittle Neil Peart as himself Chris Kattan as Walter Melon Mc chris as MC Pee Pants Fred Armisen as Time Lincoln George Lowe as Space Ghost Isaac Hayes III as Plantation Owner Tina Fey as Burrito H. Jon Benjamin as CIA Agent 1 Jon Glaser as CIA Agent 2 Craig Hartin as Rob Goldstein Matt Harrigan as Linda Mastodon (uncredited) as Interrupting Snack Band Production[edit] Development[edit] In an interview at the 2005 San Diego Comic-Con, Dana Snyder and Matt Maiellaro confirmed rumors that there would be a feature-length movie of Aqua Teen Hunger Force. More details were revealed at the 2005 Paley Television Festival,[3] such as a possible cameo by 80s funk group Cameo, and Maiellaro described it as "an action piece that leads into an origin story that unfolds in a very 'Aqua Teen' way." The creators revealed much more information in an interview with Wizard Entertainment. While they dodged many questions, they confirmed that the film would run 80 minutes, be produced on a meager $750,000 budget, and feature a plot detail about a "lost Aqua Teen", who is a large chicken nugget named "Chicken Bittle" (voiced by Bruce Campbell).[4] They also confirmed more cameos, with Rush drummer and lyricist Neil Peart, voice actor H. Jon Benjamin and his comedy partner Jon Glaser, and Saturday Night Live's Fred Armisen making appearances. Heavy metal band Mastodon stated in a Decibel article that they would be performing during the opening, and that the band would be animated as a bucket of popcorn, a soda, a hot dog, and a candy bar. They were actually animated as a pretzel, a pile of nachos, an "Icecaps" box, and a gumdrop.[5] Rating[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Regarding the film's rating, Maiellaro commented that "I think if [the movie is rated] R, it won't get the audience that watches it. But we don't know yet. We're still waiting to find out."[citation needed] Following this, the released trailer advertised the film as rated R. The film is mostly uncensored; when censoring does occur, it is occasionally accompanied by a censoring beep that does not obscure the word. Censoring also occurs once during a flashback. As explained in the production feature, the inconsistency was an editing mistake, but left untouched for comic effect. Soundtrack[edit] Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Colon the Soundtrack Soundtrack album by Various Artists Released April 10, 2007 (2007-04-10) Recorded 2007 Genre Alternative rock hard rock heavy metal rap rock Length 44:25 Label Williams Street Producer Various Artists Aqua Teen Hunger Force music chronology Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Colon the Soundtrack (2007) Have Yourself a Very Meaty Christmas (2009) Professional ratings Review scores Source Rating AllMusic [6] The soundtrack was released on April 10, 2007, under the title Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Colon the Soundtrack. It features many previously unreleased songs, some recorded for the purpose of this album. In addition, the compilation features an intro/outro titled "Nude Love" by Aqua Teen character Master Shake, a track from former SPIN.com Artist of the Day MC Chris, skits and sound bites from the movie, and a new version of the Aqua Teen Hunger Force theme by rapper Schoolly D. The album features mix of musical styles ranging from heavy metal, indie rock, and hip-hop; and also features new, original music from Mastodon, Killer Mike and Unearth. Noticeably missing is "In the Air Tonight" by Phil Collins, which is prominently featured at the end of the film. Master Shake – "Nude Love" – 1:27 Soda Dog Refreshment Squad – "Groovy Time for a Movie Time" – 0:48 Mastodon – "Cut You Up With a Linoleum Knife" – 1:50 Early Man – "More to Me Than Meat and Eyes" – 3:11 Schoolly D – "Aqua Teen Hunger Force Theme" (Remix) – 1:34 Meatwad – Skit – 0:18 Unearth – "The Chosen" – 3:50 Andrew W.K. – "Party Party Party" – 1:56 Carl Brutananadilewski – Skit – 0:15 Nine Pound Hammer – "Carl's Theme" – 2:42 Brass Castle – "Bookworm Resin" – 3:34 Master Shake – Skit – 0:22 Killer Mike – "Blam Blam" – 6:12 Insane-O-Flex – "I Like Your Booty (But I'm Not Gay)" – 2:04 mc chris – "I Want Candy" – 2:03 The Hold Steady – "Girls Like Status" – 2:43 Master Shake – "Nude Love (Reprise)" – 9:28 features hidden tracks Meatwad and Superchunk – "Misfits and Mistakes" Master Shake and Nashville Pussy – "Face Omelet" Carl Brutananadilewski – Skit Matt Maiellaro – Guitar Solo Note: Carey Means (Frylock) is absent from the skits, sound bites, and hidden tracks where the other Aqua Teens can be heard. Regardless, Carey Means still portrays Frylock in the film. Marketing[edit] The film's poster was illustrated by Julie Bell and Boris Vallejo, and parodies the "King of the Mountain" design.[7] Boston Mooninite panic[edit] Main article: 2007 Boston Mooninite panic On January 31, 2007, police in Boston, Massachusetts received reports of devices resembling bombs in various places around the city. The devices turned out to be electronic signs similar to a Lite-Brite that displayed images of the Mooninites Ignignokt and Err giving the finger, and were designed to promote the Aqua Teen Hunger Force television show as part of a guerrilla marketing campaign authorized by Cartoon Network, the cartoon's parent company. The boards were present in several cities for weeks before the ones in Boston were reported.[8] The Boston City Government sought a reimbursement for the money spent responding to the incident. The amount quoted was $500,000 initially, and then was increased to $750,000.[9] On February 5, it was announced that Turner Broadcasting and the city of Boston have reached an agreement to pay $2 million to offset the cost of removing the devices: $1 million to cover the cost of the agencies involved and an additional $1 million in goodwill funding to homeland security.[10] An episode from season five, entitled "Boston", was produced as the series creators' response to the scare, but Adult Swim pulled it to avoid further controversy surrounding the events of the bomb scare.[11] April Fools' Day television "premiere"[edit] The heavily promoted April 1, 2007 airing of the movie on Adult Swim muted and featured in a small picture-in-picture screen in the bottom left hand corner during a simultaneous airing of the Family Guy episode "Peter's Two Dads", while a large and noisy on-screen graphic of Master Shake promotes the movie's airing. Adult Swim began running advertisements on March 25, 2007, advertising the television premiere of the movie the following Sunday, April 1, 2007. Its only reasoning behind this stunt, as stated in the advertisement, was, "because we're fucking crazy". While Adult Swim's TV listings on its website stated the movie would be shown, other TV listings reported the same Sunday block. The stunt was, in actuality, yet another one of Adult Swim's annual April Fools' pranks: though the first few minutes of the movie were shown normally, the remainder was shown in a small picture-in-picture box in the bottom left-hand corner, with no sound, over the normal programming and occasional giant pop-ups alerting viewers of its presence, as well as advertising the actual premiere. The advertising was shown again on one episode of a Family Guy marathon on July 6, 2007. The movie eventually was shown in full on Sunday, March 30, 2008. The day after the April Fools' joke, Cartoon Network showed another bumper, stating: "Sorry you will still have to pay to actually see the movie. But thanks for the ratings!"[citation needed] Fake endings[edit] In yet another promotional stunt, the "ending" to the movie was posted in various places including YouTube, KingColon.com (in the Worst Game Ever game), and fansite "Aqua Teen Central": each ending was completely different. Eventually, the Adult Swim website let it be known that none of the "endings" were real and presented seven more clips (which were fake as well) throughout the weeks following the film's release. These endings, now called the "fake.com endings", are available on the film's "Extras" DVD on the 2-Disc Collector's Edition. These endings are parodies of other films. For example, one of the endings spoofs The Terminator, featuring Meatwad as "The Determinator". Release[edit] Home media[edit] See also: List of Aqua Teen Hunger Force DVDs Warner Home Video released Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters in a two-disc DVD edition on August 14, 2007. For the DVD release, the studio changed the title of the eighty-seven-minute full-length movie to Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters for DVD, just like the film soundtrack's title. The DVD features include the ten fake endings as shown on the internet, a "making of" featurette, promos, the "Deleted Scenes" episode, a music video, and an eighty-minute animatic (rough cut) of the movie made out of the deleted scenes from the film and scenes from the "Deleted Scenes" episode as well as a commentary. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee Patti Smith is featured on the DVD commentary. The scene after the credits was removed from the UK DVD release. The set also features the season four episode "Deleted Scenes" (also known as "Star-Studded Xmas Spectacular"), which makes heavy references and parallels to the film that originally aired years prior to the film's release on December 18, 2005. The film is also available in HD and SD on the Xbox Live Marketplace.[12] Reception[edit] Box office[edit] The film was a box office success, making $5,520,368 domestically against its $750,000 budget,[2] making it the 8th highest grossing R-rated animated film of all time. Critical response[edit] With 28 reviews compiled, Metacritic reported that Movie Film for Theaters has received an average rating of 54/100, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[13] Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an approval rating of 48% based on reviews from 85 critics, with an average rating of 5.1/10. The website's consensus states: "The non sequitur humor of Aqua Teen Hunger Force will surely appeal to its built-in fanbase, but for the uninitiated, the premise wears thin".[14] Reviews ranged from Glenn Kenny at Premiere magazine, who stated that he was tempted to refer to the film as "the most successful full-on surrealist film since Buñuel and Dalí's 1930 L'Age d'Or",[15] to Ty Burr of The Boston Globe, who called it "an act of terrorism against entertainment".[16] The film was given a thumbs down on the television show At the Movies with Ebert & Roeper; Richard Roeper criticized the film's run time and calling it "unfunny", though he said the first five minutes of the film were funny.[citation needed] In response to such reviews, a commercial featuring the Mooninites began airing during the Adult Swim block. The two characters spend the entire commercial insulting a supposedly typical reviewer, "Lionel" of lionellovesmovies.com (the site merely leads back to the movie page). Other commercials recommend people see the film two or three more times to push the box office numbers up. Adult Swim also mentioned in one of its commercial bumpers that the review situation highlights the generation gap, and that most negative reviews came from much older critics.[citation needed] Cancelled sequel[edit] There has been mention of producing a sequel entitled Death Fighter.[17] While little has been confirmed by Adult Swim in regards to the film, there have been many statements regarding it. On December 15, 2008, Dave Willis stated no script was written and that the film would be released in Spring 2009 (though, as he also stated that Death Fighter was a T-shirt he was working on, he likely wasn't being serious)[18] Following this, in an April 2009 interview, Dave joked about the film lacking any sort of funding and being sold out of the back of his car.[19] In a 2010 interview, staff members of Radical Axis confirmed that a sequel was indeed in production, and mentioned the possibility that the film might be made in 3D. When asked if the film was designed for a theatrical release, a Radical Axis staff member responded yes, but stated: "We're not sure if we have a distributor yet." This was then followed by the statement: "Adult Swim will never make another movie ever again."[20] In 2012, Matt Maiellaro released more news regarding the film, that being: "It is all written and great. We are just trying to convince the network do it again. The first one was such a cash cow for them, not just box office but also ad sales in the movie. So it is kind of a no-brainer. So hopefully one day."[21] By 2014, the script had been completed and approved and would be released somewhere in mid 2015 and jokingly stated that the film was shelved as it was not G-rated;[22][23] however, on April 25, 2015, at a C2CE convention panel, Willis indirectly stated that the project was scrapped, soon after announcing the show's cancellation.[24][25] He later mentioned on Reddit that it would cost $3.4 million to produce, and expressed interest in doing a Kickstarter to fund it. He also reportedly stated that the film could potentially be released in the next 2 years.[26] See also[edit] List of adult animated films List of American films of 2007 References[edit] ^ a b "Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. American Film Institute. Retrieved February 21, 2021. ^ a b c d e "Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters (2007)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2011. ^ Rick Porter (March 7, 2005). "'Aqua Teen' Looks to Conquer Big Screen". tv.zap2it.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2007. ^ "Bruce Campbell As A Chicken Nugget "Fucks!", "Shits!", And "Bleeps" Ahoy!! It's AQUA TEEN HUNGER FORCE: THE MOVIE!!". Ain't It Cool News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2009. Retrieved March 25, 2009. ^ "Decibel Magazine". Archived from the original on January 29, 2008. ^ "Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Colon T - Various Artists". Allmusic. ^ "King of the Mountain - Posterwire.com". Archived from the original on June 9, 2019. Retrieved May 29, 2012. ^ "Two held after ad campaign triggers Boston bomb scare". CNN. January 31, 2007. Archived from the original on March 5, 2007. Retrieved March 2, 2007. ^ "Pair plead not guilty in Turner advertising fiasco". Atlanta Journal-Constitution. February 1, 2007. Archived from the original on February 3, 2007. Retrieved March 2, 2007. ^ "Turner, contractor to pay $2M in Boston bomb scare". CNN. February 5, 2007. Archived from the original on February 16, 2007. Retrieved March 2, 2007. ^ "Exclusive Interview With Meatwad, Er, Dave Willis, Of 'Aqua Teen Hunger Force'". Starpulse.com. December 15, 2008. Archived from the original on February 23, 2011. Retrieved December 26, 2010. ^ Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Archived May 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine at Xbox Live Marketplace. ^ Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Archived August 5, 2015, at the Wayback Machine on Metacritic ^ "Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters (2007)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on October 11, 2016. Retrieved 2018-10-20. ^ Kenny, Glenn (April 11, 2007). "Aqua Teen Hunger Force". Premiere. Archived from the original on 7 January 2008. Retrieved 4 January 2017. ^ Burr, Ty (April 13, 2007). "OK, we get the 'Aqua Teen' joke; it's still not funny". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2017. ^ Craig "Voiceroy" Crumpton. "Dragon*Con08 Day 2: Aqua Squid Venture Brothers". toonzone. Archived from the original on October 27, 2010. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Daniels, Hunter (July 30, 2010). "Radical Axis Interview Comic-Con; CEO Scott Fry, VP of Production Craig Hartin and Animation Director Todd Redner". Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. ^ Hunter Daniels. "Radical Axis Interview Comic-Con; CEO Scott Fry, VP of Production Craig Hartin and Animation Director Todd Redner". Collider. Archived from the original on August 2, 2010. Retrieved October 2, 2010. ^ ""Aqua Teen Hunger Force" co-creator Matt Maiellaro chats about new season". July 23, 2012. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved November 18, 2019. ^ Mike Gencarelli. ""Aqua Teen Hunger Force" co-creator Matt Maiellaro chats about new season". Media Mikes. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved September 24, 2012. ^ Willis, Dave (January 24, 2014). "@JohnMcBloom mid 2015 finally! Got shelved since we didn't get the G-rating". Archived from the original on November 2, 2015. Retrieved February 6, 2017. ^ Dave Willis speaking at a C2CE convention panel on April 25, 2015 posted on Twitch ^ Martin, Garrett. "The Life and Death of Aqua Teen Hunger Force". Paste. Archived from the original on June 20, 2015. Retrieved 22 June 2015. ^ Statement made by Dave Willis on June 16, 2015 Archived November 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine on Reddit External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API API at IMDb API at Box Office Mojo API at Rotten Tomatoes API at Metacritic v t e Aqua Teen Hunger Force Characters Media Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters Aqua Teen Hunger Force Zombie Ninja Pro-Am Seasons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Aqua Unit Patrol Squad 1 Aqua Something You Know Whatever Aqua TV Show Show Aqua Teen Hunger Force Forever Episodes "Rabbot" (season 1) "Last Last One Forever and Ever" (season 6) "One Hundred" (season 7) "Allen" (season 8) "The Greatest Story Ever Told" (season 11) Related Space Ghost Coast to Coast 2007 Boston Mooninite panic Soul Quest Overdrive Category Book v t e Adult Swim pilots, films, and specials Pilots Welcome to Eltingville (2002) Saddle Rash (2002) The Groovenians (2002) Korgoth of Barbaria (2006) Snake 'n' Bacon (2009) Cheyenne Cinnamon and the Fantabulous Unicorn of Sugar Town Candy Fudge (2010) Totally for Teens (2011) Filthy Sexy Teen$ (2013) Films Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters (2007) Mister America (2019) Specials Anime Talk Show (2004) Robot Chicken: Star Wars (2007) Young Person's Guide to History (2008) The Xtacles (2008) Robot Chicken: Star Wars Episode II (2008) Infomercials (since 2009) Freaknik: The Musical (2010) Robot Chicken: Star Wars Episode III (2010) Robot Chicken DC Comics Special (2012) Metalocalypse: The Doomstar Requiem (2013) Dan Deacon: U.S.A. (2013) Robot Chicken DC Comics Special 2: Villains in Paradise (2014) Dinner with Friends with Brett Gelman and Friends (2014) Too Many Cooks (2014) Robot Chicken DC Comics Special III: Magical Friendship (2015) Bagboy (2015) Dinner in America with Brett Gelman (2016) Mr. Neighbor's House (2016) Mr. Neighbor's House 2 (2018) Harvey Birdman: Attorney General (2018) Regular Adult Swim programming v t e Radical Axis Current Archer (since 2009) Former Aqua Teen Hunger Force (2000–2015) Sealab 2021 (2000–05) Perfect Hair Forever (2004–07; 2014) Anime Talk Show (2004) 12 oz. Mouse (2005–06; 2007) Freak Show (2006) Cheyenne Cinnamon and the Fantabulous Unicorn of Sugar Town Candy Fudge (2010) Soul Quest Overdrive (2011) Squidbillies (2004-2011) Feature film Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters (2007)