Group of diapsids broadly classified as reptiles This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Archosaurs Temporal range: Earliest Triassic–Present, 251–0 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Birds and crocodilians (in this case a yellow-billed stork and a Nile crocodile) are the only known living archosaur groups. Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Reptilia Clade: Eucrocopoda Clade: Archosauria Cope, 1869 Subgroups Avemetatarsalia (birds and their extinct relatives) Pseudosuchia (crocodilians and their extinct relatives) †Albisaurus †Avipes †Palaeosaurus †Picrodon †Sikannisuchus †Smok †Zanclodon Synonyms Arctopoda Haeckel, 1895 Avesuchia Benton, 1999 Archosauria ("ruling reptiles") is a clade of diapsids, with birds and crocodilians as the only living representatives. Archosaurs are broadly classified as reptiles, in the cladistic sense of term which includes birds. Extinct archosaurs include non-avian dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and extinct relatives of crocodilians. Modern paleontologists define Archosauria as a crown group that includes the most recent common ancestor of living birds and crocodilians, and all of its descendants. The base of Archosauria splits into two clades: Pseudosuchia, which includes crocodilians and their extinct relatives, and Avemetatarsalia, which includes birds and their extinct relatives (such as non-avian dinosaurs and pterosaurs).[1] Older definitions of the group Archosauria rely on shared morphological characteristics, such as an antorbital fenestra in the skull, serrated teeth, and an upright stance. Some extinct reptiles, such as proterosuchids and euparkeriids, possessed these features yet originated prior to the split between the crocodilian and bird lineages. The older morphological definition of Archosauria nowadays roughly corresponds to Archosauriformes, a group named to encompass crown-group archosaurs and their close relatives.[1] The oldest true archosaur fossils are known from the Early Triassic period, though the first archosauriforms and archosauromorphs (reptiles closer to archosaurs than to lizards or other lepidosaurs) appeared in the Permian. Archosaurs quickly diversified in the aftermath of the Permian-Triassic mass extinction (~252 Ma), becoming the largest and most ecologically dominant terrestrial vertebrates from the Middle Triassic period up until the K-Pg mass extinction (~66 Ma).[2] Birds and several crocodyliform lineages were the only archosaurs to survive the K-Pg extinction, rediversifying in the subsequent Cenozoic era. Birds in particular have become among the most species-rich groups of terrestrial vertebrates in the present day. Contents 1 Distinguishing characteristics 2 Origins 3 Archosaur takeover in the Triassic 4 Main forms 5 Classification 5.1 Modern classification 5.2 History of classification 5.3 Phylogeny 6 Extinction and survival 7 Archosaur lifestyle 7.1 Hip joints and locomotion 7.2 Diet 7.3 Land, water and air 7.4 Metabolism 7.5 Respiratory system 8 Reproduction 9 See also 10 References 11 Sources 12 External links Distinguishing characteristics[edit] Archosaurs can traditionally be distinguished from other tetrapods on the basis of several synapomorphies, or shared characteristics, which were present in their last common ancestor. Many of these characteristics appeared prior to the origin of the clade Archosauria, as they were present in archosauriforms such as Proterosuchus and Euparkeria, which were outside the crown group.[1] The most obvious features include teeth set in deep sockets, antorbital and mandibular fenestrae (openings in front of the eyes and in the jaw, respectively),[3] and a pronounced fourth trochanter (a prominent ridge on the femur).[4] Being set in sockets, the teeth were less likely to be torn loose during feeding. This feature is responsible for the name "thecodont" (meaning "socket teeth"),[5] which early paleontologists applied to many Triassic archosaurs.[4] Additionally, non-muscular cheek and lip tissue appear in various forms throughout the clade, with all living archosaurs lacking non-muscular lips, unlike most non-avian saurischian dinosaurs.[6] Some archosaurs, such as birds, are secondarily toothless. Antorbital fenestrae reduced the weight of the skull, which was relatively large in early archosaurs, rather like that of modern crocodilians. Mandibular fenestrae may also have reduced the weight of the jaw in some forms. The fourth trochanter provides a large site for the attachment of muscles on the femur. Stronger muscles allowed for erect gaits in early archosaurs, and may also be connected with the ability of the archosaurs or their immediate ancestors to survive the catastrophic Permian-Triassic extinction event.[citation needed] Origins[edit] Archosaurs are a subgroup of archosauriforms, which themselves are a subgroup of archosauromorphs. Both the oldest archosauromorph (Protorosaurus speneri) and the oldest archosauriform (Archosaurus rossicus) lived in the late Permian. The oldest true archosaurs appeared during the Olenekian stage (247-251 Ma) of the Early Triassic. A few fragmentary fossils of large carnivorous crocodilian-line archosaurs (informally termed "rauisuchians") are known from this stage. These include Scythosuchus and Tsylmosuchus (both of which have been found in Russia),[7] as well as the Xilousuchus, a ctenosauriscid from China.[1] The oldest known fossils of bird-line archosaurs are from the Anisian stage (247-242 Ma) of Tanzania, and include Asilisaurus (an early silesaurid), Teleocrater (an aphanosaur), and Nyasasaurus (a possible early dinosaur).[citation needed] Archosaur takeover in the Triassic[edit] Synapsids are a clade that includes mammals and their extinct ancestors. The latter group, which are often referred to as "mammal-like reptiles" but should be termed "protomammals," "stem mammals," or "basal synapsids" because they are not true reptiles by modern cladistic classification, were the dominant land vertebrates throughout the Permian, but most perished in the Permian–Triassic extinction event. Very few large synapsids survived the event, and one form, Lystrosaurus (a herbivorous dicynodont), attained a widespread distribution soon after the extinction.[citation needed] Instead, archosaurs and other archosauriforms quickly became the dominant land vertebrates in the early Triassic. Fossils from before the mass extinction have only been found around the Equator, but after the event fossils can be found all over the world.[8] The three most commonly suggested explanations for this are:[citation needed] Archosaurs made more rapid progress towards erect limbs than synapsids, and this gave them greater stamina by avoiding Carrier's constraint. An objection to this explanation is that archosaurs became dominant while they still had sprawling or semi-erect limbs, similar to those of Lystrosaurus and other synapsids.[citation needed] Archosaurs have more efficient[clarification needed] respiratory systems featuring unidirectional air flow. Dr. Peter Ward suggests this may have proven advantageous in a suspected drop in oxygen levels at the end of the Permian.[citation needed] The Early Triassic was predominantly arid, because most of the Earth's land was concentrated in the supercontinent Pangaea. Archosaurs were probably better at conserving water than early synapsids because: Modern diapsids (lizards, snakes, crocodilians, birds) excrete uric acid, which can be excreted as a paste, resulting in low water loss as opposed to a more dilute urine. It is reasonable to suppose that archosaurs (the ancestors of crocodilians, dinosaurs and pterosaurs) also excreted uric acid, and therefore were good at conserving water. The aglandular (glandless) skins of diapsids would also have helped to conserve water.[citation needed] Modern mammals excrete urea, which requires a relatively high urinary rate to keep it from leaving the urine by diffusion in the kidney tubules. Their skins also contain many glands, which also lose water. Assuming that early synapsids had similar features, e.g., as argued by the authors of Palaeos, they were at a disadvantage in a mainly arid world. The same well-respected site points out that "for much of Australia's Plio-Pleistocene history, where conditions were probably similar, the largest terrestrial predators were not mammals but gigantic varanid lizards (Megalania) and land crocs."[5] However, this theory has been questioned, since it implies synapsids were necessarily less advantaged in water retention, that synapsid decline coincides with climate changes or archosaur diversity (neither of which tested) and the fact that desert dwelling mammals are as well adapted in this department as archosaurs,[9] and some cynodonts like Trucidocynodon were large sized predators.[10] Main forms[edit] Examples of pseudosuchians. Clockwise from top-left: Longosuchus meadei (an aetosaur), Gavialis gangeticus, (a crocodilian), Saurosuchus galilei (a loricatan), Pedeticosaurus leviseuri (a sphenosuchian), Chenanisuchus lateroculi (a dyrosaurid), and Dakosaurus maximus (a thalattosuchian). Examples of avemetatarsalians. Clockwise from top-left: Tupuxuara leonardi (a pterosaur), Alamosaurus sanjuanensis, (a sauropod), Tsintaosaurus spinorhinus (an ornithopod), Daspletosaurus torosus (a tyrannosaurid), Pentaceratops sternbergii (a ceratopsian), and Grus grus (a neornithian). Since the 1970s, scientists have classified archosaurs mainly on the basis of their ankles.[11] The earliest archosaurs had "primitive mesotarsal" ankles: the astragalus and calcaneum were fixed to the tibia and fibula by sutures and the joint bent about the contact between these bones and the foot. The Pseudosuchia appeared early in the Triassic. In their ankles, the astragalus was joined to the tibia by a suture and the joint rotated round a peg on the astragalus which fitted into a socket in the calcaneum. Early "crurotarsans" still walked with sprawling limbs, but some later crurotarsans developed fully erect limbs. Modern crocodilians are crurotarsans that can walk with their limbs sprawling or erect depending on speed of locomotion.[citation needed] Euparkeria and the Ornithosuchidae had "reversed crurotarsal" ankles, with a peg on the calcaneum and socket on the astragalus. The earliest fossils of Avemetatarsalia ("bird ankles") appear in the Anisian age of the late Triassic. Most Ornithodirans had "advanced mesotarsal" ankles. This form of ankle incorporated a very large astragalus and very small calcaneum, and could only move in one plane, like a simple hinge. This arrangement, which was only suitable for animals with erect limbs, provided more stability when the animals were running. The earliest avemetatarsalians, such as Teleocrater and Asilisaurus, retained "primitive mesotarsal" ankles. The ornithodirans differed from other archosaurs in other ways: they were lightly built and usually small, their necks were long and had an S-shaped curve, their skulls were much more lightly built, and many ornithodirans were completely bipedal. The archosaurian fourth trochanter on the femur may have made it easier for ornithodirans to become bipeds, because it provided more leverage for the thigh muscles. In the late Triassic, the ornithodirans diversified to produce dinosaurs and pterosaurs. Classification[edit] Modern classification[edit] Archosauria is normally defined as a crown group, which means that it only includes descendants of the last common ancestors of its living representatives. In the case of archosaurs, these are birds and crocodilians. Archosauria is within the larger clade Archosauriformes, which includes some close relatives of archosaurs, such as proterochampsids and euparkeriids. These relatives are often referred to as archosaurs despite being placed outside of the crown group Archosauria in a more basal position within Archosauriformes.[12] Historically, many archosauriforms were described as archosaurs, including proterosuchids and erythrosuchids, based on the presence of an antorbital fenestra. While many researchers prefer to treat Archosauria as an unranked clade, some continue to assign it a traditional biological rank. Traditionally, Archosauria has been treated as a Superorder, though a few 21st century researchers have assigned it to different ranks including Division[13] and Class.[14] History of classification[edit] Archosauria as a term was first coined by American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope in 1869, and included a wide range of taxa including dinosaurs, crocodilians, thecodonts, sauropterygians (which may be related to turtles), rhynchocephalians (a group that according to Cope included rhynchosaurs, which nowadays are considered to be more basal archosauromorphs, and tuataras, which are lepidosaurs), and anomodonts, which are now considered synapsids.[15] It was not until 1986 that Archosauria was defined as a crown-clade, restricting its use to more derived taxa.[16] Archosaur ankle types: Adapted with permission from Palaeos   Tibia        Fibula        Astragalus        Calcaneum Primitive mesotarsal ankle Crocodilian form of crurotarsal ankle Reversed crurotarsal ankle "Advanced" mesotarsal ankle Cope's term was a Greek-Latin hybrid intended to refer to the cranial arches, but has later also been understood as "leading reptiles" or "ruling reptiles" by association with Greek ἀρχός "leader, ruler".[17] The term "thecodont", now considered an obsolete term, was first used by the English paleontologist Richard Owen in 1859 to describe Triassic archosaurs, and it became widely used in the 20th century. Thecodonts were considered the "basal stock" from which the more advanced archosaurs descended. They did not possess features seen in later avian and crocodilian lines, and therefore were considered more primitive and ancestral to the two groups. With the cladistic revolution of the 1980s and 90s, in which cladistics became the most widely used method of classifying organisms, thecodonts were no longer considered a valid grouping. Because they are considered a "basal stock", thecodonts are paraphyletic, meaning that they form a group that does not include all descendants of its last common ancestor: in this case, the more derived crocodilians and birds are excluded from "Thecodontia" as it was formerly understood. The description of the basal ornithodires Lagerpeton and Lagosuchus in the 1970s provided evidence that linked thecodonts with dinosaurs, and contributed to the disuse of the term "Thecodontia", which many cladists consider an artificial grouping.[18] With the identification of "crocodilian normal" and "crocodilian reversed" ankles by Sankar Chatterjee in 1978, a basal split in Archosauria was identified. Chatterjee considered these two groups to be Pseudosuchia with the "normal" ankle and Ornithosuchidae with the "reversed" ankle. Ornithosuchids were thought to be ancestral to dinosaurs at this time. In 1979, A.R.I. Cruickshank identified the basal split and thought that the crurotarsan ankle developed independently in these two groups, but in opposite ways. Cruickshank also thought that the development of these ankle types progressed in each group to allow advanced members to have semi-erect (in the case of crocodilians) or erect (in the case of dinosaurs) gaits.[18] Phylogeny[edit] In many phylogenetic analyses, archosaurs have been shown to be a monophyletic grouping, thus forming a true clade. One of the first studies of archosaur phylogeny was authored by French paleontologist Jacques Gauthier in 1986. Gauthier split Archosauria into Pseudosuchia, the crocodilian line, and Ornithosuchia, the dinosaur and pterosaur line. Pseudosuchia was defined as all archosaurs more closely related to crocodiles, while Ornithosuchia was defined as all archosaurs more closely related to birds. Proterochampsids, erythrosuchids, and proterosuchids fell successively outside Archosauria in the resulting tree. Below is the cladogram from Gauthier (1986):[19]     †Proterosuchidae       †Erythrosuchidae       †Proterochampsidae    Archosauria   Pseudosuchia    †Parasuchia       †Aetosauria       †Rauisuchia     Crocodylomorpha          Ornithosuchia    †Euparkeria       †Ornithosuchidae     Ornithodira               In 1988, paleontologists Michael Benton and J.M. Clark produced a new tree in a phylogenetic study of basal archosaurs. As in Gauthier's tree, Benton and Clark's revealed a basal split within Archosauria. They referred to the two groups as Crocodylotarsi and Ornithosuchia. Crocodylotarsi was defined as an apomorphy-based taxon based on the presence of a "crocodile-normal" ankle joint (considered to be the defining apomorphy of the clade). Gauthier's Pseudosuchia, by contrast, was a stem-based taxon. Unlike Gauthier's tree, Benton and Clark's places Euparkeria outside Ornithosuchia and outside the crown group Archosauria altogether.[20] The clades Crurotarsi and Ornithodira were first used together in 1990 by paleontologist Paul Sereno and A.B. Arcucci in their phylogenetic study of archosaurs. They were the first to erect the clade Crurotarsi, while Ornithodira was named by Gauthier in 1986. Crurotarsi and Ornithodira replaced Pseudosuchia and Ornithosuchia, respectively, as the monophyly of both of these clades were questioned.[18][21] Sereno and Arcucci incorporated archosaur features other than ankle types in their analyses, which resulted in a different tree than previous analyses. Below is a cladogram based on Sereno (1991), which is similar to the one produced by Sereno and Arcucci:[18] Archosauriformes    †Proterosuchidae       †Erythrosuchidae       †Euparkeria       †Proterochampsidae    Archosauria   Crurotarsi    †Parasuchia       †Ornithosuchidae     Suchia        Ornithodira      †?Scleromochlus     †Pterosauria       Dinosauromorpha               Ornithodira and Crurotarsi are both node-based clades, meaning that they are defined to include the last common ancestor of two or more taxa and all of its descendants. Ornithodira includes the last common ancestor of pterosaurs and dinosaurs (which include birds), while Crurotarsi includes the last common ancestor of living crocodilians and three groups of Triassic archosaurs: ornithosuchids, aetosaurs, and phytosaurs. These clades are not equivalent to "bird-line" and "crocodile-line" archosaurs, which would be branch-based clades defined as all taxa more closely related to one living group (either birds or crocodiles) than the other. Benton proposed the name Avemetatarsalia in 1999 to include all bird-line archosaurs (under his definition, all archosaurs more closely related to dinosaurs than to crocodilians). His analysis of the small Triassic archosaur Scleromochlus placed it within bird-line archosaurs but outside Ornithodira, meaning that Ornithodira was no longer equivalent to bird-line archosaurs. Below is a cladogram modified from Benton (2004) showing this phylogeny:[16] Archosauria    †Hyperodapedon (Rhynchosauria)       †Prolacerta (Prolacertiformes)       †Proterosuchus (Proterosuchidae)       †Euparkeria (Euparkeriidae)       †Proterochampsidae   Avesuchia  Crurotarsi      †Phytosauridae     †Gracilisuchus       †Ornithosuchidae    Suchia    †Stagonolepididae       †Postosuchus     Crocodylomorpha         †Fasolasuchus    Prestosuchidae   †Ticinosuchus     †Prestosuchus     †Saurosuchus            Avemetatarsalia    †Scleromochlus    Ornithodira    †Pterosauria    Dinosauromorpha   †Lagerpeton    Dinosauriformes    †Marasuchus   Dinosauria   †Ornithischia    Saurischia    †Sauropodomorpha    Theropoda    †Herrerasaurus     Neotheropoda                  (Crown group Archosauria)            In Sterling Nesbitt's 2011 monograph on early archosaurs, a phylogenetic analysis found strong support for phytosaurs falling outside Archosauria. Many subsequent studies supported this phylogeny. Because Crurotarsi is defined by the inclusion of phytosaurs, the placement of phytosaurs outside Archosauria means that Crurotarsi must include all of Archosauria. Nesbitt reinstated Pseudosuchia as a clade name for crocodile-line archosaurs, using it as a stem-based taxon. Below is a cladogram modified from Nesbitt (2011):[1]     †Phytosauria   Archosauria Pseudosuchia   †Ornithosuchidae   Suchia   †Gracilisuchus     †Turfanosuchus       †Revueltosaurus     †Aetosauria         †Ticinosuchus   Paracrocodylomorpha   †Poposauroidea   Loricata   †Prestosuchus       †Saurosuchus       †Batrachotomus       †Fasolasuchus       †Rauisuchidae     Crocodylomorpha                     Avemetatarsalia/   †Pterosauromorpha   Dinosauromorpha   †Lagerpetidae   Dinosauriformes   †Marasuchus       †Silesauridae   Dinosauria   †Ornithischia   Saurischia   †Sauropodomorpha     Theropoda             Ornithodira*   * Nesbitt did not include Scleromochlus in the analysis, meaning that Avemetatarsalia and Ornithodira occupy the same place in this cladogram   Extinction and survival[edit] Crocodylomorphs, pterosaurs and dinosaurs survived the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event about 200 million years ago, but other archosaurs had become extinct at or prior to the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. Non-avian dinosaurs and pterosaurs perished in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, which occurred approximately 66 million years ago, but crown-group birds (the only remaining dinosaur group) and many crocodyliforms survived. Both are descendants of archosaurs, and are therefore archosaurs themselves under phylogenetic taxonomy. Crocodilians (which include all modern crocodiles, alligators, and gharials) and birds flourish today in the Holocene. It is generally agreed that birds have the most species of all terrestrial vertebrates.[citation needed] Archosaur lifestyle[edit] Hip joints and locomotion[edit] Hip joints and hindlimb postures Like the early tetrapods, early archosaurs had a sprawling gait because their hip sockets faced sideways, and the knobs at the tops of their femurs were in line with the femur. In the early to middle Triassic, some archosaur groups developed hip joints that allowed (or required) a more erect gait. This gave them greater stamina, because it avoided Carrier's constraint, i.e. they could run and breathe easily at the same time. There were two main types of joint which allowed erect legs: The hip sockets faced sideways, but the knobs on the femurs were at right angles to the rest of the femur, which therefore pointed downwards. Dinosaurs evolved from archosaurs with this hip arrangement. The hip sockets faced downwards and the knobs on the femurs were in line with the femur. This "pillar-erect" arrangement appears to have evolved independently in various archosaur lineages, for example it was common in "Rauisuchia" (non-crocodylomorph paracrocodylomorphs) and also appeared in some aetosaurs. It has been pointed out that an upright stance requires more energy, so it may indicate a higher metabolism and a higher body temperature.[22] Diet[edit] Most were large predators, but members of various lines diversified into other niches. Aetosaurs were herbivores and some developed extensive armor. A few crocodyliforms were herbivores, e.g., Simosuchus, Phyllodontosuchus. The large crocodyliform Stomatosuchus may have been a filter feeder. Sauropodomorphs and ornithischian dinosaurs were herbivores with diverse adaptations for feeding biomechanics. Land, water and air[edit] Archosaurs are mainly portrayed as land animals, but: Many phytosaurs and crocodyliforms dominated the rivers and swamps and even invaded the seas (e.g., the teleosaurs, Metriorhynchidae and Dyrosauridae). The Metriorhynchidae were rather dolphin-like, with paddle-like forelimbs, a tail fluke and smooth, unarmoured skins. Two clades of ornithodirans, the pterosaurs and the birds, dominated the air after becoming adapted to a volant lifestyle. Metabolism[edit] The metabolism of archosaurs is still a controversial topic. They certainly evolved from cold-blooded ancestors, and the surviving non-dinosaurian archosaurs, crocodilians, are cold-blooded. But crocodilians have some features which are normally associated with a warm-blooded metabolism because they improve the animal's oxygen supply: 4-chambered hearts. Both birds and mammals have 4-chambered hearts, which completely separate the flows of oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood. Non-crocodilian reptiles have 3-chambered hearts, which are less efficient because they let the two flows mix and thus send some de-oxygenated blood out to the body instead of to the lungs. Modern crocodilians' hearts are 4-chambered, but are smaller relative to body size and run at lower pressure than those of modern birds and mammals. They also have a pulmonary bypass, which makes them functionally 3-chambered when under water, conserving oxygen. a secondary palate, which allows the animal to eat and breathe at the same time. a hepatic piston mechanism for pumping the lungs. This is different from the lung-pumping mechanisms of mammals and birds, but similar to what some researchers claim to have found in some dinosaurs.[23][24] Historically there has been uncertainty as to why natural selection favored the development of these features, which are very important for active warm-blooded creatures, but of little apparent use to cold-blooded aquatic ambush predators that spend the vast majority of their time floating in water or lying on river banks? Terrestrisuchus Chirotherium footprint in Triassic sediments Paleontological evidence[clarification needed] shows that the ancestors of living crocodilians were active and endothermic (warm-blooded). Some experts[who?] believe that their archosaur ancestors were warm-blooded as well. This is likely because feather-like filaments evolved to cover the whole body and were capable of providing thermal insulation.[25] Physiological, anatomical, and developmental features of the crocodilian heart support the paleontological evidence and show that the lineage reverted to ectothermy when it invaded the aquatic, ambush predator niche. Crocodilian embryos develop fully 4-chambered hearts at an early stage. Modifications to the growing heart form a pulmonary bypass shunt that includes the left aortic arch, which originates from the right ventricle, the foramen of Panizza between the left and right aortic arches, and the cog‐tooth valve at the base of the pulmonary artery. The shunt is used during diving to make the heart function as 3-chambered heart, providing the crocodilian with the neurally controlled shunting used by ectotherms. The researchers concluded that the ancestors of living crocodilians had fully 4-chambered hearts, and were therefore warm-blooded, before they reverted to a cold-blooded or ectothermic metabolism. The authors also provide other evidence for endothermy in stem archosaurs.[26][27] It is reasonable to suggest that later crocodilians developed the pulmonary bypass shunt as they became cold-blooded, aquatic, and less active. If the crocodilian ancestors and other Triassic archosaurs were warm-blooded, this would help to resolve some evolutionary puzzles: The earliest crocodylomorphs, e.g., Terrestrisuchus, were slim, leggy terrestrial predators whose build suggests a fairly active lifestyle, which requires a fairly fast metabolism. And some other crurotarsan archosaurs appear to have had erect limbs, while those of rauisuchians are very poorly adapted for any other posture. Erect limbs are advantageous for active animals because they avoid Carrier's constraint, but disadvantageous for more sluggish animals because they increase the energy costs of standing up and lying down. If early archosaurs were completely cold-blooded and (as seems most likely) dinosaurs were at least fairly warm-blooded, dinosaurs would have had to evolve warm-blooded metabolisms in less than half the time it took for synapsids to do the same. Respiratory system[edit] A recent study of the lungs of Alligator mississippiensis (the American alligator) has shown that the airflow through them is unidirectional, moving in the same direction during inhalation and exhalation.[28] This is also seen in birds and many non-avian dinosaurs, which have air sacs to further aid in respiration. Both birds and alligators achieve unidirectional air flow through the presence of parabronchi, which are responsible for gas exchange. The study has found that in alligators, air enters through the second bronchial branch, moves through the parabronchi, and exits through the first bronchial branch. Unidirectional airflow in both birds and alligators suggests that this type of respiration was present at the base of Archosauria and retained by both dinosaurs and non-dinosaurian archosaurs, such as aetosaurs, "rauisuchians" (non-crocodylomorph paracrocodylomorphs), crocodylomorphs, and pterosaurs.[28] The use of unidirectional airflow in the lungs of archosaurs may have given the group an advantage over synapsids, which had lungs where air moved tidally in and out through a network of bronchi that terminated in alveoli, which were cul-de-sacs. The better efficiency in gas transfer seen in archosaur lungs may have been advantageous during the times of low atmospheric oxygen which are thought to have existed during the Mesozoic.[29] Reproduction[edit] Most (if not all) archosaurs are oviparous. Birds and crocodilians lay hard-shelled eggs, as did extinct dinosaurs, and crocodylomorphs. Hard-shelled eggs are present in both dinosaurs and crocodilians, which has been used as an explanation for the absence of viviparity or ovoviviparity in archosaurs.[30] However, both pterosaurs[31] and baurusuchids[32] have soft-shelled eggs, implying that hard shells are not a plesiomorphic condition. The pelvic anatomy of Cricosaurus and other metriorhynchids[33] and fossilized embryos belonging to the non-archosaur archosauromorph Dinocephalosaurus,[34] together suggest that the lack of viviparity among archosaurs may be a consequence of lineage-specific restrictions.[clarification needed] Archosaurs are ancestrally superprecocial as evidenced in various dinosaurs, pterosaurs, and crocodylomorphs.[35] However, parental care did evolve independently multiple times in crocodilians, dinosaurs, and aetosaurs.[36] In most such species the animals bury their eggs and rely on temperature-dependent sex determination. The notable exception are Neornithes which incubate their eggs and rely on genetic sex determination – a trait that might have given them a survival advantage over other dinosaurs.[37] See also[edit] 2021 in archosaur paleontology References[edit] ^ a b c d e Nesbitt, S.J. (2011). "The early evolution of archosaurs: relationships and the origin of major clades" (PDF). Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History. 352: 1–292. doi:10.1206/352.1. hdl:2246/6112. S2CID 83493714. ^ Ezcurra, M. N. D.; Scheyer, T. M.; Butler, R. J. (2014). "The Origin and Early Evolution of Sauria: Reassessing the Permian Saurian Fossil Record and the Timing of the Crocodile-Lizard Divergence". PLOS ONE. 9 (2): e89165. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0089165. PMC 3937355. PMID 24586565. ^ Gareth Dyke; Gary Kaiser, eds. (2011). Living Dinosaurs: The Evolutionary History of Modern Birds. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 10. ISBN 978-0470656662. ^ a b Khanna, D.R. (2004). Biology Of Reptiles. Discovery Publishing House. pp. 78ff. ISBN 978-8171419074. ^ a b White, T.; Kazlev, M. A. "Archosauromorpha: Overview". Palaeos.com. Archived from the original on December 20, 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2012. ^ Paul, Gregory S. (2016). The Princeton Field Guide to Dinosaurs (2nd ed.). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 26. ISBN 978-0691167664. ^ Gower, D. J.; Sennikov, A. G. (2003). "Early archosaurs from Russia". In Benton, M.J.; Shishkin, M.A.; Unwin, D.M. (eds.). The Age of Dinosaurs in Russia and Mongolia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 140–159. ^ "Iguana-sized dinosaur cousin discovered in Antarctica - ScienceDaily". ^ Darren Naish, Episode 38: A Not Too Shabby Podcarts Archived 2016-01-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ Oliveira, T.V.; Soares, M.B.; Schultz, C.L. (2010). "Trucidocynodon riograndensis gen. nov. et sp. nov. (Eucynodontia), a new cynodont from the Brazilian Upper Triassic (Santa Maria Formation)". Zootaxa. 2382: 1–71. doi:10.11646/zootaxa.2382.1.1. ^ Archosauromorpha: Archosauria - Palaeos Archived 2005-04-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gower, D. J.; Wilkinson, M. (1996). "Is there any consensus on basal archosaur phylogeny?" (PDF). Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 263 (1375): 1399–1406. doi:10.1098/rspb.1996.0205. S2CID 86610229. ^ Benton, M.J. (2005). Vertebrate Paleontology, 3rd ed. Blackwell Science Ltd ^ Göhlich, U.B.; Chiappe, L.M.; Clark, J.M.; Sues, H.-D. (2005). "The systematic position of the Late Jurassic alleged dinosaur Macelognathus (Crocodylomorpha: Sphenosuchia)". Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences. 42 (3): 307–321. doi:10.1139/e05-005. ^ Cope, Edward Drinker (1869). "Synopsis of the extinct Batrachia, Reptilia and Aves of North America". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 14 (1): 1–252. doi:10.2307/1005355. hdl:2027/nyp.33433090912423. JSTOR 1005355. ^ a b Benton, M.J. (2004). "Origin and relationships of Dinosauria". In Weishampel, D.B.; Dodson, P.r; Osmólska, H. (eds.). The Dinosauria (2nd ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 7–19. ISBN 978-0-520-24209-8. ^ Pamphlets on Biology: Kofoid collection, vol. 2900 (1878), p. 731 ^ a b c d Sereno, P.C. (1991). "Basal archosaurs: phylogenetic relationships and functional implications". Memoir (Society of Vertebrate Paleontology). 2: 1–53. doi:10.2307/3889336. JSTOR 3889336. ^ Gauthier, J.A. (1986). "Saurischian monophyly and the origin of birds". In Padian, K. (ed.). The Origin of Birds and the Evolution of Flight. Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences. 8. San Francisco: California Academy of Sciences. pp. 1–55. ^ Benton, M. J.; Clark, J. M. (1985). "Archosaur phylogeny and the relationships of the Crocodylia". In Benton, M.J. (ed.). The Phylogeny and Classification of the Tetrapods. 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 295–338. ISBN 978-0-19-857712-6. ^ Sereno, P. C.; Arcucci, A. B. (1990). "The monophyly of crurotarsal archosaurs and the origin of bird and crocodile ankle joints". Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie, Abhandlungen. 180: 21–52. ^ Desmond, Adrián J., The hot-blooded dinosaurs: a revolution in palaeontology. 1976, Dial Press, page 87. ^ Ruben, J.; et al. (1996). "The metabolic status of some Late Cretaceous dinosaurs". Science. 273 (5279): 120–147. Bibcode:1996Sci...273.1204R. doi:10.1126/science.273.5279.1204. S2CID 84693210. ^ Ruben, J.; et al. (1997). "Lung structure and ventilation in theropod dinosaurs and early birds". Science. 278 (5341): 1267–1270. Bibcode:1997Sci...278.1267R. doi:10.1126/science.278.5341.1267. ^ Persons, Walter S.; Currie, Philip J. (2015). "Bristles before down: A new perspective on the functional origin of feathers". Evolution. 69 (4): 857–862. doi:10.1111/evo.12634. ISSN 1558-5646. PMID 25756292. S2CID 24319963. ^ Seymour, R. S.; Bennett-Stamper, C. L.; Johnston, S. D.; Carrier, D. R. & Grigg, G. C. (2004). "Evidence for endothermic ancestors of crocodiles at the stem of archosaur evolution" (PDF). Physiol. Biochem. Zool. 77 (6): 1051–1067. doi:10.1086/422766. hdl:2440/1933. PMID 15674775. S2CID 10111065.[permanent dead link] ^ Summers, A.P. (2005). "Evolution: Warm-hearted crocs". Nature. 434 (7035): 833–834. Bibcode:2005Natur.434..833S. doi:10.1038/434833a. PMID 15829945. S2CID 4399224. ^ a b Farmer, C. G.; Sanders, K. (2010). "Unidirectional airflow in the lungs of alligators". Science. 327 (5963): 338–340. Bibcode:2010Sci...327..338F. doi:10.1126/science.1180219. PMID 20075253. S2CID 206522844. ^ Lisa Grossman (January 14, 2010). "Alligators breathe like birds". Science News. Retrieved January 14, 2010. ^ Robin M. Andrews; Tom Mathies (2000). "Natural History of Reptilian Development: Constraints on the Evolution of Viviparity". BioScience. 50 (3): 227–238. doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2000)050[0227:NHORDC]2.3.CO;2. ^ Ji, Q; Ji, SA; Cheng, YN; et al. (December 2004). ""(December 2004). "Palaeontology: pterosaur egg with a leathery shell". Nature. 432 (7017): 572. doi:10.1038/432572a. PMID 15577900. S2CID 4416203. ^ Oliveira, C.E.M.; Santucci, R.M.; Andrade, M.B.; Fulfaro, V.J.; Basílo, J.A.F.; Benton, M.J. (2011). "Crocodylomorph eggs and eggshells from the Adamantina Formation (Bauru Group), Upper Cretaceous of Brazil". Palaeontology. 54 (2): 309–321. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4983.2010.01028.x. ^ Herrera, Yanina; Fernández, Marta S.; Lamas, Susana G.; Campos, Lisandro; Talevi, Marianella; Gasparini, Zulma (2017-02-01). "Morphology of the sacral region and reproductive strategies of Metriorhynchidae: a counter-inductive approach". Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 106 (4): 247–255. doi:10.1017/S1755691016000165. ISSN 1755-6910. ^ Liu, Jun; Organ, Chris L.; Benton, Michael J.; Brandley, Matthew C.; Aitchison, Jonathan C. (2017-02-14). "Live birth in an archosauromorph reptile". Nature Communications. 8: 14445. Bibcode:2017NatCo...814445L. doi:10.1038/ncomms14445. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 5316873. PMID 28195584. ^ Mark P. Witton (2013), Pterosaurs: Natural History, Evolution, Anatomy, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-15061-1 ^ Avanzini, M.; Dalla; Mietto, P; Piubelli, D; Preto, N; Rigo, M; Roghi, G (2007). "A vertebrate nesting site in northeastern Italy reveals unexpectedly complex behavior for late Carnian reptiles". PALAIOS. 22 (5): 465–475. doi:10.2110/palo.2005.p05-137r. S2CID 131332250. ^ Tanaka, Kohei (2015). "Eggshell Porosity Provides Insight on Evolution of Nesting in Dinosaurs". PLOS ONE. 10 (11): e0142829. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1042829T. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0142829. PMC 4659668. PMID 26605799. Sources[edit] Benton, M. J. (2004). Vertebrate Paleontology (3rd ed.). Blackwell Science. Carroll, R. L. (1988). Vertebrate Paleontology and Evolution'. New York: W. H. Freeman. External links[edit] UCMP Paleos reviews the messy history of archosaur phylogeny (family tree) and has an excellent image of the various archosaur ankle types. Mikko's Phylogeny Archive Archosauria v t e Extant chordate classes Kingdom Animalia (unranked) Bilateria Superphylum Deuterostomia Cephalochordata Leptocardii (lancelets) Olfactores Tunicata (urochordata) Ascidiacea (sea squirts) Appendicularia (larvaceans) Thaliacea (pyrosomes, salps, doliolids) Vertebrata Cyclostomata Myxini (hagfish) Hyperoartia (lampreys) Gnathostomata (jawed vertebrates) Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish: sharks, rays, chimaeras) Euteleostomi (bony vertebrates) Actinopterygii (ray-finned fish) Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fish) Actinistia (coelacanths)¹ Rhipidistia Dipnoi (lungfish)¹ Tetrapoda Amphibia (amphibians) Amniota Mammalia (mammals) Sauria Lepidosauria Rhynchocephalia (tuatara)² Squamata (scaled reptiles)² Archelosauria Testudines (turtles)² Archosauria Crocodilia (crocodilians)² Aves (birds) ¹subclasses of Sarcopterygii ²orders of class Reptilia (reptiles) italics denote paraphyletic groups v t e Archosauromorpha Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Sauropsida Clade: Eureptilia Clade: Sauria Eureptilia see Eureptilia Archosauromorpha see below↓ Archosauromorpha Archosauromorpha †Aenigmastropheus †Elachistosuchus? †Elessaurus †Prolacertoides †Choristodera? †Thalattosauria? †Ichthyosauromorpha? see Ichthyosauromorpha Pantestudines? see Pantestudines includes turtles †Sauropterygia? see Sauropterygia †"Protorosauria" (paraphyletic) Czatkowiella Exilisuchus? Jesairosaurus Malerisaurus? Malutinisuchus Mecistotrachelos? Megacnemus Microcnemus Protorosaurus Rhombopholis Trachelosaurus Vritramimosaurus Drepanosauromorpha? Sharovipterygidae Ozimek Sharovipteryx Tanystropheidae Amotosaurus Augustaburiania Cosesaurus Dinocephalosaurus? Exilisuchus? Fuyuansaurus Gwyneddosaurus Langobardisaurus Macrocnemus Pectodens Protanystropheus Raibliania Sclerostropheus Tanystropheus Tanytrachelos Sharovipterygidae? Crocopoda see below↓ Crocopoda Crocopoda †Ankistrodon †Blomosuchus †Boreopricea †Elessaurus? †Tasmaniosaurus †Teyujagua †Kuehneosauridae? †Allokotosauria Arctosaurus? Pamelaria Kuehneosauridae? Azendohsauridae Azendohsaurus Malerisaurus? Pamelaria? Shringasaurus Trilophosauridae Anisodontosaurus? Coelodontognathus? Doniceps? Spinosuchus Teraterpeton Tricuspisaurus? Trilophosaurus Variodens? Vitalia? †Rhynchosauria Colobops? Eohyosaurus Howesia Mesosuchus Noteosuchus Rhynchosauridae Otischalkia Rhynchosaurus Hyperodapedontidae Bentonyx Fodonyx Langeronyx Hyperodapedontinae Hyperodapedon Isalorhynchus Oryctorhynchus Supradapedon Teyumbaita Stenaulorhynchinae Ammorhynchus Brasinorhynchus Elorhynchus Mesodapedon Stenaulorhynchus †Prolacertidae Kadimakara Prolacerta Archosauriformes see below↓ Archosauriformes Archosauriformes †Antarctanax †Chasmatosuchus †Collilongus †Crosbysaurus? †Cuyosuchus †Eorasaurus? †Fenhosuchus †Kalisuchus †Sarmatosuchus †Scleromochlus †Tsylmosuchus? †Vjushkovisaurus †Vonhuenia †Proterosuchidae Archosaurus Proterosuchus †Protopyknosia Kranosaura Triopticus †Erythrosuchidae Chalishevia Erythrosuchus Fugusuchus Garjainia Guchengosuchus Shansisuchus Uralosaurus Eucrocopoda †Asperoris †Dorosuchus †Polymorphodon †Euparkeriidae Euparkeria Halazhaisuchus Osmolskina †Proterochampsia Litorosuchus? Vancleavea? Doswelliidae Ankylosuchus Doswellia Jaxtasuchus Rugarhynchos Scleromochlus? Proterochampsidae Cerritosaurus Proterochampsa Tropidosuchus Rhadinosuchinae Chanaresuchus Gualosuchus Rhadinosuchus Pseudochampsa Crurotarsi see below↓ Crurotarsi †Phytosauria Belodon Centemodon? Compsosaurus? Diandongosuchus Francosuchus? Heterodontosuchus? Mesorhinosuchus Omosaurus? Palaeoctonus? Phytosaurus? Rileyasuchus? Suchoprion? Termatosaurus? Parasuchidae Arganarhinus Ebrachosuchus Paleorhinus Parasuchus Wannia Mystriosuchinae Angistorhinus Brachysuchus Protome Rutiodon Volcanosuchus Leptosuchomorpha Leptosuchus Pravusuchus Smilosuchus Mystriosuchini Angistorhinopsis Coburgosuchus Machaeroprosopus Mystriosuchus Nicrosaurus Redondasaurus Archosauria †Albisaurus? †Avipes? †Palaeosaurus? †Sikannisuchus †Smok †Zanclodon? Pseudosuchia see Pseudosuchia includes crocodilians Avemetatarsalia see Avemetatarsalia includes birds Related articles Archelosauria Thecodontia Proterosuchia Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q130910 Wikispecies: Archosauria ADW: Archosauria EoL: 42329834 Fossilworks: 99812 ITIS: 174357 NCBI: 8492 uBio: 655702 Dinosaurs portal Evolutionary biology portal Paleontology portal