Controversial interpretation of out-of-body experiences This article is about the paranormal concept. For the psychedelic trance musical band, see Astral Projection (band). For physical travel to other stars, see Interstellar travel. "Astral travel" redirects here. For the album by Lonnie Liston Smith, see Astral Traveling. Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune telling Ghost hunting Indigo children Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychokinesis Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Reportedly haunted locations: India United Kingdom United States World Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific skepticism Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend Parapsychology Death and culture Parapsychology Scientific literacy v t e "The Separation of the Spirit Body" from The Secret of the Golden Flower, a Chinese handbook on alchemy and meditation Astral projection (or astral travel), is a term used in esotericism to describe an intentional out-of-body experience (OBE)[1][2] that assumes the existence of a soul called an "astral body" that is separate from the physical body and capable of travelling outside it throughout the universe.[3][4][5] The idea of astral travel is ancient and occurs in multiple cultures. The modern terminology of "astral projection" was coined and promoted by 19th-century Theosophists.[3] It is sometimes reported in association with dreams and forms of meditation.[6] Some individuals have reported perceptions similar to descriptions of astral projection that were induced through various hallucinogenic and hypnotic means (including self-hypnosis). There is no scientific evidence that there is a consciousness whose embodied functions are separate from normal neural activity or that one can consciously leave the body and make observations,[7] and astral projection has been characterized as a pseudoscience.[8][9][10][11][12][13][14][excessive citations]^ Contents 1 Accounts 1.1 Western 1.2 Biblical/Mythical 1.3 Ancient Egypt 1.4 China 1.5 Hinduism 1.6 Japan 1.7 Inuit Nunangat 1.8 Amazon 2 "Astral" and "etheric" 3 Notable practitioners 4 Scientific reception 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Accounts[edit] Western[edit] According to classical, medieval, renaissance Hermeticism, Neoplatonism, and later Theosophist and Rosicrucian; thought the astral body is an intermediate body of light linking the rational soul to the physical body while the astral plane is an intermediate world of light between Heaven and Earth, composed of the spheres of the planets and stars. These astral spheres were held to be populated by angels, demons and spirits.[15][16] The subtle bodies, and their associated planes of existence, form an essential part of the esoteric systems that deal with astral phenomena. In the neo-platonism of Plotinus, for example, the individual is a microcosm ("small world") of the universe (the macrocosm or "great world"). "The rational soul...is akin to the great Soul of the World" while "the material universe, like the body, is made as a faded image of the Intelligible". Each succeeding plane of manifestation is causal to the next, a world-view known as emanationism; "from the One proceeds Intellect, from Intellect Soul, and from Soul - in its lower phase, or that of Nature - the material universe".[17] Often these bodies and their planes of existence are depicted as a series of concentric circles or nested spheres, with a separate body traversing each realm.[18] The idea of the astral figured prominently in the work of the nineteenth-century French occultist Eliphas Levi, whence it was adopted and developed further by Theosophy, and used afterwards by other esoteric movements. Biblical/Mythical[edit] Carrington, Muldoon, Peterson, and Williams claim that the subtle body is attached to the physical body by means of a psychic silver cord.[19][20] The final chapter of the Book of Ecclesiastes is often cited in this respect: "Before the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be shattered at the fountain, or the wheel be broken at the cistern."[21] Scherman, however, contends that the context points to this being merely a metaphor, comparing the body to a machine, with the silver cord referring to the spine.[22] Paul's Second Epistle to the Corinthians is more generally agreed to refer to the astral planes:[23] "I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven. Whether it was in the body or out of the body I do not know—God knows."[24] This statement gave rise to the Visio Pauli, a tract that offers a vision of heaven and hell, a forerunner of visions attributed to Adomnan and Tnugdalus as well as of Dante's Divine Comedy. Ancient Egypt[edit] The ba hovering above the body. This image is based on an original found in The Book of the Dead. Similar concepts of soul travel appear in various other religious traditions. For example, ancient Egyptian teachings present the soul (ba) as having the ability to hover outside the physical body via the ka, or subtle body.[25] China[edit] Taoist alchemical practice involves creation of an energy body by breathing meditations, drawing energy into a 'pearl' that is then "circulated".[26] "Xiangzi ... with a drum as his pillow fell fast asleep, snoring and motionless. His primordial spirit, however, went straight into the banquet room and said, "My lords, here I am again." When Tuizhi walked with the officials to take a look, there really was a Taoist sleeping on the ground and snoring like thunder. Yet inside, in the side room, there was another Taoist beating a fisher drum and singing Taoist songs. The officials all said, "Although there are two different people, their faces and clothes are exactly alike. Clearly he is a divine immortal who can divide his body and appear in several places at once. ..." At that moment, the Taoist in the side room came walking out, and the Taoist sleeping on the ground woke up. The two merged into one."[27] Hinduism[edit] Similar ideas such as the Liṅga Śarīra are found in ancient Hindu scriptures such as, the YogaVashishta-Maharamayana of Valmiki.[25] Modern Indians who have vouched for astral projection include Paramahansa Yogananda who witnessed Swami Pranabananda doing a miracle through a possible astral projection.[28] The Indian spiritual teacher Meher Baba described one's use of astral projection: In the advancing stages leading to the beginning of the path, the aspirant becomes spiritually prepared for being entrusted with free use of the forces of the inner world of the astral bodies. He may then undertake astral journeys in his astral body, leaving the physical body in sleep or wakefulness. The astral journeys that are taken unconsciously are much less important than those undertaken with full consciousness and as a result of deliberate volition. This implies conscious use of the astral body. Conscious separation of the astral body from the outer vehicle of the gross body has its own value in making the soul feel its distinction from the gross body and in arriving at fuller control of the gross body. One can, at will, put on and take off the external gross body as if it were a cloak, and use the astral body for experiencing the inner world of the astral and for undertaking journeys through it, if and when necessary....The ability to undertake astral journeys therefore involves considerable expansion of one's scope for experience. It brings opportunities for promoting one's own spiritual advancement, which begins with the involution of consciousness.[29] Astral projection is one of the Siddhis considered achievable by yoga practitioners through self-disciplined practice. In the epic The Mahabharata, Drona leaves his physical body to see if his son is alive. Japan[edit] The ikiryō as illustrated by Toriyama Sekien. In Japanese mythology, an ikiryō (生霊, also read as shōryō, seirei, or ikisudama) is a manifestation of the soul of a living person separately from their body.[30] Traditionally, if someone holds a sufficient grudge against another person, it is believed that a part or the whole of their soul can temporarily leave their body and appear before the target of their hate in order to curse or otherwise harm them, similar to an evil eye. Souls are also believed to leave a living body when the body is extremely sick or comatose; such ikiryō are not malevolent.[31][32] Inuit Nunangat[edit] In some Inuit groups, people with special capabilities are said to travel to (mythological) remote places, and report their experiences and things important to their fellows or the entire community; how to stop bad luck in hunting, cure a sick person etc.,[33][34] things unavailable to people with normal capabilities.[35] Amazon[edit] The yaskomo of the Waiwai is believed to be able to perform a "soul flight" that can serve several functions such as healing, flying to the sky to consult cosmological beings (the moon or the brother of the moon) to get a name for a new-born baby, flying to the cave of peccaries' mountains to ask the father of peccaries for abundance of game or flying deep down in a river to get the help of other beings.[36] "Astral" and "etheric"[edit] The expression "astral projection" came to be used in two different ways. For the Golden Dawn[37] and some Theosophists[38] it retained the classical and medieval philosophers' meaning of journeying to other worlds, heavens, hells, the astrological spheres and other imaginal[39] landscapes, but outside these circles the term was increasingly applied to non-physical travel around the physical world.[40] Though this usage continues to be widespread, the term, "etheric travel", used by some later Theosophists, offers a useful distinction. Some experients say they visit different times and/or places:[41] "etheric", then, is used to represent the sense of being "out of the body" in the physical world, whereas "astral" may connote some alteration in time-perception. Robert Monroe describes the former type of projection as "Locale I" or the "Here-Now", involving people and places that actually exist:[42] Robert Bruce calls it the "Real Time Zone" (RTZ) and describes it as the non-physical dimension-level closest to the physical.[43] This etheric body is usually, though not always, invisible but is often perceived by the experient as connected to the physical body during separation by a "silver cord". Some link "falling" dreams with projection.[44] According to Max Heindel, the etheric "double" serves as a medium between the astral and physical realms. In his system the ether, also called prana, is the "vital force" that empowers the physical forms to change. From his descriptions it can be inferred that, to him, when one views the physical during an out-of-body experience, one is not technically "in" the astral realm at all.[45] Other experiments may describe a domain that has no parallel to any known physical setting. Environments may be populated or unpopulated, artificial, natural or abstract, and the experience may be beatific, horrific or neutral. A common Theosophical belief is that one may access a compendium of mystical knowledge called the Akashic records. In many accounts the experiencer correlates the astral world with the world of dreams. Some even report seeing other dreamers enacting dream scenarios unaware of their wider environment.[46] The astral environment may also be divided into levels or sub-planes by theorists, but there are many different views in various traditions concerning the overall structure of the astral planes: they may include heavens and hells and other after-death spheres, transcendent environments, or other less-easily characterized states.[42][44][46] Notable practitioners[edit] Astral projection according to Carrington and Muldoon, 1929 Emanuel Swedenborg was one of the first practitioners to write extensively about the out-of-body experience, in his Spiritual Diary (1747–65). French philosopher and novelist Honoré de Balzac's fictional work "Louis Lambert" suggests he may have had some astral or out-of-body experiences.[47] There are many twentieth-century publications on astral projection,[48] although only a few authors remain widely cited. These include Robert Monroe,[49] Oliver Fox,[50] Sylvan Muldoon, and Hereward Carrington,[51] and Yram.[52] Robert Monroe's accounts of journeys to other realms (1971–1994) popularized the term "OBE" and were translated into a large number of languages. Though his books themselves only placed secondary importance on descriptions of method, Monroe also founded an institute dedicated to research, exploration and non-profit dissemination of auditory technology for assisting others in achieving projection and related altered states of consciousness. Robert Bruce,[53] William Buhlman,[54] Marilynn Hughes,[55] and Albert Taylor[56] have discussed their theories and findings on the syndicated show Coast to Coast AM several times. Michael Crichton gives lengthy and detailed explanations and experience of astral projection in his non-fiction book Travels. In her book, My Religion, Helen Keller tells of her beliefs in Swedenborgianism and how she once "traveled" to Athens: "I have been far away all this time, and I haven't left the room...It was clear to me that it was because I was a spirit that I had so vividly 'seen' and felt a place a thousand miles away. Space was nothing to spirit!"[57] The soul's ability to leave the body at will or while sleeping and visit the various planes of heaven is also known as "soul travel". The practice is taught in Surat Shabd Yoga, where the experience is achieved mostly by meditation techniques and mantra repetition. All Sant Mat Gurus widely spoke about this kind of out of body experience, such as Kirpal Singh.[58] Eckankar describes Soul Travel broadly as movement of the true, spiritual self (Soul) closer to the heart of God. While the contemplative may perceive the experience as travel, Soul itself is said not to move but to "come into an agreement with fixed states and conditions that already exist in some world of time and space".[59] American Harold Klemp, the current Spiritual Leader of Eckankar[60] practices and teaches Soul Travel, as did his predecessors,[61] through contemplative techniques known as the Spiritual Exercises of ECK (Divine Spirit).[62] Edgar Cayce from the US, was popularly known as the “Sleeping Prophet”. He had been practicing astral travel at Washington DC for many years. In occult traditions, practices range from inducing trance states to the mental construction of a second body, called the Body of Light in Aleister Crowley's writings, through visualization and controlled breathing, followed by the transfer of consciousness to the secondary body by a mental act of will.[63] Scientific reception[edit] There is no known scientific evidence that astral projection as an objective phenomenon exists.[7][8][9] There are cases of patients having experiences suggestive of astral projection from brain stimulation treatments and hallucinogenic drugs, such as ketamine, phencyclidine, and DMT.[9] Robert Todd Carroll writes that the main evidence to support claims of astral travel is anecdotal and comes "in the form of testimonials of those who claim to have experienced being out of their bodies when they may have been out of their minds."[64] Subjects in parapsychological experiments have attempted to project their astral bodies to distant rooms and see what was happening. However, such experiments haven't produced clear results.[65] According to Bob Bruce of the Queensland Skeptics Association, astral projection is "just imagining", or "a dream state". Bruce writes that the existence of an astral plane is contrary to the limits of science. "We know how many possibilities there are for dimensions and we know what the dimensions do. None of it correlates with things like astral projection." Bruce attributes astral experiences such as "meetings" alleged by practitioners to confirmation bias and coincidences.[66] Psychologist Donovan Rawcliffe has written that astral projection can be explained by delusion, hallucination and vivid dreams.[67] Arthur W. Wiggins, writing in Quantum Leaps in the Wrong Direction: Where Real Science Ends...and Pseudoscience Begins, said that purported evidence of the ability to astral travel great distances and give descriptions of places visited is predominantly anecdotal. In 1978, Ingo Swann provided a test of his alleged ability to astral travel to Jupiter and observe details of the planet. Actual findings and information were later compared to Swann's claimed observations; according to an evaluation by James Randi, Swann's accuracy was "unconvincing and unimpressive" with an overall score of 37 percent. Wiggins considers astral travel an illusion, and looks to neuroanatomy, human belief, imagination and prior knowledge to provide prosaic explanations for those claiming to experience it.[11] In popular culture[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Ring-a-Ding Girl—fictional treatment of astral projection in popular media The Twilight Zone, in which a fading actress (Maggie McNamara) is able to project her consciousness from her body by means of magic and rescue the inhabitants of her hometown from an impending natural disaster In Dungeons and Dragons astral projection is a powerful spell that allows travelers to transport a mental image of themselves into a strange realm known as the astral plane which is dictated entirely by thought and perception. It is filled with horrifying monsters and is virtually infinite. Insidious—A film about a boy named Dalton whose astral body gets caught in a demonic world known as The Further. His father, from whom he acquired these abilities, must find him and bring him back to the living world. The Three Investigators #23 in the children's mystery series, "The Mystery of the Invisible Dog", features a character that performs astral projection. Aahat (Episode 164) - A popular TV horror show in India had an episode about astral projection The Powers of Matthew Star - In the latter half of this 1982–1983 series, the main character Matthew Star, an alien prince hiding out on Earth, is shown to have the power to perform astral projections and uses it pretty regularly to help in the government assignments he and his mentor take on. The Sheep Talisman from the animated television series Jackie Chan Adventures grants its user the power of astral projection. In the television series Charmed, the character of Prue, a witch played by Shannen Doherty, has the power of astral projection and has used it many times in the series dealings with the supernatural. In the Legend of Korra television show, a character named Jinora is able to use astral projection. In the Adventure Time episode “Astral Plane”, A comet causes Finn the Human to Project Astrally. With no control on how to use it, he follows up on the various exploit of several characters before floating up to Mars. In the Gothic soap opera Dark Shadows, the characters of Barnabas Collins and Julia Hoffman have used the mystic powers of the IChing wands to project their astral body into the past while their bodies remain in a trance in the present. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe live-action film Doctor Strange (2016), Stephen Strange and his teacher the Ancient One use astral travel. In the Netflix's Chilling Adventures of Sabrina, several of the characters use astral projection multiple times throughout the series.[68] In Fringe, Olivia Dunham takes a fictitious drug called Cortexiphan which allows her to experience an astral projection in a forest. In the 2018 Indian horror film, Taxiwaala, one of the characters (Sisira) experiments with astral projection to know the cause of her mother's death. Fuko Ibuki from visual novel Clannad is an astral projection of herself whilst she's in a comas Sal Governale aka "Sal the Stockbroker" aka "Sal the Turtle" astral projected at home and spoke about his experience on the Howard Stern Show. In the Netflix original series Stranger Things, a child victim of the MKULTRA experiments demonstrates the ability to locate and spy on others using astral protection.[69] In the Netflix original series “Behind Her Eyes”, several of the main characters use the power of astral projection, and it plays a major part in the plot. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe live-action series WandaVision (2021), Wanda Maximoff is seen using astral projection while reading the Darkhold in her remote mountain home. In the Astral Project (manga) the main character is listening to a jazz recording to go out of his body. In the 1973 novel Gravity’s Rainbow, Tyrone Slothrop’s uncle Lyle Bland becomes an advanced practitioner of astral projection and uses it to leave the material realm. [70] See also[edit] Esotericism Hypnagogia Lucid dream Merkaba Metaphysics Sleep paralysis Soul retrieval Surat Shabd Yoga Tattva vision Teleportation Yoga-nidra References[edit] ^ Varvoglis, Mario, Out-Of-Body Experiences (OBE or OOBE), retrieved 9 July 2016 ^ Myers, Frederic W.H. (2014), "Astral Projection", Journal for Spiritual & Consciousness Studies, 37 (1): 52 ^ a b Crow, John L (2012), "Taming the astral body: the Theosophical Society's ongoing problem of emotion and control", Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 80 (3): 691–717, doi:10.1093/jaarel/lfs042 ^ "Webster's New Millennium Dictionary of English, Preview Edition (v 0.9.7)", Dictionary.com, n.d., archived from the original on 31 July 2016, retrieved 9 July 2016 ^ "Astral projection", The Skepdic's Dictionary, 27 October 2015 ^ Zusne, Leonard; Jones, Warren H. (1989), Anomalistic Psychology: A Study of Magical Thinking', Psychology Press, ISBN 978-0-8058-0508-6 ^ a b Brian Regal. (2009). Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia. Greenwood. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-313-35507-3 "Other than anecdotal eyewitness accounts, there is no known evidence of the ability to astral project, the existence of other planes, or of the Akashic Record." ^ a b Terence Hines. (2003). Pseudoscience and the Paranormal. Prometheus Books. pp. 103-106. ISBN 978-1573929790 ^ a b c Robert L. Park. (2008). Superstition: Belief in the Age of Sciences. Princeton University Press. pp. 90-91. ISBN 1-4008-2877-5. ^ Martin Gardner (17 October 2001). Did Adam and Eve Have Navels?: Debunking Pseudoscience. W. W. Norton. pp. 158–. ISBN 978-0-393-32238-5. ^ a b Charles M. Wynn; Arthur W. Wiggins; Sidney Harris (2001). Quantum leaps in the wrong direction: where real science ends-- and pseudoscience begins. Joseph Henry Press. pp. 95–. ISBN 978-0-309-07309-7. Retrieved 24 December 2011. ^ Patrick Grim (1982). Philosophy of Science and the Occult. SUNY Press. pp. 92–. ISBN 978-1-4384-0498-1. ^ Calhoun, Ada (2015-03-12). "Why I Stopped Believing in Pseudoscience". Cosmopolitan. ^ Massimo Pigliucci; Maarten Boudry; Daniel Thurs; Ronald Numbers (16 August 2013). Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem. University of Chicago Press. pp. 138–. ISBN 978-0-226-05182-6. ^ Dodds, E.R. Proclus: The Elements of Theology. A revised text with translation, introduction, and commentary, 2nd edition 1963, Appendix. ^ Pagel, Walter (1967). William Harvey's Biological Ideas. Karger Publishers. pp. 147–148. ISBN 978-3-8055-0962-6. ^ John Gregory, The Neoplatonists, Kyle Cathie 1991 pp15–16 ^ Besant, Annie Wood (1897). The Ancient Wisdom: An Outline of Theosophical Teachings. Theosophical publishing society. ISBN 978-0-524-02712-7. ^ Projection of the Astral Body by Carrington and Muldoon ^ Out of Body Experiences: How to have them and what to expect by Robert Peterson (chapters 5, 17, 22) ^ Ecclesiastes 12:6 ^ Rabbi Nosson Scherman, ed. (2011). The ArtScroll English Tanach. ArtScroll Series (First ed.). Brooklyn, New York: Mesorah Publications, Ltd. p. 1150. ISBN 978-1-4226-1065-7. ^ Hankins, James (2007). "Ficino, Avicenna and the Occult Powers of the Rational Soul". Atti di Convegni (Istituto Nazionale di Studi Sul Rinascimento). ^ 2 Corinthians 12:2 ^ a b Melton, J. G. (1996). Out-of-the-body Travel. In Encyclopedia of Occultism & Parapsychology. Thomson Gale. ISBN 978-0-8103-9487-2. ^ Chia, Mantak (2007) [1989]. Fusion of the Five Elements. Destiny Books. pp. 89+. ISBN 978-1-59477-103-3. ^ Erzeng, Yang (2007). The Story of Han Xiangzi. University of Washington Press. pp. 207–209. ISBN 978-0-295-98690-6. ^ Wikisource:Autobiography of a Yogi/Chapter 3 ^ Baba: 90, 91. ^ Clarke, Peter Bernard (2000). Japanese new religions: in global perspective, Volume 1999 (annotated ed.). Routledge. p. 247. ISBN 978-0-7007-1185-7. ^ Ramesh Chopra Academic Dictionary Of Mythology 2005, p. 144 ^ Patrick Drazen A Gathering of Spirits: Japan's Ghost Story Tradition: from Folklore and Kabuki to Anime and Manga 2011, p. 131 ^ Kleivan & Sonne 1985: 7–8, 12, 23–24,26, 27–29, 30, 31 ^ Merkur 1985: 4–6 ^ Hoppál 1975: 228 ^ Fock 1963: 16 ^ Chic Cicero, Chic C, Sandra Tabatha Cicero The Essential Golden Dawn, Llewellyn Worldwide, 2003. ^ Arthur A.Powell, THE ASTRAL BODY AND OTHER ASTRAL PHENOMENA, The Theosophical Publishing House, London, England; Wheaton, Ill, U.S.A.; Adyar, Chennai, India, 1927, reprinted in 1954 and 1965, page 7, online June 2008 at http://hpb.narod.ru/AstralBodyByPowell-A.htm ^ Henri Corbin, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn Arabi, tr. Ralph Mannheim, Bollingen XCI, Princeton U.P., 1969 ^ e.g. William Judge, The Ocean of Theosophy 2nd Ed. TPH, 1893, Chapter 5, book online June 2008 at http://www.theosociety.org/pasadena/ocean/oce-hp.htm ^ Astral-Projections.com"Secret Guide To Instant Astral Projection Archived 22 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine" ^ a b Journeys Out of the Body by Robert A. Monroe, p 60. Anchor Press, 1977. ^ Astral Dynamics by Robert Bruce Hampton Roads Publishing Company, Inc, 1999. p 25-27, 30-31 ^ a b Astral Dynamics by Robert Bruce. Hampton Roads Publishing Company, Inc, 1999 ISBN 1-57174-143-7 ^ Heindel, Max, The Rosicrucian Mysteries (Chapter IV, The Constitution of Man: Vital Body - Desire Body - Mind), 1911, ISBN 0-911274-86-3 ^ a b Monroe, Robert. Far Journeys. ISBN 0-385-23182-2 ^ Frederick Lawton Balzac The Echo Library, 2007, p. 18 ^ "GENERAL". obebibliography.info. ^ "A biography of Robert Monroe by Susan Blackmore". Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 9 March 2009. ^ "A biography of Oliver Fox by Susan Blackmore". Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 9 March 2009. ^ Blackmore, Susan. "A biography of Sylvan Muldoon". Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. ^ "A biography of Yram by Susan Blackmore". Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 9 March 2009. ^ "Robert Bruce - Biography & Interviews". Coast to Coast AM. ^ "William Buhlman - Biography & Interviews". Coast to Coast AM. ^ "Marilynn Hughes - Biography & Interviews". Coast to Coast AM. ^ "Albert Taylor - Biography & Interviews". Coast to Coast AM. ^ Keller, Helen (1927). My Religion (First ed.). Garden City: Doubleday, Page & Company. p. 33. Retrieved 12 December 2017. ^ See chapter V of the book Crown of Life by Kirpal Singh available online at [1] ^ "Soul Travel". www.eckankar.org. ^ "Sri Harold Klemp, Spiritual Leader of Eckankar". www.eckankar.org. ^ "ECKANKAR: ECK Masters". www.eckankar.org. ^ "ECKANKAR: The Spiritual Exercises of ECK". www.eckankar.org. ^ Greer, John (1967). Astral Projection. In The New Encyclopedia of the Occult. Llewellyn Worldwide. ISBN 978-1-56718-336-8. ^ Robert Todd Carroll (31 July 2003). The skeptic's dictionary: a collection of strange beliefs, amusing deceptions, and dangerous delusions. John Wiley and Sons. pp. 33–. ISBN 978-0-471-27242-7. Retrieved 24 December 2011. ^ Blackmore, Susan (1991). "Near-Death Experiences: In or out of the body?". Skeptical Inquirer 1991, 16, 34-45. Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. Retrieved 2008-06-17. ^ Frazer, Peter (30 September 2010). "Astral projection? In your dreams, say sceptics". Brisbane Times. Retrieved 24 December 2011. ^ Rawcliffe, Donovan. (1988). Occult and Supernatural phenomena. Dover Publications. p. 123 ^ Oswald, Anjelica (December 17, 2018). "Things you may have missed on Netflix's 'Chilling Adventures of Sabrina'". Business Insider. Retrieved September 20, 2020. ^ Alexander, Leigh (September 18, 2016). "I Tried Astral Projection in a Flotation Tank and All I Got Was a Text Message". Vice. Retrieved September 20, 2020. ^ Pynchon, Thomas (1973). Gravity’s Rainbow. 2006. p590. Penguin Classics Baba, Meher (1967). Discourses. Vol. II. San Francisco: Sufism Reoriented. ISBN 1-880619-09-1. Fock, Niels (1963). Waiwai. Religion and society of an Amazonian tribe. Nationalmuseets skrifter, Etnografisk Række (Ethnographical series), VIII. Copenhagen: The National Museum of Denmark. Hoppál, Mihály (1975). "Az uráli népek hiedelemvilága és a samanizmus". In Hajdú, Péter (ed.). Uráli népek. Nyelvrokonaink kultúrája és hagyományai (in Hungarian). Budapest: Corvina Kiadó. pp. 211–233. ISBN 978-963-13-0900-3. The title means: "Uralic peoples / Culture and traditions of our linguistic relatives"; the chapter means "The belief system of Uralic peoples and the shamanism". Hoppál, Mihály (2005). Sámánok Eurázsiában (in Hungarian). Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó. ISBN 978-963-05-8295-7. The title means "Shamans in Eurasia", the book is written in Hungarian, but it is published also in German, Estonian and Finnish. Site of publisher with short description on the book (in Hungarian) Kleivan, Inge; B. Sonne (1985). Eskimos: Greenland and Canada. Iconography of religions, section VIII, "Arctic Peoples", fascicle 2. Leiden, The Netherlands: Institute of Religious Iconography • State University Groningen. E.J. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-07160-5. Merkur, Daniel (1985). Becoming Half Hidden: Shamanism and Initiation among the Inuit. Acta Universitatis Stockholmiensis • Stockholm Studies in Comparative Religion. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell. ISBN 978-91-22-00752-4. Klemp, Harold (2003). Past Lives, Dreams, and Soul Travel. Eckankar. Minneapolis, MN. [Eckankar Web site: http://www.eckankar.org]: Eckankar. ISBN 978-1-57043-182-1. Roi, Alex. Astral Projection and Lucid Dreams, [Web site=http://www.howtoluciddreamsfast.org]. Further reading[edit] Robert Bruce (1999). Astral Dynamics: A New Approach to Out-of-Body Experiences. Hampton Roads Publishing. ISBN 1-57174-143-7. Robert Todd Carroll (2003). The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 0-471-27242-6. Thomas Gilovich (1993). How We Know What Isn't So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life. Free Press. ISBN 0-02-911706-2. Terence Hines (2003). Pseudoscience and the Paranormal. Prometheus Books. ISBN 1-57392-979-4. Robert Monroe (1971). Journeys Out of the Body Doubleday. Reprinted (1989) Souvenir Press Ltd. ISBN 0-385-00861-9. Sylvan Muldoon and Hereward Carrington (1929). Projection of the Astral Body. Rider and Company. ISBN 0-7661-4604-9. External links[edit] Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Astral Projection at the Skeptic's Dictionary v t e New Age movement Culture New Age communities New Age music New Age travelers Groups Association for Research and Enlightenment The Family New World Alliance Rainbow Family Non-exclusive themes Age of Aquarius Akashic records Alternative medicine Ancient astronauts Angels Animism Ascended master Astral projection Astrology Atlantis Aura Conspiracy theories Contactee Cosmic ordering Conscious evolution Crystal healing Earth Changes Earth mysteries Ecofeminism Energy Environmentalism Faith healing Feng shui Gaia hypothesis Gaia philosophy Gnosis Goddess movement Higher consciousness Idealism Indigo children Intuition Karma Law of attraction Lemuria Magic Meditation Mediumship Michael Teachings Odic force Paganism Pantheism Parapsychology Perception Perennial philosophy Quantum mysticism Qi Reincarnation Religious pluralism Supernatural Tantra UFOs Veganism Vegetarianism Visualization Wellness Yoga Proponents or individual influences José Argüelles Richard Bach Alice Bailey Annie Besant Helena Blavatsky Gregg Braden Rhonda Byrne Eileen Caddy Marjorie Cameron Lee Carroll Edgar Cayce Deepak Chopra Andrew Cohen Benjamin Creme Aleister Crowley Scott Cunningham Adi Da Ram Dass Wayne Dyer Werner Erhard Marilyn Ferguson Debbie Ford Gandalf Linda Goodman Glenda Green Alex Grey Michael Harner Esther Hicks Barbara Marx Hubbard David Icke Timothy Leary John Lilly Max Freedom Long Shirley MacLaine Leon MacLaren Terence McKenna Corinne McLaughlin Michael Mirdad Tony Nader Mariam Nour Leonard Orr Jack Parsons Daniel Quinn Rajneesh James Redfield Wilhelm Reich Jane Roberts Helena Roerich Walter Russell Mark Satin Helen Schucman John Selby Ravi Shankar David Spangler Joshua David Stone Ingo Swann Herbert Sutcliffe Michael Talbot William Thetford Eckhart Tolle Neale Donald Walsch Alan Watts Ken Wilber Stuart Wilde Marianne Williamson Robert Anton Wilson Oprah Winfrey Fred Alan Wolf Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Other influences Advaita Vedanta Animism Anthroposophy Ariosophy Ascended Master Teachings Astrology Beat Generation Buddhism Cannabis culture Cognitive science Conspiracy theories Discordianism Eight-circuit model of consciousness Entheogens Esalen Institute Esoteric Christianity Esotericism Freemasonry Fringe science Gnosticism Hermeticism Hinduism Hippie subculture Human Potential Movement Huna Integral theory Kabbalah Leather subculture Metaphysics Neuro-linguistic programming New Thought Nonviolence Occultism Paganism Neo-Druidism Neotantra Wicca Postmodernism Pseudoarchaeology Pseudoscience Psychedelic music Quantum mechanics Radical Faeries Rastafari movement Rosicrucianism School of Economic Science Science fiction Seth Material Shamanism Shinto Spiritism Spiritualism Spirituality Sufism Taoism Thelema Theosophy Traditionalist School Transhumanism Transpersonal psychology Zen v t e Pseudoscience Terminology Cargo cult science Charlatan Crank Fringe theory Fringe science Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Junk science Paranormal Pathological science Quackery Snake oil Crocodile oil Superseded scientific theory True-believer syndrome Voodoo Science Topics characterized as pseudoscience 2012 phenomenon Acupuncture Adrenal fatigue Alchemy Alternative medicine Ancient astronauts Anthroposophic medicine Applied kinesiology Aquatic ape hypothesis Astrology Bates method Biodynamic agriculture Biorhythms Bloodletting Body memory Catastrophism Chiropractic Chromotherapy Conspiracy theory 5G conspiracy 9/11 conspiracy theories Chemtrail conspiracy theory Climate change denial COVID-19 misinformation Moon landing conspiracy theories Conversion therapy Correactology Creation science Cryonics Cryptozoology Crystal healing Cupping Detoxification Colon cleansing Dianetics Doctrine of signatures Doktor Koster's Antigaspills Dowsing Ear candling Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Electronic voice phenomenon Eugenics Facilitated communication Feng shui Flat Earth theory Germ theory denialism Graphology HIV/AIDS denialism Hollow Earth theory Homeopathy Humorism Indigo children Intelligent design Iridology Japhetic theory Levitation Lunar effect Lysenkoism Magnet therapy Mediumship Miracle Mineral Supplement Naturopathy Nazi archaeology Nibiru cataclysm Numerology Orgone Palmistry Panchagavya Patent medicine Perpetual motion Phrenology Polygraph Primal therapy Pseudoarchaeology Pseudohistory Genocide denial Historical negationism Holocaust denial Pseudoscientific metrology Psychohistory Quantum mysticism Rapid prompting method Recovered-memory therapy Reiki Scientific racism Aryan race Melanin theory Statement analysis Strauss–Howe generational theory Trepanning Ufology Vertebral subluxation Voice stress analysis Water memory Promoters of pseudoscience Sucharit Bhakdi Deepak Chopra Gaia, Inc. Max Gerson Goop (company) Nicholas Gonzalez William Donald Kelley Jenny McCarthy Theodor Morell Hans Alfred Nieper Mehmet Oz Andrew Wakefield Related topics Bourgeois pseudoscience Demarcation problem Scientific method Suppressed research in the Soviet Union Traditional medicine Resources Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Cults of Unreason Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science Fortean Times JREF Quackwatch Skeptical Inquirer The Natural History of Quackery The Psychology of the Occult The Ragged Edge of Science The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience The Skeptic's Dictionary List of topics characterized as pseudoscience v t e Spiritualism and spiritism History and beliefs Apport Automatic writing Cross-Correspondences Ectoplasm Faith healing Materialization Mediumship Séance Spirit guides Spiritual healing Spirit obsession Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Table-turning Theism Spiritualists Derek Acorah Rosemary Altea Dan Aykroyd Charles Bailey Bangs Sisters Ada Besinnet Stephen E. Braude William Breeze Rosemary Brown Sylvia Browne Eva Carrière Doris Collins Florence Cook Mina Crandon William Crookes Geraldine Cummins Pearl Curran Frank Decker Arthur Conan Doyle Helen Duncan Eddy Brothers Harry Edwards John Edward William Eglinton Colin Evans Fox sisters Leslie Flint Arthur Ford Colin Fry Eileen Garrett Kathleen Goligher Rita Goold Jan Guzyk Robert Hare Alec Harris Gordon Higginson Richard Hodgson Daniel Dunglas Home Elizabeth Hope William Hope Swami Laura Horos Cecil Husk James H. Hyslop Allan Kardec Franek Kluski Gladys Osborne Leonard Oliver Lodge Heinrich Melzer Carmine Mirabelli Francis Ward Monck William Usborne Moore Lorin Morgan-Richards William Stainton Moses Einer Nielsen Eusapia Palladino Leonora Piper Ethel Post-Parrish James Van Praagh Bert Reese Estelle Roberts Jane Roberts William Roy Rudi Schneider Maria Silbert Henry Slade Doris Stokes Emanuel Swedenborg Rosina Thompson Stanisława Tomczyk Ena Twigg George Valiantine Jack Webber Etta Wriedt Chico Xavier Organizations List of Spiritualist organizations Spiritualist churches Spiritist centres London Spiritualist Alliance National Spiritualist Association of Churches Spiritualists' National Union Spiritualist Association of Great Britain Spiritual church movement Arthur Findlay College International Spiritualist Federation Skeptics David Abbott John Henry Anderson George Miller Beard Ruth Brandon Lionel Branson Derren Brown William Carpenter Milbourne Christopher Edward Clodd Edmund Smith Conklin Millais Culpin Stuart Cumberland Eric Dingwall Joseph Dunninger Henry Evans Chris French Martin Gardner G. Stanley Hall Trevor H. Hall William A. Hammond C. E. M. Hansel Carlos María de Heredia Carl Hertz Terence Hines Harry Houdini Joseph Jastrow Stanley LeFevre Krebs Rose Mackenberg David Marks John Nevil Maskelyne Henry Maudsley Joseph McCabe Henry C. McComas Georgess McHargue Charles Arthur Mercier Albert Moll John Mulholland Fulton Oursler Joe Nickell E. Clephan Palmer Ronald Pearsall Frank Podmore Massimo Polidoro Harry Price Julien Proskauer James Randi Donovan Rawcliffe Joseph Rinn C. E. Bechhofer Roberts Chung Ling Soo Gordon Stein Amy Tanner Ivor Lloyd Tuckett Lyttelton Winslow Richard Wiseman v t e Religious Science/Science of Mind Beliefs Spiritual mind treatment Founder Ernest Holmes Notable ministers Fenwicke Holmes Raymond Charles Barker Stuart Grayson Louise Hay Michael Beckwith Joseph Murphy Jean Houston Terry Cole-Whittaker William Hornaday Largest groups Centers for Spiritual Living Seicho-no-Ie Affiliated New Thought Network Global Religious Science Ministries Influences Ralph Waldo Emerson Emma Curtis Hopkins Thomas Troward Mary Baker Eddy Phineas Quimby Emmet Fox Church of Divine Science Other The Science of Mind Science of Mind Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125