Concept of a subtle body, intermediate between the soul and body The Astral Sleep - by Jeroen van Valkenburg The Astral body is a subtle body posited by many philosophers, intermediate between the intelligent soul and the mental body, composed of a subtle material.[1] In many recensions the concept ultimately derives from the philosophy of Plato though the same or similar ideas have existed all over the world well before Plato’s time: it is related to an astral plane, which consists of the planetary heavens of astrology. The term was adopted by nineteenth-century Theosophists and neo-Rosicrucians. The idea is rooted in common worldwide religious accounts of the afterlife[2] in which the soul's journey or "ascent" is described in such terms as "an ecstatic.., mystical or out-of body experience, wherein the spiritual traveller leaves the physical body and travels in his/her subtle body (or dreambody or astral body) into ‘higher’ realms".[3] Hence "the "many kinds of 'heavens', 'hells', and purgatorial existences believed in by followers of innumerable religions" may also be understood as astral phenomena, as may the various "phenomena of the séance room".[4] The phenomenon of apparitional experience is therefore related, as is made explicit in Cicero's Dream of Scipio. The astral body is sometimes said to be visible as an aura of swirling colours.[5] It is widely linked today with out-of-body experiences or astral projection. Where this refers to a supposed movement around the real world, as in Muldoon and Carrington's book The Projection of the Astral Body, it conforms to Madame Blavatsky's usage of the term. Elsewhere this latter is termed "etheric", while "astral" denotes an experience of dream-symbols, archetypes, memories, spiritual beings and visionary landscapes. Contents 1 History 1.1 The classical world 1.2 The Modern Era 1.3 Theosophy 1.4 Post-theosophists 1.5 George Ivanovitch Gurdjieff 2 Scientific reception 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links History[edit] Planes of existence Gross and subtle bodies Theosophy Full list 1. Spiritual plane / Monadic plane / Divine plane : Divine Spirit / Word / Adi 2. Spiritual plane: Holy Spirit / Word 3. Spiritual plane: Spirit / Word 4. Spiritual / Causal plane / Buddhic plane : Human spirit / Oversoul, Soul / Causal body 5 Mental / Causal plane: Mind, Causal body, Mental body, Projection / OBE 6. Astral-Ethereal plane: Life / Ether-Astral body, Projection / OBE 7. Material plane: Material body Rosicrucian The 7 Worlds & the 7 Cosmic Planes The Seven-fold constitution of Man The Ten-fold constitution of Man Thelema Body of light | Thelemic mysticism Hermeticism Hermeticism | Cosmogony Surat Shabda Yoga Cosmology Jainism Jain cosmology Sufism Sufi cosmology Hinduism Talas/Lokas - Tattvas, Kosas, Upadhis Buddhism Buddhist cosmology Gnosticism Aeons, Archons Kabbalah Atziluth > Beri'ah > Yetzirah > Assiah Sephirot Fourth Way Ray of Creation The Laws Three Centers and Five Centers This box: view talk edit The classical world[edit] Neoplatonism is a branch of classical philosophy that uses the works of Plato as a guide to understanding religion and the world. In the Myth of Er, particularly, Plato rendered an account of the afterlife which involved a journey through seven planetary spheres and then eventual reincarnation. He taught that man was composed of mortal body, immortal reason and an intermediate "spirit".[6] Neoplatonists agreed as to the immortality of the rational soul but disagreed as to whether man's "irrational soul" was immortal and celestial ("starry", hence astral) or whether it remained on earth and dissolved after death. The late Neoplatonist Proclus, who is credited the first to speak of subtle "planes", posited two subtle bodies or "carriers" (okhema) intermediate between the rational soul and the physical body. These were; 1) the astral vehicle which was the immortal vehicle of the Soul and 2) the spiritual (pneuma) vehicle, aligned with the vital breath, which he considered mortal.[7] The word "astral" means "of the stars", thus the astral plane, consisting of the celestial spheres, is held to be an astrological phenomenon: "The whole of the astral portion of our earth and of the physical planets, together with the purely astral planets of our System, make up collectively the astral body of the Solar Logos". There are "seven types of astral matter" by means of which "psychic changes occur periodically".[8] The Modern Era[edit] Such ideas greatly influenced mediaeval religious thought and are visible in the Renaissance medicine of Paracelsus and Servetus. In the romantic era, alongside the discovery of electromagnetism and the nervous system, there came a new interest in the spirit world. Franz Anton Mesmer spoke of the stars, animal magnetism and magnetic fluids. In 1801, the English occultist Francis Barrett wrote of a herb's "excellent astral and magnetic powers" - for herbalists had categorised herbs according to their supposed correspondence with the seven planetary influences. In the mid-nineteenth century the French occultist Eliphas Levi wrote much of "the astral light", a factor he considered of key importance to magic, alongside the power of will and the doctrine of correspondences. He considered the astral light the medium of all light, energy and movement, describing it in terms that recall both Mesmer and the luminiferous ether.[9] Levi's idea of the astral was to have much influence in the English-speaking world through the teachings of The Golden Dawn, but it was also taken up by Helena Blavatsky and discussed in the key work of Theosophy, The Secret Doctrine. Levi seems to have been regarded by later Theosophists as the immediate source from which the term was adopted into their sevenfold schema of planes and bodies, though there was slight confusion as to the term's proper use. Theosophy[edit] Blavatsky frequently used the term "astral body" in connection with the Indian linga sharira which is one of the seven principles of human life. However, she said that "there are various astral bodies".[10] For example, she talked of one as being constituted by "the lower manas and volition, kama"[11] According to the Theosophical founder William Q. Judge "There are many names for the Astral Body. Here are a few: Linga Sarira, Sanskrit, meaning design body, and the best one of all; ethereal double; phantom; wraith; apparition; doppelganger; personal man; perispirit; irrational soul; animal soul; Bhuta; elementary; spook; devil; demon. Some of these apply only to the astral body when devoid of the corpus after death." [12] C.W. Leadbeater and Annie Besant (Theosophical Society Adyar), equated it with Blavatsky's Kama (desire) principle and called it the Emotional body. Astral body, desire body, and emotional body became synonymous, and this identification is found in later Theosophically-inspired thought. The astral body in later Theosophy is "the vehicle of feelings and emotions" through which "it is possible...to experience all varieties of desire". We have a "life in the astral body, whilst the physical body is wrapped in slumber". So the astral body "provides a simple explanation of the mechanism of many phenomena revealed by modern psycho-analysis".[13] To this extent, then, the "astral body" is a reification of the dream-world self. Post-theosophists[edit] Anonymous Flammarion engraving (1888). According to Max Heindel's Rosicrucian writings the Desire body is made of desire stuff from which human beings form feelings and emotions. It is said to appear to spiritual sight as an ovoid cloud extending from sixteen to twenty inches beyond the physical body. It has a number of whirling vortices (chakras) and from the main vortex, in the region of the liver, there is a constant flow which radiates and returns.[14] The desire body exhibits colors that vary in every person according to his or her temperament and mood. However, the astral body (or "Soul body") must be evolved by means of the work of transmutation and will eventually be evolved by humanity as a whole. According to Heindel, the term "astral body" was employed by the mediaeval Alchemists because of the ability it conferred to traverse the "starry" regions. The "Astral body" is regarded as the "Philosopher's Stone" or "Living Stone" of the alchemist, the "Wedding Garment" of the Gospel of Matthew[15] and the "Soul body" that Paul mentions in the First Epistle to the Corinthians[16] Many other popular accounts of post-Theosophical ideas appeared in the late 20th century. Barbara Brennan's Hands of Light distinguishes between the emotional body and the astral body. She sees these as two distinct layers in the seven-layered "Human Energy Field". The emotional body pertains to the physical universe, the astral body to the astral world. The Mother sometimes referred to the astral body and experiences on the astral plane. The Indian master Osho occasionally made use of a modified Theosophical terminology. According to Samael Aun Weor, who popularised Theosophical thought in Latin America, the astral body is the part of human soul related to emotions, represented by the sephirah Hod in the kabbalistic Tree of Life. However the common person only has a kamarupa, body of desire or "lunar astral body," a body related to animal emotions, passions and desires, while the true human emotional vehicle is the solar astral body, which can be crystallised through Tantric sex. The solar astral body is the first mediator between the Cosmic Christ, Chokmah, and the individual human soul.[17] George Ivanovitch Gurdjieff[edit] "What is called the ‘body-Kesdjan,’ or, as they themselves later began to name this being-part of theirs—of which, by the way, contemporary beings know only by hearsay—the ‘Astral-body.’"[18] "At first on the planet itself the ‘second-being-body,’ i.e., the body-Kesdjan, together with the ‘third-being-body’ separate themselves from the ‘fundamental-planetary-body’ and, leaving this planetary body on the planet, rise both together to that sphere where those cosmic substances— from the localizations of which the body-Kesdjan of a being arises—have their place of concentration. “And only there, at the end of a certain time, does the principal and final sacred Rascooarno occur to this two-natured arising, after which such a ‘higher being-part’ indeed becomes an independent individual with its own individual Reason."[19] According to Gurdjieff it is an independent arising which is intermediate between the physical body and the Soul. Gurdjieff refers to the astral body as the "body Kesdjan" or "vessel of the soul": it is of the sun and all planets, just as the physical body is of the earth. While it is not developed one is a "human being only in quotation marks", who cannot be considered in any meaningful sense to have a soul and who will "die like a dog".[20] Scientific reception[edit] There is no scientific evidence that an astral body exists. Psychologist Donovan Rawcliffe, who assumes the existence of the astral body to be a myth, has written that "delusions and hallucinations due to acenesthesia or hysteria have undoubtedly helped to perpetuate the myth of the astral body."[21] David Barreto attempted to theorize in his 2019 book The Supernatural Science: Theory and Magic that the astral body is made up of multidimensional particles, which would include baryons, leptons, and neutrinos.[22] According to Barreto "If the astral body was to be condensed as physical molecules, it would be associated to molecules that constitute silicon dioxide, since the two elements have acutely similar frequency amplitudes, albeit in different dimensions." However, no apparent scientific research was developed to validate such a declaration. References[edit] ^ Arthur A.Powell, stral Body and other Astral Phenomena, The Theosophical Publishing House, London, England; Wheaton,Ill, U.S.A.; Adyar, Chennai, India, 1927, reprinted in 1954 and 1965, page 7, online July 2012 at http://hpb.narod.ru/AstralBodyByPowell-A.htm ^ Suki Miller, After Death: How People around the World Map the Journey after Death (1995). ^ Dr. Roger J. Woolger, Beyond Death: Transition and the Afterlife, accessed online June 2008 at the website of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/PDF/RWoolgerTransition.pdf. ^ Powell, op.cit. ^ C.W. Leadbeater, Man, Visible and Invisible; Barbara Brennan, Hands of Light; Dora Van Gelder Kunz, The Personal Aura; Barbara Y. Martin, Change Your Aura, Change Your Life. ^ Plato, The Republic, trans. Desmond Lee, Harmondsworth. ^ Dodds, E.R. Proclus: The Elements of Theology. A revised text with translation, introduction, and commentary, 2nd edition 1963, Appendix. ^ Powell, op. cit. page 9. ^ Chic Cicero, Chic C, Sandra Tabatha Cicero The Essential Golden Dawn, Llewellyn Worldwide, 2003. ^ Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna. "Collected Writings vol. XII". (Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House), 705. ^ Collected Writings vol. V (Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House), fn. 81 ^ William Judge, The Ocean of Theosophy 2nd Ed. TPH, 1893, Chapter 5, book online June 2008 at http://www.theosociety.org/pasadena/ocean/oce-hp.htm ^ Powell, op. cit. Ch.1 passim. ^ Currents in the desire body ^ Cf. Matthew 22:1-14 ^ Cf. 1Cor 15:44 Archived 2011-06-06 at the Wayback Machine (concordance Greek/Textus Receptus): "It is sown a soul body [Gr. "soma" – body and "psuchicon" – psu(y)che – soul; mistranslated "natural body"]; it is raised a spiritual body (...)" ^ Samael Aun Weor (1953), The Seven Words, Thelema Press ^ All and Everything: Beelzebub's Tales to His Grandson, CH 16 The Relative Understanding of Time ^ All and Everything: Beelzebub's Tales to His Grandson, Ch 39 The Holy Planet Purgatory ^ Kenneth Walker, A Study of Gurdjieff's Teachings. ^ Rawcliffe, Donovan. (1988). Occult and Supernatural Phenomena. Dover Publications. p. 123. ISBN 0-486-25551-4 ^ BARRETO, David (2019). Ghosts. The Supernatural Science: Theory and Magic. First Edition. London. ISBN 978-1-9162111-4-8 Sources[edit] Besant, Annie, Theosophical Manual No. VII: Man and His Bodies, London, Theosophical Publishing House, 1914. Brennan, Barbara Ann, Hands of Light : A Guide to Healing Through the Human Energy Field, Bantam Books, 1987. ----- Light Emerging: The Journey of Personal Healing, Bantam Books, 1993. C. W. Leadbeater, Man, Visible and Invisible, London, Theosophical Publishing House, 1902. Kunz, Dora van Gelder, The Personal Aura, Wheaton, IL, Quest Books/Theosophical Publishing House, 1991. [Carl Edwin Lindgren]. 2005. Debunking Auras and Aura Cameras. Martin, Barbara Y., with Dmitri Moraitis, Change Your Aura, Change Your Life, Sunland, CA, Wisdomlight, 2003. The Mother (Alfassa, Mirra) Collected Works of the Mother. ----- The Agenda Poortman, J.J. Vehicles of Consciousness; The Concept of Hylic Pluralism (Ochema), vol I-IV, The Theosophical Society in Netherlands, 1978. Powell, Arthur E. The Astral Body and other Astral Phenomena Steiner, Rudolf, Theosophy: An introduction to the supersensible knowledge of the world and the destination of man. London: Rudolf Steiner Press. (1904) 1970. ----- Occult Science - An Outline. Trans. George and Mary Adams. London: Rudolf Steiner Press, 1909, 1969. Heindel, Max, The Rosicrucian Mysteries (Chapter IV: The Constitution of Man: Vital Body - Desire Body - Mind), 1911, ISBN 0-911274-86-3. Walker, Benjamin, Beyond the Body: The Human Double, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1974, ISBN 0-7100-7808-0; Fitzhenry, Toronto, 1974; Arkana, 1988, ISBN 0-14-019169-0. Yogananda, Paramahansa, Autobiography of a Yogi, Los Angeles, CA: Self-Realization Fellowship, 1946, Chapter 43. External links[edit] the Astral Body Song and diagram showing Gurdjieff's Kesdjanian Body v t e Theosophy Theosophical Society founders Helena Blavatsky William Quan Judge Henry Steel Olcott People Alice Bailey Annie Besant Jiddu Krishnamurti C.W. Leadbeater Arthur E. Powell Gottfried de Purucker Helena Roerich Nicholas Roerich A. P. Sinnett Rukmini Devi Arundale Jinarajadasa Walter Evans-Wentz Bertram Keightley Constance Wachtmeister W. B. Yeats More... Theosophical texts Isis Unveiled The Key to Theosophy The Mahatma Letters to A.P. Sinnett The Secret Doctrine Theosophical Glossary The Voice of the Silence More... Philosophical concepts Astral body Astral plane Mental body Mental plane Round (Theosophy) Septenary (Theosophy) Universal Brotherhood More... Institutions, publications Blavatsky Lodge Theosophical Society Theosophical Society Adyar Theosophical Society Pasadena United Lodge of Theosophists Lucifer Sunrise The Theosophist The Theosophical Movement More... Related Agni Yoga Anthroposophy Buddhism and Theosophy Christianity and Theosophy Esotericism Hinduism and Theosophy Maitreya Neo-Theosophy Plane (cosmology) Spiritual evolution Theosophical mysticism Theosophy and literature Theosophy and visual arts Theosophy and Western philosophy Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125