Greek Stoic philosopher (c.74 BC - 7 AD) For other people, see Athenodoros. Athenodorus Cananites Ἀθηνόδωρος Κανανίτης Athenodorus and the ghost, by Henry Justice Ford, c.1900 Born c. 74 BC Canana, near Tarsus Died 7 AD Era Ancient philosophy Region Western philosophy School Stoicism Warning: Page using Template:Infobox philosopher with unknown parameter "native_name_lang" (this message is shown only in preview). Warning: Page using Template:Infobox philosopher with unknown parameter "parents" (this message is shown only in preview). Warning: Page using Template:Infobox philosopher with unknown parameter "occupation" (this message is shown only in preview). Athenodorus Cananites (Greek: Ἀθηνόδωρος Κανανίτης, Athenodoros Kananites; c. 74 BC – 7 AD) was a Stoic philosopher. Life[edit] Athenodorus was born in Canana, near Tarsus (in modern-day Turkey); his father was Sandon.[1] He was a student of Posidonius of Rhodes, and the teacher of Octavian (the future Caesar Augustus) at Apollonia. He was a personal friend of Strabo, from whom we derive some knowledge of his life.[2] In 44 BC, he seems to have followed Octavian to Rome and continued mentoring him there. He is reputed there to have openly rebuked the Emperor, and to have instructed him to recite the alphabet before reacting in anger. Later, Athenodorus returned to Tarsus, where he was instrumental in expelling the government of Boëthus and drafting a new constitution for the city, the result of which was a pro-Roman oligarchy.[3] Athenodorus is also written of by Pliny the Younger, who tells us of Athenodorus' renting of a haunted house in Athens. Athenodorus was wary because the house was exceptionally cheap for its size. When Athenodorus was writing a book of philosophy, late at night, a ghost is said to have come to him. The ghost, who was bound with chains, beckoned Athenodorus to follow him, but was allegedly indicated by Athenodorus to wait. After he finished his writing, the ghost led him to a courtyard, and suddenly vanished. Athenodorus marked the spot, and the next day, with the permission of the city magistrates, he dug up the earth from that spot, where he found the skeleton of an old man, bound with chains. After the skeleton was given a proper burial with full honours, the ghost was said to have never haunted that house again.[4] Works[edit] Strabo, Cicero, and Eusebius regarded him highly. Works attributed to Athenodorus include: A work against the Categories of Aristotle (although this is sometimes credited to Athenodoros Cordylion). A history of Tarsus. A work of some kind dedicated to Octavia Minor.[5] A work entitled περὶ σπουδῆς και παιδείας ("On zeal and education"). A work entitled περίπατοι ("Perambulations"). None of these are extant, but he also assisted Cicero in writing his De Officiis and it has been suggested that his work may have influenced Seneca and Saint Paul.[3] Following his death, the people of Tarsus held an annual festival and sacrifice in his honour. Notes[edit] ^ Strabo, xiv. 14 ^  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Athenodorus s.v.". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 831. ^ a b Chisholm 1911. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChisholm1911 (help) ^ Pliny the Younger (1909–14). "LXXXIII. To Sura". In Charles W. Eliot (ed.). Letters, by Pliny the Younger; translated by William Melmoth; revised by F. C. T. Bosanquet. The Harvard Classics. 9. New York: P.F. Collier & Son. ^ Plutarch: Life of Publicola 17. v t e Stoicism Philosophers Early Zeno of Citium Persaeus Aristo Sphaerus Herillus Cleanthes Chrysippus Zeno of Tarsus Crates of Mallus Diogenes of Babylon Dioscorides Zenodotus Dionysius of Cyrene Apollodorus Antipater of Tarsus Middle Panaetius Dardanus Mnesarchus Hecato Posidonius Diodotus Diotimus Geminus Antipater of Tyre Athenodorus Cananites Late Seneca Cornutus Musonius Rufus Euphrates Cleomedes Epictetus Hierocles Junius Rusticus Marcus Aurelius Chaeremon Mara bar Serapion Philosophy Stoicism categories logic passions physics Neostoicism Modern Stoicism Concepts Adiaphora Apatheia Ataraxia Ekpyrosis Eudaimonia Katalepsis Kathekon Logos Oikeiôsis Pneuma Prohairesis Sophos Works Epictetus Discourses Enchiridion Marcus Aurelius Meditations Seneca Letters to Lucilius Essays: Anger Benefits Clemency Constancy Happiness Leisure Providence Shortness of Life Tranquillity Consolations Other Lectures (Musonius Rufus) On Passions (Chrysippus) Republic (Zeno) Related articles Paradoxa Stoicorum Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta Stoic Opposition Moral intellectualism Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125