For other uses, see Ate (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Other deities Personified concepts Achlys Adikia Alala Algos Amphillogiai Androktasiai Angelia Apate Atë Bia Charites Dike Dysnomia Epiales Eris Eros Harmonia Hedone Homados Horae Horkos Hypnos Hysminai Kratos Kydoimos Lampetia Limos Machai Metis Mnemosyne Moirai Neikea Nemesis Nike Palioxis Phaethusa Phonoi Polemos Ponos Proioxis Thanatos Themis Zelus v t e Atë, Até or Aite (/ˈeɪtiː/; Ancient Greek: ἄτη) is the Greek goddess of mischief, delusion, ruin, and folly. Até also refers to an action performed by a hero that leads to their death or downfall. Mythology personifies Atë as the daughter either of Zeus or of Eris.[1] Contents 1 Classical references 2 Post-classical 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Classical references[edit] Homer's Iliad (Book 19) depicts Atë as the eldest daughter of Zeus (with no mother mentioned). On Hera's instigation, Atë used her influence over Zeus so that he swore an oath that on that day a great mortal man descended from him would be born (brought into the light by Eileithyia, goddess of "birth-pangs"), who would become lord of all men who dwell about him (the Argives). Hera immediately arranged to delay the birth of Heracles to Alcmene and bring forth Eurystheus prematurely (to whom Heracles would later become subject), born to Nicippe (unnamed), wife of Sthenelus. In anger, Zeus flung Atë by her hair down to earth, from the starry heavens, forever forbidding her return to Mount Olympus and heaven (the starry sky). Atë then wandered about, treading on the heads of men rather than on the earth, wreaking havoc and delusion amongst mortals. The Litae ("Prayers") follow after her, but Atë is fast and far outruns them. The Bibliotheca (3.143) claims that when thrown down by Zeus, Atë landed on a peak in Phrygia called by her name. There Ilus later, following a cow, founded the city of Ilion, known as Troy. This flourish is chronologically at odds with Homer's dating of Atë's fall. Hesiod's Theogony (l.230) makes Atë the daughter of Eris ("Strife"), with no father mentioned. In Nonnus' Dionysiaca (11.113), at Hera's instigation Atë persuades the boy Ampelus whom Dionysus passionately loves, to impress Dionysus by riding on a bull from which Ampelus subsequently falls and breaks his neck. In the Argonautica of Apollonius of Rhodes (4.817), Hera says that "even the gods are sometimes visited by Atë" (translated by Richard Hunter as "even gods make mistakes"). Post-classical[edit] In the play Julius Caesar, Shakespeare introduces the goddess Atë as an invocation of vengeance and menace. Mark Antony, lamenting Caesar's murder, envisions: "And Caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge, With Atë by his side come hot from Hell, Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice Cry "Havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war ... Shakespeare also mentions her in the play Much Ado About Nothing, when Benedick says, referring to Beatrice, "Come, talk not of her. You shall find her the infernal Atë in good apparel" (2.1.251-252). [2] So too, in King John, Shakespeare refers to Queen Eleanor as "An Ate stirring [John] to blood and strife" (2.1.63), and in Love's Labours Lost Birone jeers "Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir them on! stir them on!" (5.2. 688-9). In Spenser's The Faerie Queene, a fiend from Hell disguised as a beautiful woman is called Ate. This is a possible parallel to the fallen angels. In her book The March of Folly, Barbara Tuchman notes that the earth has been called The Meadow of Atë.[3] See also[edit] Folly (allegory) Lucifer Nemesis 111 Ate Notes[edit] ^ Atsma, Aaron J. "Ate". Theoi Greek Mythology. Retrieved 2014-11-08. ^ Shakespeare, William. "Much Ado About Nothing" (PDF). Folger Shakespeare Library. Retrieved 30 November 2020. ^ Tuchman, B., The March of Folly, p. 47, Alfred A. Knopf, 1984 References[edit] Calasso, Roberto – The Marriage of Cadmus and Harmony E.R. Dodds, The Greeks and the Irrational, University of California Press. Grimal, Pierre, The Dictionary of Classical Mythology, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996, ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1. "Ate" p. 65 Hesiod's Theogony Smith, William; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, London (1873). "Ate" Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125