"Thanh Long" redirects here. For the fruit known as "Thanh Long", see Dragonfruit. API Qīnglóng sculpture on the eaves tile Chinese name Traditional Chinese 青龍 Simplified Chinese 青龙 Literal meaning Blue-green Dragon Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Qīnglóng Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Cheng1 Lung4 Jyutping Ceng1 Lung4 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Chheⁿ-lêng or Chhiⁿ-lêng Vietnamese name Vietnamese alphabet Thanh Long Chữ Hán 青龍 Korean name Hangul 청룡 Hanja 靑龍 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Cheongnyong Japanese name Kanji 青竜 Hiragana せいりゅう Transcriptions Revised Hepburn Seiryū Kunrei-shiki Seiryuu The Azure Dragon on the national flag of China during the Qing dynasty, 1889-1912 The Azure Dragon on the Chinese national emblem, 1913-1928 The Azure Dragon (Chinese: 青龍 Qīnglóng), also known as Blue-green Dragon, Green Dragon, or the Blue Dragon (蒼龍 Cānglóng), is one of the Dragon Gods who represent the mount or chthonic forces of the Five Forms of the Highest Deity (五方上帝 Wǔfāng Shàngdì). He is also one of the Four Symbols of the Chinese constellations, which are the astral representations of the Wufang Shangdi. The Azure Dragon represents the east and the spring season.[1] The Dragon is frequently referred to in the media, feng shui, other cultures, and in various venues as the Green Dragon and the Avalon Dragon.[2] His cardinal direction's epithet is "Bluegreen Dragon of the East" (東方青龍 Dōngfāng Qīnglóng or 東方蒼龍 Dōngfāng Cānglóng). This dragon is also known as Seiryu in Japanese, Cheongnyong in Korean and Thanh Long in Vietnamese. Contents 1 Seven Mansions of the Azure Dragon 2 Cultural depictions 3 Influence 3.1 Japan 3.2 Korea 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Seven Mansions of the Azure Dragon[edit] As with the other three Symbols, there are seven astrological "Mansions" (positions of the Moon) within the Azure Dragon. The names and determinative stars are:[3][4] Mansion no. Name (pinyin) Translation Determinative star 1 角 (Jiăo) Horn Spica 2 亢 (Kàng) Neck κ Vir 3 氐 (Dĭ) Root α Lib 4 房 (Fáng) Room π Sco 5 心 (Xīn) Heart Antares 6 尾 (Wěi) Tail μ Sco 7 箕 (Jī) Winnowing Basket γ Sgr Cultural depictions[edit] The Azure Dragon on a road marker at Yangshan Quarry In the Romance of the Tales of the Tang (Shuo Tang Yanyi), the White Tiger's star is reincarnated as General Luo Cheng (simplified Chinese: 罗成; traditional Chinese: 羅成), who serves Li Shimin. The Azure Dragon's Star is reincarnated as General Shan Xiongxin (单雄信; 單雄信), who serves Wang Shichong. The two generals are sworn brothers of Qin Shubao (秦叔宝; 秦叔寶), Cheng Zhijie (程知节; 程知節) and Yuchi Gong (尉迟恭; 尉遲恭). After death, their souls are said to possess heroes of the Tang dynasty and Goguryeo, such as Xue Rengui (薛仁贵; 薛仁貴) and Yeon Gaesomun (淵蓋蘇文). The Azure Dragon appears as a door god at Taoist temples. He was represented on the tomb of Wang Hui (stone coffin, east side) at Xikang in Lushan. A rubbing of this was collected by David Crockett Graham and is in the Field Museum of Natural History.[5][6] The dragon featured on the Chinese national flag in 1862-1912, and on the Twelve Symbols national emblem from 1913-1928. Influence[edit] Azure Dragon presiding the ablution well of the Shinto Heian Shrine in Japan. Japan[edit] In Japan, the Azure Dragon is one of the four guardian spirits of cities and is said to protect the city of Kyoto on the east.[7] The west is protected by the White Tiger, the north is protected by the Black Tortoise, the south is protected by the Vermilion Bird, and the center is protected by the Yellow Dragon.[7] In Kyoto, there are temples dedicated to each of these guardian spirits. The Azure Dragon is represented in the Kiyomizu Temple in eastern Kyoto. Before the entrance of the temple there is a statue of the dragon, which is said to drink from the waterfall within the temple complex at nighttime. Therefore, each year a ceremony is held to worship the dragon of the east. In 1983, the Kitora Tomb was found in the village of Asuka. All four guardians were painted on the walls (in the corresponding directions) and a system of the constellations was painted on the ceiling. This is one of the few ancient records of the four guardians. Korea[edit] In Korea, the murals of the Goguryeo tombs found at Uhyon-ni in South Pyongan province features the Azure Dragon and the other mythological creatures of the four symbols.[8] Gallery[edit] The Azure Dragon mural depiction at the Goguryeo tombs. Depiction of the Azure Dragon on a tile. The Azure Dragon by a fountain in Kiyomizu Temple, Kyoto. See also[edit] Chinese dragon Thundurus References[edit] ^ Tom, K.S. (1989). Echoes from Old China: Life, Legends, and Lore of the Middle Kingdom. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 55. ISBN 9780824812850 – via Internet Archive. ^ Lee, Ki-Baik; Wagner, Edward W. (1984). A new history of Korea (Translated ed.). Cambridge / Seoul: Harvard University Press / Ilchokak. ISBN 978-0-674-61576-2. ^ "The Chinese Sky". International Dunhuang Project. Archived from the original on 2015-11-04. Retrieved 2011-06-25. ^ Sun, Xiaochun (1997). Helaine Selin (ed.). Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures. Kluwer Academic Publishers. p. 517. ISBN 0-7923-4066-3. Retrieved 2011-06-25. ^ Starr, Kenneth (December 1957). "Gift of Chinese Rubbings goes on Special Exhibition" (PDF). Chicago Natural History Museum Bulletin. Field Museum of Natural History: 4–5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-11-04. Retrieved 1 March 2012. ^ Walravens, Hartmut; Hoshien Tchen; Kenneth Starr; Alice K. Schneider (1981). Catalogue of Chinese Rubbings from Field Museum. Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History. OCLC 185544225. Retrieved 2 March 2012. ^ a b Suzuki, Yui (2011). Medicine Master Buddha: The Iconic Worship of Yakushi in Heian Japan. Brill. p. 21. ISBN 9789004229174 – via Google Books. ^ Lee, Ki-Baik; Wagner, Edward W. (1984). A new history of Korea (Translated ed.). Cambridge / Seoul: Harvard University Press / Ilchokak. ISBN 978-0-674-61576-2. External links[edit] Media related to Azure Dragon Warning: Commons link does not match Wikidata– please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Chinese mythology Overview topics Creation myth Godly world concepts Astrology Dragons Shenmo fiction Gods and immortals Tian Pangu Ghosts Major personages Deities Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Eight Immortals Shennong Yellow Emperor Yan Emperor Chiyou Hou Yi Kuafu Creatures Four Symbols Black Tortoise Azure Dragon White Tiger Vermilion Bird Yellow Dragon Four Benevolent Animals Qilin Fenghuang Yinglong Spirit turtle Huli jing Chinese guardian lions Pixiu (Bixie) Nian Wuzhiqi Yeren Fox spirit Four Perils (Four Evildoers) Places Fusang Penglai Diyu Kunlun Mountain Youdu Longmen Popular literary works Classic of Mountains and Seas Shi Yi Ji The Peach Blossom Spring The Four Journeys Investiture of the Gods Legend of the White Snake The Sorcerer's Revolt Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio Journey to the West Soushen Ji Tian Xian Pei What the Master Would Not Discuss Heavenly Questions (Chu Ci) Huainanzi Records of the Grand Historian v t e Chinese constellations Three Enclosures (三垣) Purple Forbidden enclosure (紫微垣) Supreme Palace enclosure (太微垣) Heavenly Market enclosure (天市垣) Four Symbols (四象) and Twenty-Eight Mansions (二十八宿) East – Azure Dragon (青龍) Horn (角) Neck (亢) Root (氐) Room (房) Heart (心) Tail (尾) Winnowing Basket (箕) South – Vermilion Bird (朱雀) Well (井) Ghost (鬼) Willow (柳) Star (星) Extended Net (張) Wings (翼) Chariot (軫) West – White Tiger (白虎) Legs (奎) Bond (婁) Stomach (胃) Hairy Head (昴) Net (畢) Turtle Beak (觜) Three Stars (參) North – Black Tortoise (玄武) Dipper (斗) Ox (牛) Girl (女) Emptiness (虛) Rooftop (危) Encampment (室) Wall (壁) Center – Yellow Dragon (黃龍) Earth