Tincture of blue in heraldry This article is about the heraldic tincture. For the colour, see Azure (color). For other uses, see Azure (disambiguation). Azure   Class Colour Non-heraldic equivalent Blue Monochromatic designations Hatching pattern   Tricking abbr. b. - Az., bl. Poetic designations Heavenly body Jupiter, ♃ Jewel Sapphire In heraldry, azure (/ˈæʒər, ˈæz.jʊər/ AZH-ər, AZ-yoor)[1] is the tincture with the colour blue, and belongs to the class of tinctures called "colours". In engraving, it is sometimes depicted as a region of horizontal lines or else is marked with either az. or b. as an abbreviation. The term azure derives from the name of the deep blue stone now called lapis lazuli (stone of Lazhward). The word was adopted into Old French by the 12th century, after which the word passed into use in the blazon of coats of arms. As an heraldic colour, the word azure means "blue", and reflects the name for the colour in the language of the French-speaking Anglo-Norman nobles following the Norman Conquest of England. A wide range of colour values is used in the depiction of azure in armory and flags, and in common usage it is often referred to simply as 'blue'. In addition to the standard blue tincture called azure, there is a lighter blue sometimes found that is called bleu celeste or "sky blue". Neither azure nor bleu celeste is precisely defined as a particular shade of blue, but azure is consistently depicted in a much darker shade. Sometimes, the different tinctures are said to be connected with special meanings or virtues, and represent certain elements and precious stones. Even if this is an idea mostly disregarded by serious heraldists throughout the centuries,[2] it may be of anecdotal interest to see what they are, since the information is often asked for. Many sources give different meanings, but azure is often said to represent the following:[3] Of jewels, the sapphire Of heavenly bodies, Jupiter (the planet Jupiter is further associated with the metal tin in traditional alchemical/occultistic lore) Gallery[edit] Arms of Dolní Přím municipality, Hradec Králové District, the Czech Republic. Arms of the Dollern municipality Arms of the municipality of Holtorfsloh, Seevetal, Lower Saxony. Arms of St Cleere family of St Osyth, Essex. Arms of Guy Harpigny See also[edit] Look up azure in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Bleu celeste References[edit] ^ Oxford Dictionary Online, Oxford US Dictionary ^ Woodcock, Thomas; Robinson, John Martin (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 0-19-211658-4. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Elvin, Charles Norton (1889). A Dictionary of Heraldry. v t e Tinctures in heraldry Rule of tincture Tricking system Hatching system "Proper" Fimbriation Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermine Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné (tawny) Non-traditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste (sky blue)   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation (flesh-coloured)   Cendrée (ash grey)   Ochre   Orange   Rose (pink) 1 Rarely used – mostly only in some regional traditions or as relatively modern innovations – and considered unheraldic by some.