1985 film Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend Theatrical release poster Directed by Bill L. Norton Produced by Jonathan T. Taplin Roger Spottiswood Written by Clifford Green Ellen Green Based on The storybook by David Lee Miller Starring William Katt Sean Young Patrick McGoohan Music by Jerry Goldsmith Cinematography John Alcott Edited by David Bretherton Howard Smith Production companies Touchstone Films Silver Screen Partners II Distributed by Buena Vista Distribution Release date March 22, 1985 (1985-03-22) Running time 95 minutes Country United States Language English Box office $14.9 million[1] Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend is a 1985 American adventure fantasy film directed by Bill L. Norton and starring William Katt, Sean Young, Patrick McGoohan, and Julian Fellowes. The film follows paleontologist Susan Matthews-Loomis and her husband George, who stumble upon Brontosaurus on an expedition in Central Africa while trying to track down a local monster. The two are pursued by the African military in an attempt to protect a baby dino and its parents. Produced by Walt Disney Studios and released on its Touchstone Films label, it was first released on March 22, 1985. A recut version aired on American television in 1989 under the title Dinosaur...Secret of the Lost Legend as part of the Wonderful World of Disney.[2] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Soundtrack 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] During an expedition into Central Africa, paleontologist Dr. Susan Matthews-Loomis and her husband George Loomis attempt to track down evidence of a local monster legend. The monster, which the local natives refer to as "Mokele-mbembe", shares many characteristics with the Sauropod order of dinosaurs. During the expedition, they discover Brontosaurus in the deep jungle and are further amazed when the animals show very little fear of them. The couple begins observing the creatures and become especially enamored with the curious young offspring of the pair, whom they nickname "Baby". Unfortunately, the discovery soon places the dinosaurs in jeopardy from both the local military as well as fellow scientist Dr. Eric Kiviat. Whereas Dr. Kiviat sees Baby and his parents as his ticket to fame & fortune, the African military led by Colonel Nsogbu sees the dinosaurs as a threat and makes several attempts to destroy them. During one such attempt, one of the adult Brontosaurus is killed and the other captured. The Loomises are able to escape with Baby, but quickly find themselves lost in the jungle while being pursued by Colonel Nsogbu's forces. After finally escaping their pursuers, the pair decide to circle back and rescue the captive parent, whom Dr. Kiviat has persuaded Colonel Nsogbu to transport back to civilization. With the aid of the local tribe – who see Baby and his parents as legends – George and Susan are able to break into the military compound and release the adult Brontosaurus. During the escape, both Kiviat and Nsogbu are killed. Afterwards, the Loomises take the pair to a secluded jungle lagoon and say a tearful goodbye to Baby as he follows his lone parent away into the deeper parts of the jungle. Cast[edit] William Katt as George Loomis Sean Young as Dr. Susan Matthews-Loomis Patrick McGoohan as Dr. Eric Kiviat Julian Fellowes as Nigel Jenkins Kyalo Mativo as Cephu Hugh Quarshie as Kenge Obe Olu Jacobs as Col. Nsogbu Eddie Tagoe as Sgt. Gwambe Edward Hardwicke as Dr. Pierre Dubois Soundtrack[edit] Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend Film score by Jerry Goldsmith Released April 8, 2008 (2008-04-08) Recorded 1985 Genre Soundtrack Length 53:08 The score to Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend, a hybrid of orchestral and synthetic elements, was composed and conducted by veteran composer Jerry Goldsmith. Goldsmith recalled the experience with such fondness that he insisted it be included in an industry tribute album featuring highlights from his scores in 1993. A limited extended soundtrack was released 8 April 2008 through Intrada Records and features sixteen tracks of score at a running time just over fifty-three minutes.[3] "The Sketch" (0:44) "No Problem" (0:44) "The Visitors" (2:27) "New Friends #1" (1:17) "New Friends #2" (0:33) "The Family" (4:04) "Dad" (7:10) "Tears" (1:25) "The Tent" (2:53) "Dragon Breath" (6:48) "The Search" (3:09) "The Jump" (4:31) "The Captives" (2:01) "Base Camp Assault" (4:15) "The Rescue" (3:37) "Just a Legend" (7:31) Reception[edit] Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend received generally negative reviews; the film currently holds a 13% 'rotten' rating on review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes based on 16 reviews.[4] References[edit] ^ API at Box Office Mojo ^ Wonderful World of Disney Television ^ Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend soundtrack review at Filmtracks.com. Retrieved 2011-03-23. ^ API at Rotten Tomatoes External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API API at IMDb API at AllMovie API at Box Office Mojo API at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Films directed by Bill L. Norton Cisco Pike (1972) More American Graffiti (1979) Baby: Secret of the Lost Legend (1985) Three for the Road (1987) Hercules and the Amazon Women (1994) Hercules in the Underworld (1994) Gone in the Night (1996) Every Mother's Worst Fear (1998)