Backcountry Theatrical release poster Directed by Adam MacDonald Produced by Thomas Michael Written by Adam MacDonald Starring Missy Peregrym Jeff Roop Eric Balfour Nicholas Campbell Music by Frères Lumières Cinematography Christian Bielz Edited by Dev Singh Distributed by IFC Midnight Release date September 8, 2014 (2014-09-08) (TIFF) March 20, 2015 (2015-03-20) (United States) August 14, 2015 (2015-08-14) (Canada) Running time 92 minutes Country Canada Language English Box office $71,874[1] Backcountry is a 2014 Canadian nature–survival horror film, written and directed by Adam MacDonald. It is loosely based on the true story of a hungry man-eating bear that attacked Mark Jordan and Jacqueline Perry, in the back country of Missinaibi Lake Provincial Park, North of Chapleau, Ontario in 2005, events for which Mark later received the Star of Courage award from Governor General Michaëlle Jean.[2][3][4] Theatrical release was scheduled for August 14, 2015.[5] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Release 5 Reception 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] Alex (Jeff Roop) prepares to take his girlfriend Jen (Missy Peregrym) camping for the weekend. When they arrive, a park ranger tells them the trail Alex wanted to take is closed and suggests they hike elsewhere; Alex refuses a map, confident that he knows the park well. After a canoe trip down river, Alex injures his foot. Night falls and they set up camp. During dinner, they encounter a tour guide called Brad (Eric Balfour) who flirts with Jen, which irritates Alex. Brad implies he would be more suited to take Jen on a hike. Though Alex and Jen initially planned on not hiking far, the next morning Alex decides to go off-trail, deeper into the park where Alex remembers there is a lake with a waterfall. On the way, he spots a bear paw print but does not tell Jen. The pair also discover a mauled, half-devoured deer. When they finally arrive at where Alex believes the lake is, they discover it is not and he realises he is lost. Jen looks for her cell phone but Alex reveals he removed it from her backpack and put it in the car, concerned that it would distract her. He also admits his knowledge of the area is less impressive than he first claimed; he has not hiked the area since high school. Jen lashes out at him, revealing that she never wanted to come on the trip. Alex reveals he was bringing her to the lake to propose. They make camp and Jen apologises, then the two tend to Alex's injured bloody foot, which has unknowingly been attracting predators. During the night as the pair sleep, a bear approaches the camp and sniffs the tent. Later that morning, they find that all of their food has been eaten. As they continue hiking they come across a bear bed, realising they are in dangerous territory, and decide to walk as far as possible before it gets dark. The next morning, Alex awakens to see the bear a few metres from the tent and getting closer. The bear claws through the tent and claws Jen on the arm. Alex, trying to protect her, is attacked too. Jen briefly wards the bear off with bear spray but it returns and drags Alex out of the tent, and begins eating him alive. Jen flees. Now without any food or shelter, Jen sleeps in a tree and wakes up to the sound of a helicopter overhead, but fails to get its attention. Stalked again by the bear, Jen manages to escape it by climbing down the waterfall, but she slips and breaks her ankle. Using a makeshift splint, she limps through the park at night using her road flare as a guide. After collapsing against a tree, suffering from her wounds, she awakes to see a deer grazing in front of her, motivating her to continue. Miraculously, Jen makes it back to their canoe. Paddling back to the lodge, she collapses on the beach in sight of Brad, who is getting ready to lead a tour, and he races over to help her. Cast[edit] Missy Peregrym as Jen Jeff Roop as Alex Eric Balfour as Brad Nicholas Campbell as the Ranger Production[edit] Casting began in October 2013 with Missy Peregrym, Eric Balfour, Nicholas Campbell and Jeff Roop being named for the script.[6] The movie was filmed in Powassan, Ontario as well as Caddy Lake, Manitoba. Release[edit] The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 8, 2014.[7] D Films acquired 25% of the film's ownership and the Canadian distribution rights while Uwe Boll's Event Film Distribution bought another 25% ownership and the non-Canadian distribution rights, the latter of which they then sold to independent distributors. Event Film sold the US distribution rights to IFC Midnight after a bidding war with Orion Pictures, Blumhouse Tilt, and Open Road Films.[citation needed] Reception[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (December 2019) On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, Backcountry holds an approval rating of 92%, based on 50 reviews, and an average rating of 7/10. It's consensus reads, "Tense, well-acted, and at once atmospheric as well as brutally impactful, Backcountry marks a memorably assured debut from writer-director Adam MacDonald."[8] On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 62 out of 100, based on 5 critics, indicating "generally positive reviews".[9] References[edit] ^ https://m.the-numbers.com/movie/Backcountry ^ "Black bear kills woman camper north of Chapleau, Ont". ^ Nemiroff, Perri. "Writer-Director Adam MacDonald Talks BACKCOUNTRY, the True Story, Shooting with Real Bears, Editing Gory Scenes and More at TIFF". Collider. Retrieved April 21, 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Governor General honours 15 Canadians for bravery". ^ "Backcountry". Tribute.ca. Retrieved June 23, 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Barton, Steve (October 17, 2013). "Haven's Eric Balfour Heads to Backcountry". Dreadcentral.com. Retrieved March 27, 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Condit, Jon (September 7, 2014). "TIFF 2014: Stills, Artwork, and Screening Details for Backcountry". Dreadscentral.com. Retrieved March 27, 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Backcountry (2015) – Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes.com. Fandango Media. Retrieved 7 December 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Backcountry reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 3 December 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes API at Metacritic v t e Films directed by Adam MacDonald Sombre Zombie (2005) In the Dominican (2010) Backcountry (2014) Pyewacket (2017)