For other uses, see Barbarian (disambiguation). Barbarian A Dungeons & Dragons character class Publication history First appearance Dragon #63 (1st edition) Editions 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 3.5, 4th, 5th (as a standard class) 3rd, 3.5, 5th (as an alternate class) 1st, 2nd, 4th Source books Player's Handbook (3rd, 3.5, 5) Based on Barbarian The barbarian is a playable character class in the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game. The class was introduced in 1985 and went through a number of evolutions in subsequent editions of the game. Contents 1 Publication history 1.1 Creative origins 1.2 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1st edition 1.3 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition 1.4 Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition 1.5 Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition 1.6 Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition 2 Barbarians in specific campaign settings 2.1 Eberron 2.2 Forgotten Realms 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Publication history[edit] Creative origins[edit] The barbarian is based on Robert E. Howard's Conan the Barbarian, Gardner Fox's Kothar and to a lesser extent Fritz Lieber's Fafhrd.[1] Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1st edition[edit] The first official barbarian character class was introduced by Gary Gygax in Dragon #63 (July 1982), as a sub-class of fighter.[2][3]:84–85 The barbarian later appears in the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons manual, Unearthed Arcana in 1985.[4] The barbarian, along with the cavalier, received a revision in Dragon magazine #148 (August 1989), as the author David Howery felt that the class as described in Unearthed Arcana was "too powerful and too vaguely defined."[5] Another version of the barbarian appeared as a character class in the original Oriental Adventures in 1985.[6] According to a reviewer for White Dwarf, the barbarian was "altered to fit into an Eastern pattern", and was "primarily a steppes warrior, or a forest and jungle dweller".[6] Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition[edit] Barbarians appear in The Complete Fighter's Handbook as a character kit,[7] and later receive full attention as a stand-alone class in The Complete Barbarian's Handbook. Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition[edit] Barbarian is one of the base character classes presented in the Player's Handbook. The barbarian is seen as the archetypal warrior who uses brute strength and raw fury to excel in combat, instead of the honed skills of the Fighter or measured strength of the Monk.[3]:84–85 Of all the classes, only the barbarian begins the game illiterate and is forced to expend extra skill points or multiclass in order to read and write. Half-Orcs have Barbarian as a favored class. Barbarians can tap their inner fury to fly into a berserker-like rage. Once the rage is expended, the barbarian becomes fatigued for the remainder of the encounter. Rage provides bonuses to Strength, Constitution, and Will saving throws (which can make barbarians surprisingly resistant to harmful magic), and a glut of additional hit points which expire along with their rage. Rage also reduces armour class and interferes with any skill requiring patience or concentration. As barbarians gain in power, their rage can be used more often and provides even larger Strength and Constitution bonuses, while taking less of a toll on their bodies. The Iconic barbarian is Krusk, a male half-orc. Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition[edit] The barbarian appears in the 4th edition as a player character class in Player's Handbook 2 (2009).[8][3]:84–85 As strikers, barbarians are focused on single target damage. Some defender or leader capabilities are also available to the class. Barbarians are proficient in melee weapons and light armor. Barbarians use the primal power source. Two barbarian builds have been detailed, the Rageblood Barbarian, which focuses on the Rageblood Vigor form of Feral Might, Strength and Constitution and leans towards the defender role, and the Thaneborn Barbarian, which focuses on Strength, Charisma and a different form of Feral Might, and leans towards the leader role. Barbarians' powers are called Evocations. The Rageblood Berserker paragon path was first presented in the 2008 preview for Player's Handbook 2.[9] The Player's Handbook 2 has several barbarian paragon paths, including the Bear Warrior, Fearbringer Thane, Frenzied Berserker and Wildrunner.[8] Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition[edit] The barbarian is as a character class in the Player's Handbook. It encompasses two subclasses, known as primal paths: the Path of the Berserker and the path of the Totem Warrior. The Path of the Berserker archetype heightens a barbarians rage allowing for more savage attacks, while the Totem Warrior imbues them with some animal attributes.[10] Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide (2015) included the Battlerager, exclusive to dwarves and allowing them to wear and utilise damaging spiked armor.[11] Xanathar's Guide to Everything (2017) added three more paths: Ancestral Guardian, Storm Herald, and Zealot. The Ancestral Guardian provides supernatural defensive protection to allied creatures, the Storm Herald emits storm-themed auras that damage foes and shield allies when the barbarian's Rage feature is activated, and the Zealot empowers their attacks with divine energy and can be easily brought back from death.[12] Tasha's Cauldron of Everything (2020) added two more paths: Path of the Beast and Path of Wild Magic.[13] Barbarians focus on defensive power. They have the highest average hit points of any class, and they gain access to a powerful unarmored defense feature. In combat, their rage feature grants them resilience against common damage types, and can be extended by taking or dealing damage.[10] Barbarians in specific campaign settings[edit] Eberron[edit] In most Dungeons & Dragons games, the barbarian is represented as a savage, tribal warrior. However, in the Eberron campaign setting, barbarians are more like nomads — while they may not be civilized, they are certainly not savages. Forgotten Realms[edit] Barbarians in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting are similar in presentation as the class presented in the core rulebook. Barbarians can be of any race in the Realms, though some are more uncommon than others. Barbarians are described as being confused by the cosmopolitan nature of certain regions of Faerûn. Reception[edit] In the book The Evolution of Fantasy Role-Playing Games (2014), Michael Tresca highlighted that the class used the highest hit dice, a d12, of any class in the second and third editions. Tresca wrote, "the early version of the barbarian emulated Conan in all his aspects [...]. However, the barbarian's failure to embrace magic items was a fundamental weakness in the long-term viability of the character. The Dungeons & Dragons advancement system was as much about the acquisition of magical items as it was about personal power through leveling. [...] The barbarian changed significantly in the first edition Unearthed Arcana, which elaborated on the class' restrictions and improved its combat abilities to compensate".[3]:84–85 Screen Rant rated the barbarian class as the 8th most powerful class of the base 12 character classes in the 5th edition.[14] The Gamer rated the 5th edition barbarian subclass Path Of The Zealot as the 2nd most awesome subclass out of the 32 new character options in Xanathar’s Guide to Everything.[15] Gus Wezerek, for FiveThirtyEight, reported that of the 5th edition "class and race combinations per 100,000 characters that players created on D&D Beyond from" August 15 to September 15, 2017, barbarians were the fourth most created at 9,063 total. Goliath (1,729) were the most common racial combination followed by half-orc (1,709) and then human (1,435).[16] References[edit] ^ DeVarque, Aardy. "Literary Sources of D&D". Archived from the original on December 9, 2007. Retrieved February 23, 2007. ^ Gygax, Gary (July 1982). "The Big, Bad Barbarian". Dragon. TSR (63): 8–10. ^ a b c d Tresca, Michael J. (2014). The Evolution of Fantasy Role-Playing Games. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co. ISBN 978-0-7864-6009-0. OCLC 697175248. ^ "Later AD&D Manuals". Acaeum.com. Retrieved January 21, 2018. ^ Howery, David (1989). "Revision". Dragon Magazine. 148: 18–23. ^ a b Shepherd, Ashley (February 1986). "Open Box: Dungeon Modules". White Dwarf. Games Workshop (74): 9–10. ISSN 0265-8712. ^ Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. p. 109. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ a b "February and Beyond". Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. ^ Heinsoo, Rob; Mearls, Mike; Decker, Jesse; Schwalb, Robert J. (October 2008). "Playtest: The Barbarian" (PDF). Dragon Magazine. Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved October 6, 2008.[dead link] ^ a b Mearls, Mike (July 28, 2014). "Keeping it Classy". Retrieved September 21, 2014. ^ Long, Michael (November 9, 2015). "Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide – Review". Tribality. Retrieved September 17, 2018. ^ "Extra life 2017, Xanathar's Guide to Everything table of contents" (PDF). Wizards of the Coast. 2017. p. 2. Retrieved September 17, 2018. ^ Turney, Alexandria (2020-11-05). "All 30 D&D Subclasses In Tasha's Cauldron Of Everything". ScreenRant. Retrieved 2020-11-06. ^ "Dungeons And Dragons: Ranking All Of The Base Classes, From Least To Most Powerful". ScreenRant. 2019-02-14. Retrieved 2019-11-26. ^ "10 Awesome Subclasses From Xanathar's Guide To Everything (D&D Expansion)". TheGamer. 2019-08-07. Retrieved 2019-11-26. ^ Wezerek, Gus (2017-10-12). "Is Your D&D Character Rare?". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved 2019-11-26. External links[edit] D&D Wiki has all the SRD Classes, along with the Barbarian. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond