For other uses, see Bat (disambiguation). Ratpenat (the Crest of the Bat), an heraldic symbol of the former Crown of Aragon. Teruel city coat of arms. The bat (also called the reremouse, reermouse, or rearmouse) is a heraldic symbol sometimes used as a charge, but most prominently used as a crest on or around the crown in municipal arms of the former Crown of Aragon—specifically in Valencia, Catalonia and the Balearic Islands. Contents 1 Origins 2 The bat in official heraldry 3 Other uses 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Origins[edit] The heraldic use of the bat has its origins in the "royal dragon" crest (cimera reial) of the coat of arms of the Kings of Aragon. The royal helmet has a víbria, a traditional Catalonian dragon, emerging from a crown as its crest. Although traditionally the dragon helmet is ascribed to king James I of Aragon (1208 – 1276),[1] reliable documents[which?] state that the winged dragon didn't appear over the helmet until Peter IV of Aragon's reign (1319 – 1387). This crest was then transformed into a bat by municipalities.[2] There is also a legend of a bat causing King James I of Aragon to win a crucial battle against the Saracens that allowed him to win Valencia for his kingdom. However, original documents state that the animal was a swallow and not a bat.[3] The bat in official heraldry[edit] The coats of arms of certain cities in eastern Spain, like Valencia,[3] Palma, Mallorca[4] and Fraga[5] have the bat over the shield. Some smaller towns, like Catarroja and Novallas, also use this symbol. Formerly the Barcelona city coat of arms had a bat crowning it as well, but the bat was removed at the beginning of the 20th century for unknown reasons. The city of Teruel[5] used to have the bat surmounting the coat of arms' crown. There the bat represents a commemoration of the role of this city in the conquest of Valencia.[6] The bat now rests just below the crown in Teruel's seal. While the use of the bat as a heraldic symbol is prevalent in the territories of the former Crown of Aragon it is rarely used elsewhere. However, it can be found in a few places, including in the coats of arms of the city of Albacete in Spain, the town of Montchauvet, Yvelines in France, Fiefbergen in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany and the former Borough of Brecknock and historic county of Brecknockshire in Wales, UK. Outside of Europe, the coat of arms of Santa Fe de Antioquia, Colombia includes multiple bats; it was granted to the town in 1545 by Charles I of Castile and Aragon and his mother, Joanna of Castile.[7] Other uses[edit] Based on the heraldic symbol of their city, certain Spanish association football club badges, like Albacete Balompié, CD Alcoyano, Levante UD and Valencia CF, have a bat on them. The ancient badge of the FC Barcelona, used during the 1899-1910 period, had a small bat crowning it as well.[8] The Burgee of the Royal Valencia Yacht Club (Reial Club Nàutic de València) displays a bat on a golden field in its center. Lo Rat Penat, a political organization based in Valencia in 1878, was named after the heraldic bat. Established by Constantí Llombart, Teodor Llorente and Fèlix Pizcueta, its aim was originally to foster a movement similar to the Catalan Renaixença in the region of Valencia. The No. 9 Squadron RAF adopted the bat badge in 1917 along with the Latin motto Per Noctem Volamus "We fly through the night". The badge was approved by King Edward VIII in November 1936.[9] Gallery[edit] Valencia city's arms Present-day arms of Palma de Mallorca Old coat of arms of Novallas, Aragon Teruel city coat of arms Coat of arms of Fraga Coat of arms of Catarroja Burgee of the Royal Valencia Yacht Club Coat of arms of Munera Coat of arms of Novallas Coat of arms of Emperador Coat of arms of the city of Albacete Coat of arms of the Province of Albacete Coat of arms of Montchauvet, France Coat of arms of Fiefbergen, Germany Coat of arms of Pácora, Colombia Coat of arms of Santa Fe de Antioquia, Colombia Coat of arms of the historic county of Brecknockshire, Wales 488 Intelligence Squadron patch Emblem of the Voennaya Razvedka Former arms of Palma de Mallorca with the winged dragon crown known as Cimera de la Festa de l'Estendard without the helmet. 17th century Barcelona coat of arms (17th-18th Centuries) with the Royal Winged Dragon (Vibra) crown and the helmet c.1790-1870 coat of arms already displaying a bat instead of a dragon on top of the helmet Late 19th century Barcelona coat of arms at Mercat de Sant Antoni, Barcelona See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bats in heraldry. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Dragon Dragons in Catalan mythology Catalan symbols James I of Aragon Crown of Aragon References[edit] ^ Diario de Palma - Vicisitudes históricas en torno a la cimera de Jaime I ^ Fatás Cabeza, Guillermo (2000). "El Escudo de Aragón. Epílogo: El dragón d'Aragón". In Gobierno de Aragón (ed.). Aragón, reino y corona: Centro Cultural de la Villa de Madrid, del 4 de abril al 21 de mayo de 2000 [Aragon, kingdom and crown: Cultural Centre Villa de Madrid, 4 April-21 May 2000] (pdf) (in Spanish). Zaragoza. p. 174. ISBN 84-8324-084-X. (pdf: link). ^ a b Luis Tramoyeres Blasco, Lo Rat Penat en el escudo de armas de Valencia ^ Antoni I. Alomar i Canyelles, L'Estendard, la festa nacional més antiga d'Europa (s. XIII-XXI) Palma 1998 ^ a b Blanco Lalinde, Leonardo (2005). "La Tabla De Magistratura de la Audiencia Territorial de Zaragoza (s. XIX)" [The Magistrate’s Table of the Territorial Hearing of Zaragoza (19th c.)] (PDF). Emblemata-Revista aragonesa de emblematica. 11: 231. ISSN 1137-1056. ^ Old Teruel city coat of arms Blanco Lalinde, Leonardo (2005). "La Tabla De Magistratura de la Audiencia Territorial de Zaragoza (s. XIX)" [The Magistrate’s Table of the Territorial Hearing of Zaragoza (19th c.)] (PDF). Emblemata-Revista aragonesa de emblematica. 11: 242. ISSN 1137-1056. ^ REUNA - Municipio de Santa Fé de Antioquia ^ "L'origen dels colors i l'escut del Barça". Archived from the original on 2011-08-31. Retrieved 2009-02-12. ^ "RAF Bomber command". Archived from the original on 2008-12-06. Retrieved 2009-02-14. Barça N. 20[permanent dead link] External links[edit] Blason de Valence (in French) Cimera del Casal de Barcelona (in Catalan) Cimera de la Festa de l'Estendard (in Catalan) Barcelona coat of arms (in Catalan) FC Barcelona, old badges (in Spanish) Lo Rat Penat (in Catalan) El ratpenat - Homenatge indirecte al València CF (in Catalan) v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources