Comic book superhero This article is about the superhero. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). "Bruce Wayne" redirects here. For other uses, see Bruce Wayne (disambiguation). Bruce Wayne Batman Batman on the cover of Batman: Hush, art by Jim Lee Publication information Publisher DC Comics First appearance Detective Comics #27 (cover date May 1939 / release date March 30, 1939)[1] Created by Bob Kane Bill Finger[2][3] In-story information Alter ego Bruce Wayne Place of origin Gotham City Team affiliations Justice League Batman Family Batmen of All Nations Batman Incorporated Outsiders Partnerships Robin (various) Alfred Pennyworth James Gordon Catwoman Batgirl (various) Superman Wonder Woman Notable aliases Matches Malone[4] Lefty Knox[5] Dark Knight World's Greatest Detective Caped Crusader Darknight Detective Abilities Genius intellect Expert detective Skilled martial artist and hand-to-hand combatant Master tactician, strategist, and field commander Utilizing high-tech equipment Batman is a superhero who appears in American comic books published by DC Comics. Batman was created by artist Bob Kane and writer Bill Finger, and debuted in the 27th issue of the comic book Detective Comics on March 30, 1939. In the DC Universe continuity, Batman is the alias of Bruce Wayne, a wealthy American playboy, philanthropist, and owner of Wayne Enterprises based in Gotham City. Kane, Finger, and future DC writers accompanied Batman with supporting characters, including his sidekick Robin, allies Alfred Pennyworth, James Gordon and Catwoman, and foes such as the Penguin, the Riddler, the Scarecrow, and his archenemy, the Joker. Batman's origin story features him swearing vengeance against criminals after witnessing the murder of his parents Thomas and Martha; he trains himself physically and intellectually, crafts a bat-inspired persona, and monitors the Gotham streets at night. Kane conceived Batman in early 1939 to capitalize on the popularity of DC's Superman; although Kane frequently claimed sole creation credit, Finger substantially developed the concept from a generic superhero into something more bat-like. The character received his own spin-off publication, Batman, in 1940. Batman was originally introduced as a ruthless vigilante who frequently killed or maimed criminals, but evolved into a character with a stringent moral code and strong sense of justice. Unlike most superheroes, Batman does not possess any superpowers, instead relying on his intellect, fighting skills, and wealth. The 1960s Batman television series used a camp aesthetic, which continued to be associated with the character for years after the show ended. Various creators worked to return the character to his darker roots in the 1970s and 1980s, culminating with the 1986 miniseries The Dark Knight Returns by Frank Miller. DC has featured Batman in many comic books, including comics published under its imprints such as Vertigo and Black Label. The longest-running Batman comic, Detective Comics, is the longest-running comic book in the United States. Batman is frequently depicted alongside other DC superheroes, such as Superman and Wonder Woman, as a member of organizations such as the Justice League and the Outsiders. In addition to Bruce Wayne, other characters have taken on the Batman persona on different occasions, such as Jean-Paul Valley / Azrael in the 1993–1994 "Knightfall" story arc and Dick Grayson, the first Robin, for a three-year period from 2009 to 2011. DC has also published comics featuring alternate versions of Batman, including the incarnation seen in The Dark Knight Returns and its successors, the incarnation from the Flashpoint (2011) event, and numerous interpretations from Elseworlds stories. One of the most iconic characters in popular culture, Batman has been listed among the greatest comic book superheroes and fictional characters ever created. He is one of the most commercially successful superheroes, and his likeness has been licensed and featured in various media and merchandise sold around the world; this includes toy lines such as Lego Batman and video games like the Batman: Arkham series. Batman has been adapted in live-action and animated incarnations, including the 1960s Batman television series played by Adam West and in films by Michael Keaton in Batman (1989) and Batman Returns (1992), Christian Bale in The Dark Knight Trilogy (2005–2012), Ben Affleck in the DC Extended Universe (2016–present) and Robert Pattinson in The Batman (2022). Kevin Conroy, Jason O'Mara, and Will Arnett, among others, have provided the character's voice. Contents 1 Publication history 1.1 Creation 1.2 Golden Age 1.2.1 Subsequent creation credit 1.2.2 Early years 1.3 Silver and Bronze Ages 1.3.1 1950s and early 1960s 1.3.2 "New Look" Batman and camp 1.4 Modern Age 1.4.1 The Dark Knight Returns 1.4.2 Knightfall 1.5 21st century 1.5.1 All Star Batman & Robin the Boy Wonder 1.5.2 The New 52 1.5.3 DC Rebirth 2 Characterization 2.1 Bruce Wayne 2.1.1 Personality 2.2 Others 3 Supporting characters 3.1 Enemies 3.2 Allies 3.3 Relationships 3.3.1 Family tree 3.3.2 Romantic interests 4 Abilities 4.1 Skills and training 4.2 Technology 5 Fictional character biography 5.1 20th century 5.1.1 Origin 5.1.2 Golden Age 5.1.3 Silver Age 5.1.4 Bronze Age 5.1.5 Modern Age 5.2 21st century 5.2.1 2000s 5.2.2 2010s 6 Cultural impact and legacy 6.1 In other media 6.1.1 Television 6.1.2 Film 6.1.3 Fine art 6.1.4 Video games 6.1.5 Role-playing games 6.2 Interpretations 6.2.1 Gay interpretations 6.2.2 Psychological interpretations 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Publication history[edit] See also: List of Batman comics Creation[edit] First published image of Batman, in Action Comics #12, announcing the character's debut in the forthcoming Detective Comics #27[6] In early 1939, the success of Superman in Action Comics prompted editors at National Comics Publications (the future DC Comics) to request more superheroes for its titles. In response, Bob Kane created "the Bat-Man".[7] Collaborator Bill Finger recalled that "Kane had an idea for a character called 'Batman,' and he'd like me to see the drawings. I went over to Kane's, and he had drawn a character who looked very much like Superman with kind of ...reddish tights, I believe, with boots ...no gloves, no gauntlets ...with a small domino mask, swinging on a rope. He had two stiff wings that were sticking out, looking like bat wings. And under it was a big sign ...BATMAN".[8] The bat-wing-like cape was suggested by Bob Kane, inspired as a child by Leonardo Da Vinci's sketch of an ornithopter flying device.[9] Finger suggested giving the character a cowl instead of a simple domino mask, a cape instead of wings, and gloves; he also recommended removing the red sections from the original costume.[10][11][12][13] Finger said he devised the name Bruce Wayne for the character's secret identity: "Bruce Wayne's first name came from Robert Bruce, the Scottish patriot. Wayne, being a playboy, was a man of gentry. I searched for a name that would suggest colonialism. I tried Adams, Hancock ...then I thought of Mad Anthony Wayne."[14] He later said his suggestions were influenced by Lee Falk's popular The Phantom, a syndicated newspaper comic-strip character with which Kane was also familiar.[15] Kane and Finger drew upon contemporary 1930s popular culture for inspiration regarding much of the Bat-Man's look, personality, methods, and weaponry. Details find predecessors in pulp fiction, comic strips, newspaper headlines, and autobiographical details referring to Kane himself.[16] As an aristocratic hero with a double identity, Batman had predecessors in the Scarlet Pimpernel (created by Baroness Emmuska Orczy, 1903) and Zorro (created by Johnston McCulley, 1919). Like them, Batman performed his heroic deeds in secret, averted suspicion by playing aloof in public, and marked his work with a signature symbol. Kane noted the influence of the films The Mark of Zorro (1920) and The Bat Whispers (1930) in the creation of the character's iconography. Finger, drawing inspiration from pulp heroes like Doc Savage, The Shadow, Dick Tracy, and Sherlock Holmes, made the character a master sleuth.[17][18] In his 1989 autobiography, Kane detailed Finger's contributions to Batman's creation: One day I called Bill and said, 'I have a new character called the Bat-Man and I've made some crude, elementary sketches I'd like you to look at.' He came over and I showed him the drawings. At the time, I only had a small domino mask, like the one Robin later wore, on Batman's face. Bill said, 'Why not make him look more like a bat and put a hood on him, and take the eyeballs out and just put slits for eyes to make him look more mysterious?' At this point, the Bat-Man wore a red union suit; the wings, trunks, and mask were black. I thought that red and black would be a good combination. Bill said that the costume was too bright: 'Color it dark grey to make it look more ominous.' The cape looked like two stiff bat wings attached to his arms. As Bill and I talked, we realized that these wings would get cumbersome when Bat-Man was in action and changed them into a cape, scalloped to look like bat wings when he was fighting or swinging down on a rope. Also, he didn't have any gloves on, and we added them so that he wouldn't leave fingerprints.[15] Golden Age[edit] Subsequent creation credit[edit] Kane signed away ownership in the character in exchange for, among other compensation, a mandatory byline on all Batman comics. This byline did not originally say "Batman created by Bob Kane"; his name was simply written on the title page of each story. The name disappeared from the comic book in the mid-1960s, replaced by credits for each story's actual writer and artists. In the late 1970s, when Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster began receiving a "created by" credit on the Superman titles, along with William Moulton Marston being given the byline for creating Wonder Woman, Batman stories began saying "Created by Bob Kane" in addition to the other credits. Finger did not receive the same recognition. While he had received credit for other DC work since the 1940s, he began, in the 1960s, to receive limited acknowledgment for his Batman writing; in the letters page of Batman #169 (February 1965) for example, editor Julius Schwartz names him as the creator of the Riddler, one of Batman's recurring villains. However, Finger's contract left him only with his writing page rate and no byline. Kane wrote, "Bill was disheartened by the lack of major accomplishments in his career. He felt that he had not used his creative potential to its fullest and that success had passed him by."[14] At the time of Finger's death in 1974, DC had not officially credited Finger as Batman co-creator. Jerry Robinson, who also worked with Finger and Kane on the strip at this time, has criticized Kane for failing to share the credit. He recalled Finger resenting his position, stating in a 2005 interview with The Comics Journal: Bob made him more insecure, because while he slaved working on Batman, he wasn't sharing in any of the glory or the money that Bob began to make, which is why ...[he was] going to leave [Kane's employ]. ...[Kane] should have credited Bill as co-creator, because I know; I was there. ...That was one thing I would never forgive Bob for, was not to take care of Bill or recognize his vital role in the creation of Batman. As with Siegel and Shuster, it should have been the same, the same co-creator credit in the strip, writer, and artist.[19] Although Kane initially rebutted Finger's claims at having created the character, writing in a 1965 open letter to fans that "it seemed to me that Bill Finger has given out the impression that he and not myself created the ''Batman, t' [sic] as well as Robin and all the other leading villains and characters. This statement is fraudulent and entirely untrue." Kane himself also commented on Finger's lack of credit. "The trouble with being a 'ghost' writer or artist is that you must remain rather anonymously without 'credit'. However, if one wants the 'credit', then one has to cease being a 'ghost' or follower and become a leader or innovator."[20] In 1989, Kane revisited Finger's situation, recalling in an interview: In those days it was like, one artist and he had his name over it [the comic strip] — the policy of DC in the comic books was, if you can't write it, obtain other writers, but their names would never appear on the comic book in the finished version. So Bill never asked me for it [the byline] and I never volunteered — I guess my ego at that time. And I felt badly, really, when he [Finger] died.[21] In September 2015, DC Entertainment revealed that Finger would be receiving credit for his role in Batman's creation on the 2016 superhero film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice and the second season of Gotham after a deal was worked out between the Finger family and DC.[2] Finger received credit as a creator of Batman for the first time in a comic in October 2015 with Batman and Robin Eternal #3 and Batman: Arkham Knight Genesis #3. The updated acknowledgment for the character appeared as "Batman created by Bob Kane with Bill Finger".[3] Early years[edit] Batman made his debut in Detective Comics #27 (May 1939), cover art by Bob Kane The first Batman story, "The Case of the Chemical Syndicate", was published in Detective Comics #27 (May 1939). Finger said, "Batman was originally written in the style of the pulps",[22] and this influence was evident with Batman showing little remorse over killing or maiming criminals. Batman proved a hit character, and he received his own solo title in 1940 while continuing to star in Detective Comics. By that time, Detective Comics was the top-selling and most influential publisher in the industry; Batman and the company's other major hero, Superman, were the cornerstones of the company's success.[23] The two characters were featured side by side as the stars of World's Finest Comics, which was originally titled World's Best Comics when it debuted in fall 1940. Creators including Jerry Robinson and Dick Sprang also worked on the strips during this period. Over the course of the first few Batman strips elements were added to the character and the artistic depiction of Batman evolved. Kane noted that within six issues he drew the character's jawline more pronounced, and lengthened the ears on the costume. "About a year later he was almost the full figure, my mature Batman", Kane said.[24] Batman's characteristic utility belt was introduced in Detective Comics #29 (July 1939), followed by the boomerang-like batarang and the first bat-themed vehicle, the Batplane, in #31 (Sept. 1939). The character's origin was revealed in #33 (Nov. 1939), unfolding in a two-page story that establishes the brooding persona of Batman, a character driven by the death of his parents. Written by Finger, it depicts a young Bruce Wayne witnessing his parents' murder at the hands of a mugger. Days later, at their grave, the child vows that "by the spirits of my parents [I will] avenge their deaths by spending the rest of my life warring on all criminals".[25][26][27] The early, pulp-inflected portrayal of Batman started to soften in Detective Comics #38 (April 1940) with the introduction of Robin, Batman's junior counterpart.[28] Robin was introduced, based on Finger's suggestion, because Batman needed a "Watson" with whom Batman could talk.[29] Sales nearly doubled, despite Kane's preference for a solo Batman, and it sparked a proliferation of "kid sidekicks".[30] The first issue of the solo spin-off series Batman was notable not only for introducing two of his most persistent enemies, the Joker and Catwoman, but for a pre-Robin inventory story, originally meant for Detective Comics #38, in which Batman shoots some monstrous giants to death.[31][32] That story prompted editor Whitney Ellsworth to decree that the character could no longer kill or use a gun.[33] By 1942, the writers and artists behind the Batman comics had established most of the basic elements of the Batman mythos.[34] In the years following World War II, DC Comics "adopted a postwar editorial direction that increasingly de-emphasized social commentary in favor of lighthearted juvenile fantasy". The impact of this editorial approach was evident in Batman comics of the postwar period; removed from the "bleak and menacing world" of the strips of the early 1940s, Batman was instead portrayed as a respectable citizen and paternal figure that inhabited a "bright and colorful" environment.[35] Silver and Bronze Ages[edit] 1950s and early 1960s[edit] Batman was one of the few superhero characters to be continuously published as interest in the genre waned during the 1950s. In the story "The Mightiest Team in the World" in Superman #76 (June 1952), Batman teams up with Superman for the first time and the pair discover each other's secret identity.[36] Following the success of this story, World's Finest Comics was revamped so it featured stories starring both heroes together, instead of the separate Batman and Superman features that had been running before.[37] The team-up of the characters was "a financial success in an era when those were few and far between";[38] this series of stories ran until the book's cancellation in 1986. Batman comics were among those criticized when the comic book industry came under scrutiny with the publication of psychologist Fredric Wertham's book Seduction of the Innocent in 1954. Wertham's thesis was that children imitated crimes committed in comic books, and that these works corrupted the morals of the youth. Wertham criticized Batman comics for their supposed homosexual overtones and argued that Batman and Robin were portrayed as lovers.[39] Wertham's criticisms raised a public outcry during the 1950s, eventually leading to the establishment of the Comics Code Authority, a code that is no longer in use by the comic book industry. The tendency towards a "sunnier Batman" in the postwar years intensified after the introduction of the Comics Code.[40] Scholars have suggested that the characters of Batwoman (in 1956) and the pre-Barbara Gordon Bat-Girl (in 1961) were introduced in part to refute the allegation that Batman and Robin were gay, and the stories took on a campier, lighter feel.[41] In the late 1950s, Batman stories gradually became more science fiction-oriented, an attempt at mimicking the success of other DC characters that had dabbled in the genre.[42] New characters such as Batwoman, the original Bat-Girl, Ace the Bat-Hound, and Bat-Mite were introduced. Batman's adventures often involved odd transformations or bizarre space aliens. In 1960, Batman debuted as a member of the Justice League of America in The Brave and the Bold #28 (Feb. 1960), and went on to appear in several Justice League comic book series starting later that same year. "New Look" Batman and camp[edit] By 1964, sales of Batman titles had fallen drastically. Bob Kane noted that, as a result, DC was "planning to kill Batman off altogether".[43] In response to this, editor Julius Schwartz was assigned to the Batman titles. He presided over drastic changes, beginning with 1964's Detective Comics #327 (May 1964), which was cover-billed as the "New Look". Schwartz introduced changes designed to make Batman more contemporary, and to return him to more detective-oriented stories. He brought in artist Carmine Infantino to help overhaul the character. The Batmobile was redesigned, and Batman's costume was modified to incorporate a yellow ellipse behind the bat-insignia. The space aliens, time travel, and characters of the 1950s such as Batwoman, Ace the Bat-Hound, and Bat-Mite were retired. Bruce Wayne's butler Alfred was killed off (though his death was quickly reversed) while a new female relative for the Wayne family, Aunt Harriet Cooper, came to live with Bruce Wayne and Dick Grayson.[44] The debut of the Batman television series in 1966 had a profound influence on the character. The success of the series increased sales throughout the comic book industry, and Batman reached a circulation of close to 900,000 copies.[45] Elements such as the character of Batgirl and the show's campy nature were introduced into the comics; the series also initiated the return of Alfred. Although both the comics and TV show were successful for a time, the camp approach eventually wore thin and the show was canceled in 1968. In the aftermath, the Batman comics themselves lost popularity once again. As Julius Schwartz noted, "When the television show was a success, I was asked to be campy, and of course when the show faded, so did the comic books."[46] Starting in 1969, writer Dennis O'Neil and artist Neal Adams made a deliberate effort to distance Batman from the campy portrayal of the 1960s TV series and to return the character to his roots as a "grim avenger of the night".[47] O'Neil said his idea was "simply to take it back to where it started. I went to the DC library and read some of the early stories. I tried to get a sense of what Kane and Finger were after."[48] O'Neil and Adams first collaborated on the story "The Secret of the Waiting Graves" in Detective Comics #395 (Jan. 1970). Few stories were true collaborations between O'Neil, Adams, Schwartz, and inker Dick Giordano, and in actuality these men were mixed and matched with various other creators during the 1970s; nevertheless the influence of their work was "tremendous".[49] Giordano said: "We went back to a grimmer, darker Batman, and I think that's why these stories did so well ..."[50] While the work of O'Neil and Adams was popular with fans, the acclaim did little to improve declining sales; the same held true with a similarly acclaimed run by writer Steve Englehart and penciler Marshall Rogers in Detective Comics #471–476 (Aug. 1977 – April 1978), which went on to influence the 1989 movie Batman and be adapted for Batman: The Animated Series, which debuted in 1992.[51] Regardless, circulation continued to drop through the 1970s and 1980s, hitting an all-time low in 1985.[52] Modern Age[edit] The Dark Knight Returns[edit] Cover art for issue #1 of The Dark Knight Returns Frank Miller's limited series The Dark Knight Returns (February–June 1986) returned the character to his darker roots, both in atmosphere and tone. The comic book, which tells the story of a 55-year-old Batman coming out of retirement in a possible future, reinvigorated interest in the character. The Dark Knight Returns was a financial success and has since become one of the medium's most noted touchstones.[53] The series also sparked a major resurgence in the character's popularity.[54] That year Dennis O'Neil took over as editor of the Batman titles and set the template for the portrayal of Batman following DC's status quo-altering 12-issue miniseries Crisis on Infinite Earths. O'Neil operated under the assumption that he was hired to revamp the character and as a result tried to instill a different tone in the books than had gone before.[55] One outcome of this new approach was the "Year One" storyline in Batman #404–407 (Feb.–May 1987), in which Frank Miller and artist David Mazzucchelli redefined the character's origins. Writer Alan Moore and artist Brian Bolland continued this dark trend with 1988's 48-page one-shot issue Batman: The Killing Joke, in which the Joker, attempting to drive Commissioner Gordon insane, cripples Gordon's daughter Barbara, and then kidnaps and tortures the commissioner, physically and psychologically. The Batman comics garnered major attention in 1988 when DC Comics created a 900 number for readers to call to vote on whether Jason Todd, the second Robin, lived or died. Voters decided in favor of Jason's death by a narrow margin of 28 votes (see Batman: A Death in the Family).[56] Knightfall[edit] The 1993 "Knightfall" story arc introduced a new villain, Bane, who critically injures Batman after pushing him to the limits of his endurance. Jean-Paul Valley, known as Azrael, is called upon to wear the Batsuit during Bruce Wayne's convalescence. Writers Doug Moench, Chuck Dixon, and Alan Grant worked on the Batman titles during "Knightfall", and would also contribute to other Batman crossovers throughout the 1990s. 1998's "Cataclysm" storyline served as the precursor to 1999's "No Man's Land", a year-long storyline that ran through all the Batman-related titles dealing with the effects of an earthquake-ravaged Gotham City. At the conclusion of "No Man's Land", O'Neil stepped down as editor and was replaced by Bob Schreck.[57] Another writer who rose to prominence on the Batman comic series, was Jeph Loeb. Along with longtime collaborator Tim Sale, they wrote two miniseries (The Long Halloween and Dark Victory) that pit an early-in-his-career version of Batman against his entire rogues gallery (including Two-Face, whose origin was re-envisioned by Loeb) while dealing with various mysteries involving serial killers Holiday and the Hangman. In 2003, Loeb teamed with artist Jim Lee to work on another mystery arc: "Batman: Hush" for the main Batman book. The 12–issue storyline has Batman and Catwoman teaming up against Batman's entire rogues gallery, including an apparently resurrected Jason Todd, while seeking to find the identity of the mysterious supervillain Hush.[58] While the character of Hush failed to catch on with readers, the arc was a sales success for DC. The series became #1 on the Diamond Comic Distributors sales chart for the first time since Batman #500 (Oct. 1993) and Todd's appearance laid the groundwork for writer Judd Winick's subsequent run as writer on Batman, with another multi-issue arc, "Under the Hood", which ran from Batman #637–650 (April 2005 – April 2006). 21st century[edit] All Star Batman & Robin the Boy Wonder[edit] See also: All Star DC Comics In 2005, DC launched All Star Batman & Robin the Boy Wonder, a stand-alone comic book miniseries set outside the main DC Universe continuity. Written by Frank Miller and drawn by Jim Lee, the series was a commercial success for DC Comics,[59][60] although it was widely panned by critics for its writing and strong depictions of violence.[61][62] Starting in 2006, Grant Morrison and Paul Dini were the regular writers of Batman and Detective Comics, with Morrison reincorporating controversial elements of Batman lore. Most notably of these elements were the science fiction-themed storylines of the 1950s Batman comics, which Morrison revised as hallucinations Batman suffered under the influence of various mind-bending gases and extensive sensory deprivation training. Morrison's run climaxed with "Batman R.I.P.", which brought Batman up against the villainous "Black Glove" organization, which sought to drive Batman into madness. "Batman R.I.P." segued into Final Crisis (also written by Morrison), which saw the apparent death of Batman at the hands of Darkseid. In the 2009 miniseries Batman: Battle for the Cowl, Wayne's former protégé Dick Grayson becomes the new Batman, and Wayne's son Damian becomes the new Robin.[63][64] In June 2009, Judd Winick returned to writing Batman, while Grant Morrison was given his own series, titled Batman and Robin.[65] In 2010, the storyline Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne saw Bruce travel through history, eventually returning to the present day. Although he reclaimed the mantle of Batman, he also allowed Grayson to continue being Batman as well. Bruce decided to take his crime-fighting cause globally, which is the central focus of Batman Incorporated. DC Comics would later announce that Grayson would be the main character in Batman, Detective Comics, and Batman and Robin, while Wayne would be the main character in Batman Incorporated. Also, Bruce appeared in another ongoing series, Batman: The Dark Knight. The New 52[edit] See also: The New 52 In September 2011, DC Comics' entire line of superhero comic books, including its Batman franchise, were cancelled and relaunched with new #1 issues as part of The New 52 reboot. Bruce Wayne is the only character to be identified as Batman and is featured in Batman, Detective Comics, Batman and Robin, and Batman: The Dark Knight. Dick Grayson returns to the mantle of Nightwing and appears in his own ongoing series. While many characters have their histories significantly altered to attract new readers, Batman's history remains mostly intact. Batman Incorporated was relaunched in 2012–2013 to complete the "Leviathan" storyline. With the beginning of The New 52, Scott Snyder was the writer of the Batman title. His first major story arc was "Night of the Owls", where Batman confronts the Court of Owls, a secret society that has controlled Gotham for centuries. The second story arc was "Death of the Family", where the Joker returns to Gotham and simultaneously attacks each member of the Batman family. The third story arc was "Batman: Zero Year", which redefined Batman's origin in The New 52. It followed Batman #0, published in June 2012, which explored the character's early years. The final storyline before the Convergence (2015) storyline was "Endgame", depicting the supposed final battle between Batman and the Joker when he unleashes the deadly Endgame virus onto Gotham City. The storyline ends with Batman and the Joker's supposed deaths. Starting with Batman (vol. 2) #41, Commissioner James Gordon takes over Bruce's mantle as a new, state-sanctioned, robotic-Batman, debuting in the Free Comic Book Day special comic Divergence. However, Bruce Wayne is soon revealed to be alive, albeit now suffering almost total amnesia of his life as Batman and only remembering his life as Bruce Wayne through what he has learned from Alfred. Bruce Wayne finds happiness and proposes to his girlfriend, Julie Madison, but Mr. Bloom heavily injures Jim Gordon and takes control of Gotham City and threatens to destroy the city by energizing a particle reactor to create a "strange star" to swallow the city. Bruce Wayne discovers the truth that he was Batman and after talking to a stranger who smiles a lot (it is heavily implied that this is the amnesic Joker) he forces Alfred to implant his memories as Batman, but at the cost of his memories as the reborn Bruce Wayne. He returns and helps Jim Gordon defeat Mr. Bloom and shut down the reactor. Gordon gets his job back as the commissioner, and the government Batman project is shut down.[66] In 2015, DC Comics released The Dark Knight III: The Master Race, the sequel to Frank Miller's The Dark Knight Returns and The Dark Knight Strikes Again.[67] DC Rebirth[edit] In June 2016, the DC Rebirth event relaunched DC Comics' entire line of comic book titles. Batman was rebooted as starting with a one-shot issue entitled Batman: Rebirth #1 (Aug. 2016). The series then began shipping twice-monthly as a third volume, starting with Batman (vol. 3) #1 (Aug. 2016). The third volume of Batman was written by Tom King, and artwork was provided by David Finch and Mikel Janín. The Batman series introduced two vigilantes, Gotham and Gotham Girl. Detective Comics resumed its original numbering system starting with June 2016's #934, and the New 52 series was labeled as volume 2, with issues numbering from #1-52.[68] Similarly with the Batman title, the New 52 issues were labeled as volume 2 and encompassed issues #1-52. Writer James Tynion IV and artists Eddy Barrows and Alvaro Martinez worked on Detective Comics #934, and the series initially featured a team consisting of Tim Drake, Stephanie Brown, Cassandra Cain, and Clayface, led by Batman and Batwoman. DC Comics ended the DC Rebirth branding in December 2017, opting to include everything under a larger DC Universe banner and naming. The continuity established by DC Rebirth continues across DC's comic book titles, including volume 1 of Detective Comics and volume 3 of Batman.[69][70] After the conclusion of Batman (vol. 3) #85[71] a new creative team consisting of James Tynion IV with art by Tony S. Daniel and Danny Miki replaced Tom King, David Finch and Mikel Janín. Characterization[edit] Bruce Wayne[edit] DC Comics concept art of Bruce Wayne Batman's secret identity is Bruce Wayne, a wealthy American industrialist. As a child, Bruce witnessed the murder of his parents, Dr. Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne, which ultimately led him to craft the Batman persona and seek justice against criminals. He resides on the outskirts of Gotham City in his personal residence, Wayne Manor. Wayne averts suspicion by acting the part of a superficial playboy idly living off his family's fortune and the profits of Wayne Enterprises, his inherited conglomerate.[72][73] He supports philanthropic causes through his nonprofit Wayne Foundation, but is more widely known as a celebrity socialite.[74] In public, he frequently appears in the company of high-status women, which encourages tabloid gossip. Although Bruce Wayne leads an active romantic life, his vigilante activities as Batman account for most of his time.[75] Various modern stories have portrayed the extravagant, playboy image of Bruce Wayne as a facade.[76] This is in contrast to the Post-Crisis Superman, whose Clark Kent persona is the true identity, while the Superman persona is the facade.[77][78] In Batman Unmasked, a television documentary about the psychology of the character, behavioral scientist Benjamin Karney notes that Batman's personality is driven by Bruce Wayne's inherent humanity; that "Batman, for all its benefits and for all of the time Bruce Wayne devotes to it, is ultimately a tool for Bruce Wayne's efforts to make the world better". Bruce Wayne's principles include the desire to prevent future harm and a vow not to kill. Bruce Wayne believes that our actions define us, we fail for a reason and anything is possible.[79] Writers of Batman and Superman stories have often compared and contrasted the two. Interpretations vary depending on the writer, the story, and the timing. Grant Morrison[80] notes that both heroes "believe in the same kind of things" despite the day/night contrast their heroic roles display. He notes an equally stark contrast in their real identities. Bruce Wayne and Clark Kent belong to different social classes: "Bruce has a butler, Clark has a boss." T. James Musler's book Unleashing the Superhero in Us All explores the extent to which Bruce Wayne's vast personal wealth is important in his life story, and the crucial role it plays in his efforts as Batman.[81] Will Brooker notes in his book Batman Unmasked that "the confirmation of the Batman's identity lies with the young audience ...he doesn't have to be Bruce Wayne; he just needs the suit and gadgets, the abilities, and most importantly the morality, the humanity. There's just a sense about him: 'they trust him ...and they're never wrong."[82] Personality[edit] "I must have a disguise. Criminals are a superstitious cowardly lot. So my disguise must be able to strike terror into their hearts. I must be a creature of the night, black, terrible...a...a...a bat!" – Bruce Wayne – Detective Comics #33 (November 1939) Batman's primary character traits can be summarized as "wealth; physical prowess; deductive abilities and obsession".[83] The details and tone of Batman comic books have varied over the years due to different creative teams. Dennis O'Neil noted that character consistency was not a major concern during early editorial regimes: "Julie Schwartz did a Batman in Batman and Detective and Murray Boltinoff did a Batman in the Brave and the Bold and apart from the costume they bore very little resemblance to each other. Julie and Murray did not want to coordinate their efforts, nor were they asked to do so. Continuity was not important in those days."[84] The driving force behind Bruce Wayne's character is his parents' murder and their absence. Bob Kane and Bill Finger discussed Batman's background and decided that "there's nothing more traumatic than having your parents murdered before your eyes".[85] Despite his trauma, he sets his mind on studying to become a scientist[86][87] and to train his body into physical perfection[86][87] to fight crime in Gotham City as Batman, an inspired idea from Wayne's insight into the criminal mind.[86][87] Another of Batman's characterizations is that of a vigilante; in order to stop evil that started with the death of his parents, he must sometimes break the law himself. Although manifested differently by being re-told by different artists, it is nevertheless that the details and the prime components of Batman's origin have never varied at all in the comic books, the "reiteration of the basic origin events holds together otherwise divergent expressions".[88] The origin is the source of the character's traits and attributes, which play out in many of the character's adventures.[83] He also speaks over 40 different languages.[89] Batman is often treated as a vigilante by other characters in his stories. Frank Miller views the character as "a dionysian figure, a force for anarchy that imposes an individual order".[90] Dressed as a bat, Batman deliberately cultivates a frightening persona in order to aid him in crime-fighting,[91] a fear that originates from the criminals' own guilty conscience.[92] Miller is often credited with reintroducing anti-heroic traits into Batman's characterization,[93] such as his brooding personality, willingness to use violence and torture, and increasingly alienated behavior. Batman, shortly a year after his debut and the introduction of Robin, was changed in 1940 after DC editor Whitney Ellsworth felt the character would be tainted by his lethal methods and DC established their own ethical code, subsequently he was retconned as having a stringent moral code.[33][94] Miller's Batman was closer to the original pre-Robin version, who was willing to kill criminals if necessary.[95] Others[edit] On several occasions former Robin Dick Grayson has served as Batman; most notably in 2009 while Wayne was believed dead, and served as a second Batman even after Wayne returned in 2010.[58] As part of DC's 2011 continuity relaunch, Grayson returned to being Nightwing following the Flashpoint crossover event. In an interview with IGN, Morrison detailed that having Dick Grayson as Batman and Damian Wayne as Robin represented a "reverse" of the normal dynamic between Batman and Robin, with, "a more light-hearted and spontaneous Batman and a scowling, badass Robin". Morrison explained his intentions for the new characterization of Batman: "Dick Grayson is kind of this consummate superhero. The guy has been Batman's partner since he was a kid, he's led the Teen Titans, and he's trained with everybody in the DC Universe. So he's a very different kind of Batman. He's a lot easier; He's a lot looser and more relaxed."[63] Over the years, there have been numerous others to assume the name of Batman, or to officially take over for Bruce during his leaves of absence. Jean-Paul Valley, also known as Azrael, assumed the cowl after the events of the Knightfall saga.[58] James Gordon donned a mecha-suit after the events of Batman: Endgame, and served as Batman in 2015 and 2016. Additionally, members of the group Batman Incorporated, Bruce Wayne's experiment at franchising his brand of vigilantism, have at times stood in as the official Batman in cities around the world.[58] Various others have also taken up the role of Batman in stories set in alternative universes and possible futures, including, among them, various former proteges of Bruce Wayne. Supporting characters[edit] Main article: List of Batman supporting characters Batman's interactions with both villains and cohorts have, over time, developed a strong supporting cast of characters.[83] Enemies[edit] Batman surrounded by his enemies, art by Alex Ross Main article: List of Batman family enemies Batman faces a variety of foes ranging from common criminals to outlandish supervillains. Many of them mirror aspects of the Batman's character and development, often having tragic origin stories that lead them to a life of crime.[96] These foes are commonly referred to as Batman's rogues gallery. Batman's "most implacable foe" is the Joker, a homicidal maniac with a clown-like appearance. The Joker is considered by critics to be his perfect adversary, since he is the antithesis of Batman in personality and appearance; the Joker has a maniacal demeanor with a colorful appearance, while Batman has a serious and resolute demeanor with a dark appearance. As a "personification of the irrational", the Joker represents "everything Batman [opposes]".[34] Other long-time recurring foes that are part of Batman's rogues gallery include Catwoman (a cat burglar anti-heroine who is an occasional ally and romantic interest), the Penguin, Ra's al Ghul, Two-Face, the Riddler, the Scarecrow, Mr. Freeze, Poison Ivy, Harley Quinn, Bane, Clayface, and Killer Croc, among others. Many of Batman's adversaries are often psychiatric patients at Arkham Asylum. Allies[edit] Alfred Main article: Alfred Pennyworth Batman's butler, Alfred Pennyworth, first appeared in Batman #16 (1943). He serves as Bruce Wayne's loyal father figure and is one of the few persons to know his secret identity. Alfred raised Bruce after his parents' death and knows him on a very personal level. He is sometimes portrayed as a sidekick to Batman and the only other resident of Wayne Manor aside from Bruce. The character "[lends] a homely touch to Batman's environs and [is] ever ready to provide a steadying and reassuring hand" to the hero and his sidekick.[96] "Batman family" The informal name "Batman family" is used for a group of characters closely allied with Batman, generally masked vigilantes who either have been trained by Batman or operate in Gotham City with his tacit approval. They include: Barbara Gordon, Commissioner Gordon's daughter, who has fought crime under the vigilante identity of Batgirl and, during a period in which she was confined to a wheelchair due to a gunshot wound inflicted by the Joker, the computer hacker the Oracle; Helena Bertinelli, the sole surviving member of a mob family turned vigilante, who has worked with Batman on occasion, primarily as the Huntress and as Batgirl for a brief stint; Cassandra Cain, the daughter of professional assassins David Cain, and Lady Shiva, who succeeded Bertinelli as Batgirl. Civilians Lucius Fox, a technology specialist and Bruce Wayne's business manager who is well aware of his employer's clandestine vigilante activities; Dr. Leslie Thompkins, a family friend who like Alfred became a surrogate parental figure to Bruce Wayne after the deaths of his parents, and is also aware of his secret identity; Vicki Vale, an investigative journalist who often reports on Batman's activities for the Gotham Gazette; Ace the Bat-Hound, Batman's canine partner who was mainly active in the 1950s and 1960s;[97] and Bat-Mite, an extra-dimensional imp mostly active in the 1960s who idolizes Batman.[97] GCPD Main article: Gotham City Police Department As Batman's ally in the Gotham City police, Commissioner James "Jim" Gordon debuted along with Batman in Detective Comics #27 and has been a consistent presence ever since. As a crime-fighting everyman, he shares Batman's goals while offering, much as the character of Dr. Watson does in Sherlock Holmes stories, a normal person's perspective on the work of Batman's extraordinary genius. Justice League Main article: Justice League Batman is at times a member of superhero teams such as the Justice League of America and the Outsiders. Batman has often been paired in adventures with his Justice League teammate Superman, notably as the co-stars of World's Finest Comics and Superman/Batman series. In Pre-Crisis continuity, the two are depicted as close friends; however, in current continuity, they are still close friends but an uneasy relationship, with an emphasis on their differing views on crime-fighting and justice. In Superman/Batman #3 (Dec. 2003), Superman observes, "Sometimes, I admit, I think of Bruce as a man in a costume. Then, with some gadget from his utility belt, he reminds me that he has an extraordinarily inventive mind. And how lucky I am to be able to call on him."[98] Robin Main article: Robin (character) Batman and Robin, art by Jack Burnley Robin, Batman's vigilante partner, has been a widely recognized supporting character for many years.[99] Bill Finger stated that he wanted to include Robin because "Batman didn't have anyone to talk to, and it got a little tiresome always having him thinking."[100] The first Robin, Dick Grayson, was introduced in 1940. In the 1970s he finally grew up, went off to college and became the hero Nightwing. A second Robin, Jason Todd, appeared in the 1980s. In the stories he was eventually badly beaten and then killed in an explosion set by the Joker, but was later revived. He used the Joker's old persona, the Red Hood, and became an antihero vigilante with no qualms about using firearms or deadly force. Carrie Kelley, the first female Robin to appear in Batman stories, was the final Robin in the continuity of Frank Miller's graphic novels The Dark Knight Returns and The Dark Knight Strikes Again, fighting alongside an aging Batman in stories set out of the mainstream continuity. The third Robin in the mainstream comics is Tim Drake, who first appeared in 1989. He went on to star in his own comic series, and currently goes by the Red Robin, a variation on the traditional Robin persona. In the first decade of the new millennium, Stephanie Brown served as the fourth in-universe Robin between stints as her self-made vigilante identity the Spoiler, and later as Batgirl.[101] After Brown's apparent death, Drake resumed the role of Robin for a time. The role eventually passed to Damian Wayne, the 10-year-old son of Bruce Wayne and Talia al Ghul, in the late 2000s.[102] Damian's tenure as du jour Robin ended when the character was killed off in the pages of Batman Incorporated in 2013.[103] Batman's next young sidekick is Harper Row, a streetwise young woman who avoids the name Robin but followed the ornithological theme nonetheless; she debuted the codename and identity of the Bluebird in 2014. Unlike the Robins, the Bluebird is willing and permitted to use a gun, albeit non-lethal; her weapon of choice is a modified rifle that fires taser rounds.[104] In 2015, a new series began titled We Are...Robin, focused on a group of teenagers using the Robin persona to fight crime in Gotham City. Relationships[edit] Family tree[edit] Helena Wayne is the biological daughter of Bruce Wayne and Selina Kyle of an alternate universe established in the early 1960s (Multiverse) where the Golden Age stories took place. Damian Wayne is the biological son of Bruce Wayne and Talia al Ghul,[63][105][106] and thus the grandson of Ra's al Ghul. Terry McGinnis and his brother Matt are the biological sons of Bruce Wayne and Mary McGinnis in the DC animated universe, and Terry has taken over the role as Batman when Bruce has become too old to do so. Romantic interests[edit] Writers have varied in the approach over the years to the "playboy" aspect of Bruce Wayne's persona. Some writers show his playboy reputation as a manufactured illusion to support his mission as Batman, while others have depicted Bruce Wayne as genuinely enjoying the benefits of being "Gotham's most eligible bachelor". Bruce Wayne has been portrayed as being romantically linked with many women throughout his various incarnations. The most significant relationships occurred with Selina Kyle, who is also Catwoman[107] and Talia al Ghul, as both women gave birth to his biological offsprings, Helena Wayne and Damian Wayne, respectively. Batman's first romantic interest was Julie Madison in Detective Comics #31 (Sept. 1939); however, their romance was short-lived. Some of Batman's romantic interests have been women with a respected status in society, such as Julie Madison, Vicki Vale, and Silver St. Cloud. Batman has also been romantically involved with allies, such as Kathy Kane (Batwoman), Sasha Bordeaux, and Wonder Woman, and with villains, such as Selina Kyle (Catwoman), Jezebel Jet, Pamela Isley (Poison Ivy), and Talia al Ghul. Catwoman Main article: Catwoman Catwoman is Batman's most enduring romance,[108] art by Adam Hughes While most of Batman's romantic relationships tend to be short in duration, Catwoman has been his most enduring romance throughout the years.[108] The attraction between Batman and Catwoman, whose real name is Selina Kyle, is present in nearly every version and medium in which the characters appear, including a love story between their two secret identities as early as in the 1966 film Batman. Although Catwoman is typically portrayed as a villain, Batman and Catwoman have worked together in achieving common goals and are usually depicted as having a romantic connection. In an early 1980s storyline, Selina Kyle and Bruce Wayne develop a relationship, in which the closing panel of the final story shows her referring to Batman as "Bruce". However, a change in the editorial team brought a swift end to that storyline and, apparently, all that transpired during the story arc. Out of costume, Bruce and Selina develop a romantic relationship during The Long Halloween. The story shows Selina saving Bruce from Poison Ivy. However, the relationship ends when Bruce rejects her advances twice; once as Bruce and once as Batman. In Batman: Dark Victory, he stands her up on two holidays, causing her to leave him for good and to leave Gotham City for a while. When the two meet at an opera many years later, during the events of the 12-issue story arc called "Hush", Bruce comments that the two no longer have a relationship as Bruce and Selina. However, "Hush" sees Batman and Catwoman allied against the entire rogues gallery and rekindling their romantic relationship. In "'Hush", Batman reveals his true identity to Catwoman. The Earth-Two Batman, a character from a parallel world, partners with and marries the reformed Earth-Two Selina Kyle, as shown in Superman Family #211. They have a daughter named Helena Wayne, who becomes the Huntress. Along with Dick Grayson, the Earth-Two Robin, the Huntress takes the role as Gotham's protector once Bruce Wayne retires to become police commissioner, a position he occupies until he is killed during one final adventure as Batman. Batman and Catwoman are shown having a sexual encounter on the roof of a building in Catwoman (vol. 4) #1 (2011); the same issue implies that the two have an ongoing sexual relationship.[109] Following the 2016 DC Rebirth continuity reboot, the two once again have a sexual encounter on top of a building in Batman (vol. 3) #14 (2017).[110] Following the 2016 DC Rebirth continuity reboot, Batman and Catwoman work together in the third volume of Batman. The two also have a romantic relationship, in which they are shown having a sexual encounter on a rooftop and sleeping together.[110][111][112] Bruce proposes to Selina in Batman (vol. 3) #24 (2017),[113] and in issue #32, Selina asks Bruce to propose to her again. When he does so, she says, "Yes." [112] Batman Annual (vol. 3) #2 (Jan. 2018) centers on a romantic storyline between Batman and Catwoman. Towards the end, the story is flash-forwarded to the future, in which Bruce Wayne and Selina Kyle are a married couple in their golden years. Bruce receives a terminal medical diagnosis, and Selina cares for him until his death.[112] Abilities[edit] Skills and training[edit] Batman has no inherent superhuman powers; he relies on "his own scientific knowledge, detective skills, and athletic prowess".[28] Batman's inexhaustible wealth gives him access to advanced technologies, and as a proficient scientist, he is able to use and modify these technologies to his advantage. In the stories, Batman is regarded as one of the world's greatest detectives, if not the world's greatest crime solver.[114] Batman has been repeatedly described as having a genius-level intellect, being one of the greatest martial artists in the DC Universe, and having peak human physical conditioning.[115] As a polymath, his knowledge and expertise in countless disciplines is nearly unparalleled by any other character in the DC Universe.[116] He has traveled the world acquiring the skills needed to aid him in his endeavors as Batman. In the Superman: Doomed story arc, Superman considers Batman to be one of the most brilliant minds on the planet.[117] Batman has trained extensively in various different fighting styles, making him one of the best hand-to-hand fighters in the DC Universe. He has fully utilized his photographic memory to master a total of 127 different forms of martial arts including, but not limited to, Aikido, boxing, Brazilian jiu-jitsu, Capoeira, Eskrima, fencing, Hapkido, Judo, Kalaripayattu, Karate, Kenjutsu, Kenpo, kickboxing, Kobudo, Krav Maga, Muay Thai, Ninjutsu, Pankration, Sambo, Savate, Silat, Taekwondo, wrestling and numerous different styles of Wushu (Kung Fu).[118] In terms of his physical condition, Batman is in peak, Olympic-athlete-level condition, easily-able to run-across rooftops in a Parkour-esqe fashion. Superman describes Batman as "the most dangerous man on Earth", able to defeat an entire team of superpowered extra-terrestrials by himself in order to rescue his imprisoned teammates in Grant Morrison's first storyline in JLA. Batman is strongly disciplined, and he has the ability to function under great physical pain and resist most forms of telepathy and mind control. He is a master of disguise, multilingual, and an expert in espionage, often gathering information under the identity of a notorious gangster named Matches Malone. Batman is highly skilled in stealth movement and escapology, which allows him to appear and disappear at will and to break free of nearly inescapable deathtraps with little to no harm. Batman is an expert in interrogation techniques and his intimidating and frightening appearance alone is often all that is needed in getting information from suspects. Despite having the potential to harm his enemies, Batman's most defining characteristic is his strong commitment to justice and his reluctance to take a life. This unyielding moral rectitude has earned him the respect of several heroes in the DC Universe, most notably that of Superman and Wonder Woman. Among physical and other crime fighting related training, he is also proficient at other types of skills. Some of these include being a licensed pilot (in order to operate the Batplane), as well as being able to operate other types of machinery. In some publications, he underwent some magician training. Batman is also frequently described as a "peak human,"[119][unreliable source?] and it has been revealed that he has (mostly unintentionally) bathed in Lazarus Pits in the past, which may or may not attribute some of his more metahuman feats.[120] Technology[edit] Batman utilizes a vast arsenal of specialized, high-tech vehicles and gadgets in his war against crime, the designs of which usually share a bat motif. Batman historian Les Daniels credits Gardner Fox with creating the concept of Batman's arsenal with the introduction of the utility belt in Detective Comics #29 (July 1939) and the first bat-themed weapons the batarang and the "Batgyro" in Detective Comics #31 and 32 (Sept. and Oct. 1939).[24] Personal armor Main article: Batsuit Batman's body armored costume incorporates the imagery of a bat in order to frighten criminals.[121] The details of the Batman costume change repeatedly through various decades, stories, media and artists' interpretations, but the most distinctive elements remain consistent: a scallop-hem cape; a cowl covering most of the face; a pair of bat-like ears; a stylized bat emblem on the chest; and the ever-present utility belt. Finger and Kane originally conceptualized Batman as having a black cape and cowl and grey suit, but conventions in coloring called for black to be highlighted with blue.[121] Hence, the costume's colors have appeared in the comics as dark blue and grey;[121] as well as black and grey. In the Tim Burton's Batman and Batman Returns films, Batman has been depicted as completely black with a bat in the middle surrounded by a yellow background. Christopher Nolan's The Dark Knight Trilogy depicted Batman wearing high-tech gear painted completely black with a black bat in the middle. Ben Affleck's Batman in the DC Extended Universe films wears a suit grey in color with a black cowl, cape, and bat symbol. Batman's batsuit aids in his combat against enemies, having the properties of both Kevlar and Nomex. It protects him from gunfire and other significant impacts. His gloves typically feature three scallops that protrude from long, gauntlet-like cuffs, although in his earliest appearances he wore short, plain gloves without the scallops.[122] The overall look of the character, particularly the length of the cowl's ears and of the cape, varies greatly depending on the artist. Dennis O'Neil said, "We now say that Batman has two hundred suits hanging in the Batcave so they don't have to look the same ...Everybody loves to draw Batman, and everybody wants to put their own spin on it."[123] Batmobile Main article: Batmobile The 1966 television Batmobile, built by George Barris from a Lincoln Futura concept car Batman's primary vehicle is the Batmobile, which is usually depicted as an imposing black car, often with tailfins that suggest a bat's wings. Batman also has an aircraft called the Batplane (later called the "Batwing"), along with various other means of transportation. In proper practice, the "bat" prefix (as in Batmobile or batarang) is rarely used by Batman himself when referring to his equipment, particularly after some portrayals (primarily the 1960s Batman live-action television show and the Super Friends animated series) stretched the practice to campy proportions. For example, the 1960s television show depicted a Batboat, Bat-Sub, and Batcycle, among other bat-themed vehicles. The 1960s television series Batman has an arsenal that includes such "bat-" names as the Bat-computer, Bat-scanner, bat-radar, bat-cuffs, bat-pontoons, bat-drinking water dispenser, bat-camera with polarized bat-filter, bat-shark repellent bat-spray, and Bat-rope. The storyline "A Death in the Family" suggests that given Batman's grim nature, he is unlikely to have adopted the "bat" prefix on his own. In The Dark Knight Returns, Batman tells Carrie Kelley that the original Robin came up with the name "Batmobile" when he was young, since that is what a kid would call Batman's vehicle. The Batmobile was redesigned in 2011 when DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic books, with the Batmobile being given heavier armor and new aesthetics. Utility belt Main article: Batman's utility belt Batman keeps most of his field equipment in his utility belt. Over the years it has shown to contain an assortment of crime-fighting tools, weapons, and investigative and technological instruments. Different versions of the belt have these items stored in compartments, often as pouches or hard cylinders attached evenly around it. Batman is often depicted as carrying a projectile which shoots a retractable grappling hook attached to a cable. This allows him to attach to distant objects, be propelled into the air, and thus swing from the rooftops of Gotham City. An exception to the range of Batman's equipment are guns, which he refuses to use on principle, since a gun was used in his parents' murder. Bat-Signal Main article: Bat-Signal When Batman is needed, the Gotham City police activate a searchlight with a bat-shaped insignia over the lens called the Bat-Signal, which shines into the night sky, creating a bat-symbol on a passing cloud which can be seen from any point in Gotham. The origin of the signal varies, depending on the continuity and medium. In various incarnations, most notably the 1960s Batman TV series, Commissioner Gordon also has a dedicated phone line, dubbed the Bat-Phone, connected to a bright red telephone (in the TV series) which sits on a wooden base and has a transparent top. The line connects directly to Batman's residence, Wayne Manor, specifically both to a similar phone sitting on the desk in Bruce Wayne's study and the extension phone in the Batcave. Batcave Main article: Batcave The Batcave is Batman's secret headquarters, consisting of a series of caves beneath his mansion, Wayne Manor. As his command center, the Batcave serves multiple purposes; supercomputer, surveillance, redundant power-generators, forensics lab, medical infirmary, private study, training dojo, fabrication workshop, arsenal, hangar and garage. It houses the vehicles and equipment Batman uses in his campaign to fight crime. It is also a trophy room and storage facility for Batman's unique memorabilia collected over the years from various cases he has worked on. In both the comic book Batman: Shadow of the Bat #45 and the 2005 film Batman Begins, the cave is said to have been part of the Underground Railroad. Fictional character biography[edit] Batman's history has undergone many retroactive continuity revisions, both minor and major. Elements of the character's history have varied greatly. Scholars William Uricchio and Roberta E. Pearson noted in the early 1990s, "Unlike some fictional characters, the Batman has no primary urtext set in a specific period, but has rather existed in a plethora of equally valid texts constantly appearing over more than five decades."[124] 20th century[edit] Origin[edit] Main article: Origin of Batman Thomas and Martha Wayne are shot by Joe Chill in Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939), art by Bob Kane The central fixed event in the Batman stories is the character's origin story.[83] As a young boy, Bruce Wayne was horrified and traumatized when he watched his parents, the physician Dr. Thomas Wayne and his wife Martha, murdered with a gun by a mugger named Joe Chill. Batman refuses to utilize any sort of gun on the principle that a gun was used to murder his parents. This event drove him to train his body to its peak condition and fight crime in Gotham City as Batman. Pearson and Uricchio also noted beyond the origin story and such events as the introduction of Robin, "Until recently, the fixed and accruing and hence, canonized, events have been few in number",[83] a situation altered by an increased effort by later Batman editors such as Dennis O'Neil to ensure consistency and continuity between stories.[125] Golden Age[edit] See also: Batman (Earth-Two) In Batman's first appearance in Detective Comics #27, he is already operating as a crime-fighter.[126] Batman's origin is first presented in Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939) and is later expanded upon in Batman #47. As these comics state, Bruce Wayne is born to Dr. Thomas Wayne and his wife Martha, two very wealthy and charitable Gotham City socialites. Bruce is brought up in Wayne Manor, and leads a happy and privileged existence until the age of 8, when his parents are killed by a small-time criminal named Joe Chill while on their way home from a movie theater. That night, Bruce Wayne swears an oath to spend his life fighting crime. He engages in intense intellectual and physical training; however, he realizes that these skills alone would not be enough. "Criminals are a superstitious cowardly lot", Wayne remarks, "so my disguise must be able to strike terror into their hearts. I must be a creature of the night, black, terrible ..." As if responding to his desires, a bat suddenly flies through the window, inspiring Bruce to craft the Batman persona.[127] In early strips, Batman's career as a vigilante earns him the ire of the police. During this period, Bruce Wayne has a fiancé named Julie Madison.[128] In Detective Comics #38, Wayne takes in an orphaned circus acrobat, Dick Grayson, who becomes his vigilante partner, Robin. Batman also becomes a founding member of the Justice Society of America,[129] although he, like Superman, is an honorary member,[130] and thus only participates occasionally. Batman's relationship with the law thaws quickly, and he is made an honorary member of Gotham City's police department.[131] During this time, Alfred Pennyworth arrives at Wayne Manor, and after deducing the Dynamic Duo's secret identities, joins their service as their butler.[132] Silver Age[edit] The Silver Age of Comic Books in DC Comics is sometimes held to have begun in 1956 when the publisher introduced Barry Allen as a new, updated version of the Flash. Batman is not significantly changed by the late 1950s for the continuity which would be later referred to as Earth-One. The lighter tone Batman had taken in the period between the Golden and Silver Ages led to the stories of the late 1950s and early 1960s that often feature many science-fiction elements, and Batman is not significantly updated in the manner of other characters until Detective Comics #327 (May 1964), in which Batman reverts to his detective roots, with most science-fiction elements jettisoned from the series. After the introduction of DC Comics' Multiverse in the 1960s, DC established that stories from the Golden Age star the Earth-Two Batman, a character from a parallel world. This version of Batman partners with and marries the reformed Earth-Two Catwoman (Selina Kyle). The two have a daughter, Helena Wayne, who becomes the Huntress. She assumes the position as Gotham's protector along with Dick Grayson, the Earth-Two Robin, once Bruce Wayne retires to become police commissioner. Wayne holds the position of police commissioner until he is killed during one final adventure as Batman. Batman titles, however, often ignored that a distinction had been made between the pre-revamp and post-revamp Batmen (since unlike the Flash or Green Lantern, Batman comics had been published without interruption through the 1950s) and would occasionally make reference to stories from the Golden Age.[133] Nevertheless, details of Batman's history were altered or expanded upon through the decades. Additions include meetings with a future Superman during his youth, his upbringing by his uncle Philip Wayne (introduced in Batman #208 (Feb. 1969)) after his parents' death, and appearances of his father and himself as prototypical versions of Batman and Robin, respectively.[134][135] In 1980, then-editor Paul Levitz commissioned the Untold Legend of the Batman miniseries to thoroughly chronicle Batman's origin and history. Batman meets and regularly works with other heroes during the Silver Age, most notably Superman, whom he began regularly working alongside in a series of team-ups in World's Finest Comics, starting in 1954 and continuing through the series' cancellation in 1986. Batman and Superman are usually depicted as close friends. As a founding member of the Justice League of America, Batman appears in its first story, in 1960's The Brave and the Bold #28. In the 1970s and 1980s, The Brave and the Bold became a Batman title, in which Batman teams up with a different DC Universe superhero each month. Bronze Age[edit] In 1969, Dick Grayson attends college as part of DC Comics' effort to revise the Batman comics. Additionally, Batman also moves from his mansion, Wayne Manor into a penthouse apartment atop the Wayne Foundation building in downtown Gotham City, in order to be closer to Gotham City's crime. In 1974's "Night of the Stalker" storyline, a diploma on the wall reveals Bruce Wayne as a graduate of Yale Law School.[136] Batman spends the 1970s and early 1980s mainly working solo, with occasional team-ups with Robin and/or Batgirl. Batman's adventures also become somewhat darker and more grim during this period, depicting increasingly violent crimes, including the first appearance (since the early Golden Age) of the Joker as a homicidal psychopath, and the arrival of Ra's al Ghul, a centuries-old terrorist who knows Batman's secret identity. In the 1980s, Dick Grayson becomes Nightwing.[137] In the final issue of The Brave and the Bold in 1983, Batman quits the Justice League and forms a new group called the Outsiders. He serves as the team's leader until Batman and the Outsiders #32 (1986) and the comic subsequently changed its title. Modern Age[edit] After the 12-issue miniseries Crisis on Infinite Earths, DC Comics retconned the histories of some major characters in an attempt at updating them for contemporary audiences. Frank Miller retold Batman's origin in the storyline "Year One" from Batman #404–407, which emphasizes a grittier tone in the character.[138] Though the Earth-Two Batman is erased from history, many stories of Batman's Silver Age/Earth-One career (along with an amount of Golden Age ones) remain canonical in the Post-Crisis universe, with his origins remaining the same in essence, despite alteration. For example, Gotham's police are mostly corrupt, setting up further need for Batman's existence. The guardian Phillip Wayne is removed, leaving young Bruce to be raised by Alfred Pennyworth. Additionally, Batman is no longer a founding member of the Justice League of America, although he becomes leader for a short time of a new incarnation of the team launched in 1987. To help fill in the revised backstory for Batman following Crisis, DC launched a new Batman title called Legends of the Dark Knight in 1989 and has published various miniseries and one-shot stories since then that largely take place during the "Year One" period. Subsequently, Batman begins exhibiting an excessive, reckless approach to his crimefighting, a result of the pain of losing Jason Todd. Batman works solo until the decade's close, when Tim Drake becomes the new Robin.[139] Many of the major Batman storylines since the 1990s have been intertitle crossovers that run for a number of issues. In 1993, DC published "Knightfall". During the storyline's first phase, the new villain Bane paralyzes Batman, leading Wayne to ask Azrael to take on the role. After the end of "Knightfall", the storylines split in two directions, following both the Azrael-Batman's adventures, and Bruce Wayne's quest to become Batman once more. The story arcs realign in "KnightsEnd", as Azrael becomes increasingly violent and is defeated by a healed Bruce Wayne. Wayne hands the Batman mantle to Dick Grayson (then Nightwing) for an interim period, while Wayne trains for a return to the role.[140] The 1994 company-wide crossover storyline Zero Hour: Crisis in Time! changes aspects of DC continuity again, including those of Batman. Noteworthy among these changes is that the general populace and the criminal element now considers Batman an urban legend rather than a known force. Batman once again becomes a member of the Justice League during Grant Morrison's 1996 relaunch of the series, titled JLA. During this time, Gotham City faces catastrophe in the decade's closing crossover arc. In 1998's "Cataclysm" storyline, Gotham City is devastated by an earthquake and ultimately cut off from the United States. Deprived of many of his technological resources, Batman fights to reclaim the city from legions of gangs during 1999's "No Man's Land". Meanwhile, Batman's relationship with the Gotham City Police Department changed for the worse with the events of "Batman: Officer Down" and "Batman: War Games/War Crimes"; Batman's long-time law enforcement allies Commissioner Gordon and Harvey Bullock are forced out of the police department in "Officer Down", while "War Games" and "War Crimes" saw Batman become a wanted fugitive after a contingency plan of his to neutralize Gotham City's criminal underworld is accidentally triggered, resulting in a massive gang war that ends with the sadistic Black Mask the undisputed ruler of the city's criminal gangs. Lex Luthor arranges for the murder of Batman's on-again, off-again love interest Vesper Lynd (introduced in the mid-1990s) during the "Bruce Wayne: Murderer?" and "Bruce Wayne: Fugitive" story arcs. Though Batman is able to clear his name, he loses another ally in the form of his new bodyguard Sasha, who is recruited into the organization known as "Checkmate" while stuck in prison due to her refusal to turn state's evidence against her employer. While he was unable to prove that Luthor was behind the murder of Vesper, Batman does get his revenge with help from Talia al Ghul in Superman/Batman #1–6. 21st century[edit] 2000s[edit] DC Comics' 2005 miniseries Identity Crisis reveals that JLA member Zatanna had edited Batman's memories to prevent him from stopping the Justice League from lobotomizing Dr. Light after he raped Sue Dibny. Batman later creates the Brother I satellite surveillance system to watch over and, if necessary, kill the other heroes after he remembered. The revelation of Batman's creation and his tacit responsibility for the Blue Beetle's death becomes a driving force in the lead-up to the Infinite Crisis miniseries, which again restructures DC continuity. Batman and a team of superheroes destroy Brother EYE and the OMACs, though, at the very end, Batman reaches his apparent breaking point when Alexander Luthor Jr. seriously wounds Nightwing. Picking up a gun, Batman nearly shoots Luthor in order to avenge his former sidekick, until Wonder Woman convinces him to not pull the trigger. Following Infinite Crisis, Bruce Wayne, Dick Grayson (having recovered from his wounds), and Tim Drake retrace the steps Bruce had taken when he originally left Gotham City, to "rebuild Batman".[141] In the Face the Face storyline, Batman and Robin return to Gotham City after their year-long absence. Part of this absence is captured during Week 30 of the 52 series, which shows Batman fighting his inner demons.[142] Later on in 52, Batman is shown undergoing an intense meditation ritual in Nanda Parbat. This becomes an important part of the regular Batman title, which reveals that Batman is reborn as a more effective crime fighter while undergoing this ritual, having "hunted down and ate" the last traces of fear in his mind.[143][144] At the end of the "Face the Face" story arc, Bruce officially adopts Tim (who had lost both of his parents at various points in the character's history) as his son.[145] The follow-up story arc in Batman, Batman and Son, introduces Damian Wayne, who is Batman's son with Talia al Ghul. Although originally, in Batman: Son of the Demon, Bruce's coupling with Talia was implied to be consensual, this arc retconned it into Talia forcing herself on Bruce.[146] Batman, along with Superman and Wonder Woman, reforms the Justice League in the new Justice League of America series,[147] and is leading the newest incarnation of the Outsiders.[148] Grant Morrison's 2008 storyline, "Batman R.I.P." featured Batman being physically and mentally broken by the enigmatic villain Doctor Hurt and attracted news coverage in advance of its highly promoted conclusion, which would speculated to feature the death of Bruce Wayne.[149] However, though Batman is shown to possibly perish at the end of the arc, the two-issue arc "Last Rites", which leads into the crossover storyline "Final Crisis", shows that Batman survives his helicopter crash into the Gotham City River and returns to the Batcave, only to be summoned to the Hall of Justice by the JLA to help investigate the New God Orion's death. The story ends with Batman retrieving the god-killing bullet used to kill Orion, setting up its use in "Final Crisis".[150] In the pages of Final Crisis Batman is reduced to a charred skeleton.[151] In Final Crisis #7, Wayne is shown witnessing the passing of the first man, Anthro.[152][153] Wayne's "death" sets up the three-issue Battle for the Cowl miniseries in which Wayne's ex-proteges compete for the "right" to assume the role of Batman, which concludes with Grayson becoming Batman,[154] while Tim Drake takes on the identity of the Red Robin.[155] Dick and Damian continue as Batman and Robin, and in the crossover storyline "Blackest Night", what appears to be Bruce's corpse is reanimated as a Black Lantern zombie,[156] but is later shown that Bruce's corpse is one of Darkseid's failed Batman clones. Dick and Batman's other friends conclude that Bruce is alive.[157][158] 2010s[edit] Bruce subsequently returned in Morrison's miniseries Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne, which depicted his travels through time from prehistory to present-day Gotham.[159][160][161] Bruce's return set up Batman Incorporated, an ongoing series which focused on Wayne franchising the Batman identity across the globe, allowing Dick and Damian to continue as Gotham's Dynamic Duo. Bruce publicly announced that Wayne Enterprises will aid Batman on his mission, known as "Batman, Incorporated". However, due to rebooted continuity that occurred as part of DC Comics' 2011 relaunch of all of its comic books, The New 52, Dick Grayson was restored as Nightwing with Wayne serving as the sole Batman once again. The relaunch also interrupted the publication of Batman, Incorporated, which resumed its story in 2012–2013 with changes to suit the new status quo. Cultural impact and legacy[edit] Batman has become a pop culture icon, recognized around the world. The character's presence has extended beyond his comic book origins; events such as the release of the 1989 Batman film and its accompanying merchandising "brought the Batman to the forefront of public consciousness".[162] In an article commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the character, The Guardian wrote, "Batman is a figure blurred by the endless reinvention that is modern mass culture. He is at once an icon and a commodity: the perfect cultural artefact for the 21st century."[163] In other media[edit] Main article: Batman franchise media Adam West as Batman in the 1960s Batman TV series The character of Batman has appeared in various media aside from comic books, such as newspaper syndicated comic strips, books, radio dramas, television, a stage show, and several theatrical feature films. The first adaptation of Batman was as a daily newspaper comic strip which premiered on October 25, 1943.[164] That same year the character was adapted in the 15-part serial Batman, with Lewis Wilson becoming the first actor to portray Batman on screen. While Batman never had a radio series of his own, the character made occasional guest appearances in The Adventures of Superman, starting in 1945 on occasions when Superman voice actor Bud Collyer needed time off.[165] A second movie serial, Batman and Robin, followed in 1949, with Robert Lowery taking over the role of Batman. The exposure provided by these adaptations during the 1940s "helped make [Batman] a household name for millions who never bought a comic book".[165] In the 1964 publication of Donald Barthelme's collection of short stories Come Back, Dr. Caligari, Barthelme wrote "The Joker's Greatest Triumph". Batman is portrayed for purposes of spoof as a pretentious French-speaking rich man.[166] Television[edit] The Batman television series, starring Adam West, premiered in January 1966 on the ABC television network. Inflected with a camp sense of humor, the show became a pop culture phenomenon. In his memoir, Back to the Batcave, West notes his dislike for the term 'camp' as it was applied to the 1960s series, opining that the show was instead a farce or lampoon, and a deliberate one, at that. The series ran for 120 episodes, ending in 1968. In between the first and second season of the Batman television series, the cast and crew made the theatrical film Batman (1966). The Who recorded the theme song from the Batman show for their 1966 EP Ready Steady Who, and The Kinks performed the theme song on their 1967 album Live at Kelvin Hall. Despite not having an immediate continuation, the series spawned a (failed) pilot episode for a spin-off Batgirl television series and, decades later, the Batman '66 (2013-2016) comic book series and the animated films Batman: Return of the Caped Crusaders (2016) and Batman vs. Two-Face (2017), and even the mockumentary Return to the Batcave: The Misadventures of Adam and Burt (2003). In the 1996 episode Heroes and Villians of Only Fools and Horses, David Jason spoofed the role of Batman.[167] The popularity of the Batman TV series also resulted in the first animated adaptation of Batman in The Batman/Superman Hour;[168] the Batman segments of the series were repackaged as The Adventures of Batman and Batman with Robin the Boy Wonder which produced thirty-three episodes between 1968 and 1977. From 1973 until 1986, Batman had a starring role in ABC's Super Friends series, which was animated by Hanna-Barbera. Olan Soule was the voice of Batman in all these shows, but was eventually replaced during Super Friends by Adam West, who also voiced the character in Filmation's 1977 series The New Adventures of Batman. Batman as depicted in the award-winning 1990s Batman: The Animated Series In 1992, Batman: The Animated Series premiered on the Fox television network, produced by Warner Bros. Animation and featuring Kevin Conroy as the voice of Batman. The series received considerable acclaim for its darker tone, mature writing, stylistic design, and thematic complexity compared to previous superhero cartoons,[169][170] in addition to multiple Emmy Awards.[171][172] The series' success led to the theatrical film Batman: Mask of the Phantasm (1993),[173] as well as various spin-off TV series that included Superman: The Animated Series, The New Batman Adventures, Justice League and Justice League Unlimited (each of which also featured Conroy as Batman's voice). The futuristic series Batman Beyond also took place in this same animated continuity and featured a newer, younger Batman voiced by Will Friedle, with the elderly Bruce Wayne (again voiced by Conroy) as a mentor. In 2004, an unrelated animated series titled The Batman made its debut with Rino Romano voicing Batman. In 2008, this show was replaced by another animated series, Batman: The Brave and the Bold, featuring Diedrich Bader's voice as Batman. In 2013, a new CGI-animated series titled Beware the Batman made its debut, with Anthony Ruivivar voicing Batman.[174] In 2014, the live-action TV series Gotham premiered on the Fox network, featuring David Mazouz as a 12-year-old Bruce Wayne. In 2018, when the series was renewed for its fifth and final season it was announced that Batman would make an appearance in the show's series finale's flash-forward. Iain Glen portrays Bruce Wayne in the live-action series Titans, appearing in the show's second season in 2019.[175] Prior to Glen, Batman was played by stunt doubles Alain Moussi and Maxim Savarias in the first season.[176][177] To commemorate the 75th anniversary of the character, Warner Bros aired the television short film, Batman: Strange Days, that was also posted on DC's YouTube channel. In August 2019, it was announced that Kevin Conroy would make his live-action television debut as an older Bruce Wayne in the upcoming Arrowverse crossover, Crisis on Infinite Earths.[178] In the crossover, he portrayed a parallel universe iteration of Batman from Earth-99. In Batwoman, the Earth-Prime version of Bruce Wayne / Batman is portrayed by Warren Christie.[179] Film[edit] Main article: Batman in film Michael Keaton as the eponymous character in the 1989 film Batman. Batman's first cinematographic adventures consisted of the 1943 serial film Batman and its 1949 sequel Batman and Robin, which both depicted a government-backed version of Batman and Robin (censorship at the time would not have allowed for vigilantes to be depicted as unauthorized crimefighters). The serials (especially the first one) are, though, notorious for their accentuation on anti-Japanese sentiments due to their World War II-period setting. As mentioned earlier, in 1966, 20th Century Fox produced the first Batman feature film, titled Batman, set in the universe and featuring most of the actors from the TV series. In 1989, Warner Bros. released the live-action feature film Batman, directed by Tim Burton and starring Michael Keaton as the title character. The film was a huge success; not only was it the top-grossing film of the year, but at the time was the fifth highest-grossing film in history.[180] The film also won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction.[181] The film's success spawned three sequels: Batman Returns (1992), Batman Forever (1995) and Batman & Robin (1997), the latter two of which were directed by Joel Schumacher instead of Burton, and replaced Keaton as Batman with Val Kilmer and George Clooney, respectively. The second Schumacher film failed to outgross any of its predecessors and was critically panned, causing Warner Bros. to cancel the planned fourth sequel, Batman Unchained,[182] and end the initial film series. Christian Bale as Batman in the 2005 film Batman Begins In 2005, Batman Begins was released by Warner Bros. as a reboot of the film series, directed by Christopher Nolan and starring Christian Bale as Batman. Its sequel, The Dark Knight (2008), set the record for the highest grossing opening weekend of all time in the U.S., earning approximately $158 million,[183] and became the fastest film to reach the $400 million mark in the history of American cinema (eighteenth day of release).[184] These record-breaking attendances saw The Dark Knight end its run as the second-highest domestic grossing film (at the time) with $533 million, bested then only by Titanic.[185] The film also won two Academy Awards, including Best Supporting Actor for the late Heath Ledger.[186] It was eventually followed by The Dark Knight Rises (2012), which served as a conclusion to Nolan's film series. Ben Affleck as Batman in the DC Extended Universe Since 2008, Batman has also starred in various direct-to-video animated films under the DC Universe Animated Original Movies banner. Kevin Conroy has reprised his voice role of Batman for several of these films while others have featured celebrity voice actors in the role, including Jeremy Sisto, William Baldwin, Bruce Greenwood, Ben McKenzie, and Peter Weller.[187] A Lego-themed version of Batman was also featured as one of the protagonists in the animated film The Lego Movie (2014), with Will Arnett providing the voice.[188] Arnett reprised the voice role for the spin-off film The Lego Batman Movie (2017)[189] (which, among other, depicts Batman's first meeting with both Barbara Gordon and Dick Grayson, and their becoming Batgirl and Robin/Nightwing, respectively), and for the sequel The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part (2019), which curiously depicts Batman's wedding to an original character. In 2016, Ben Affleck began portraying Batman in the DC Extended Universe with the release of the film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, directed by Zack Snyder,[190] a younger child version of the character was played by Brandon Spink in the same film. Affleck also made a cameo appearance as Batman in David Ayer's film Suicide Squad (2016).[191] Affleck reprised the role in the 2017 film Justice League,[192][193] also set in the DC Extended Universe.[194][195][196] Dante Pereira-Olson portrays a young Bruce Wayne in the 2019 film Joker.[197][198] In 2019, Robert Pattinson was cast to play Batman in an upcoming reboot of the franchise, The Batman, releasing in 2022.[199] Fine art[edit] Starting with the Pop Art period, and on a continuing basis, since the 1960s, the character of Batman has been "appropriated" by multiple visual artists and incorporated into contemporary artwork,[200][201] most notably by Andy Warhol,[202][203] Roy Lichtenstein,[204] Mel Ramos,[205][206] Dulce Pinzon,[207] Mr. Brainwash,[208] Raymond Pettibon,[209] Peter Saul,[210] and others.[208] Video games[edit] See also: List of Batman video games Since 1986, Batman has starred in multiple video games, most of which were adaptations of the various cinematic or animated incarnations of the character. Among the most successful of these games is the Batman: Arkham series. The first installment, Batman: Arkham Asylum (2009), was released by Rocksteady Studios to critical acclaim; review aggregator Metacritic reports it as having received 92% positive reviews.[211] It was followed by the sequel Batman: Arkham City (2011), which also received widespread acclaim and holds a Metacritic ranking of 94%.[212] A prequel game titled Batman: Arkham Origins (2013) was later released by WB Games Montréal.[213] A fourth game titled Batman: Arkham Knight (2015) has also been released by Rocksteady.[214] As with most animated Batman productions, Kevin Conroy has provided the voice of the character for these games, with the exception of Arkham Origins in which the younger Batman is voiced by Roger Craig Smith. In 2016, Telltale Games released Batman: The Telltale Series adventure game, which changed the Wayne family's history as it is depicted in the Batman mythos.[215] A sequel, titled Batman: The Enemy Within, was released in 2017.[216] Role-playing games[edit] Mayfair Games published the DC Heroes role-playing game in 1985, then published the 80-page supplement Batman the following year, written by Mike Stackpole, with cover art by Ed Hannigan.[217] In 1989, Mayfair Games published an updated 96-page softcover Batman Sourcebook, again written by Mike Stackpole, with additional material by J. Santana, Louis Prosperi, Jack Barker and Ray Winninger, with graphic design by Gregory Scott, and cover and interior art by DC Comics staff.[218] Mayfair released a simplified version of DC Heroes called The Batman Role-Playing Game in 1989 to coincide with the Batman film.[219] Interpretations[edit] Gay interpretations[edit] Further information: Homosexuality in the Batman franchise Gay interpretations of the character have been part of the academic study of Batman since psychologist Fredric Wertham asserted in Seduction of the Innocent in 1954 that "Batman stories are psychologically homosexual ...The Batman type of story may stimulate children to homosexual fantasies, of the nature of which they may be unconscious."[220] Andy Medhurst wrote in his 1991 essay "Batman, Deviance, and Camp" that Batman is interesting to gay audiences because "he was one of the first fictional characters to be attacked on the grounds of his presumed homosexuality".[221] Professor of film and cultural studies Will Brooker argues the validity of a queer reading of Batman, and that gay readers would naturally find themselves drawn to the lifestyle depicted within, whether the character of Bruce Wayne himself were explicitly gay or not. He also identifies a homophobic element to the vigor with which mainstream fandom rejects the possibility of a gay reading of the character.[222] In 2005, painter Mark Chamberlain displayed a number of watercolors depicting both Batman and Robin in suggestive and sexually explicit poses,[223] prompting DC to threaten legal action.[224] Creators associated with the character have expressed their own opinions. Writer Alan Grant has stated, "The Batman I wrote for 13 years isn't gay ...everybody's Batman all the way back to Bob Kane ...none of them wrote him as a gay character. Only Joel Schumacher might have had an opposing view."[225] Frank Miller views the character as sublimating his sexual urges into crimefighting so much so that he's "borderline pathological", concluding "He'd be much healthier if he were gay."[226] Grant Morrison said that "Gayness is built into Batman ...Obviously as a fictional character he's intended to be heterosexual, but the basis of the whole concept is utterly gay."[227] Psychological interpretations[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2019) Batman has been the subject of psychological study for some time, and there have been a number of interpretations into the character's psyche. In Batman and Psychology: A Dark and Stormy Knight, Dr. Travis Langley argues that the concept of archetypes as described by psychologists Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell is present in the Batman mythos, such that the character represents the "shadow archetype". This archetype, according to Langley, represents a person's own dark side; it is not necessarily an evil one, but rather one that is hidden from the outside and concealed from both the world and oneself. Langley argues that Bruce Wayne confronts his own darkness early in life; he chooses to use it to instill fear in wrongdoers, with his bright and dark sides working together to fight evil. Langley uses the Jungian perspective to assert that Batman appeals to our own need to face our "shadow selves".[228][229] Langley also taught a class called Batman, a title he was adamant about. "I could have called it something like the Psychology of Nocturnal Vigilantism, but no. I called it Batman," Langley says.[230] Several psychologists have explored Bruce Wayne/Batman's mental health. Robin. S. Rosenberg evaluated his actions and problems to determine if they reach the level of mental disorders. She examined the possibility of several mental health issues, including dissociative identity disorder, obsessive–compulsive disorder, and several others. She concluded that Bruce Wayne/Batman may have a disorder or a combination of disorders but due to his fictional nature, a definitive diagnosis will remain unknown.[231][232][233] However, Langley himself states in his book that Batman is far too functional and well-adjusted, due to his training, confrontation of his fear early on and other factors, to be mentally ill. More likely, he asserts Batman's mental attitude is far more in line with a dedicated Olympic athlete. References[edit] ^ Zalben, Alex (March 28, 2014). "When Is Batman's Birthday, Actually?". MTV News. New York City: Viacom. Archived from the original on July 26, 2014. Retrieved August 9, 2014. ^ a b "DC Entertainment To Give Classic Batman Writer Credit in 'Gotham' and 'Batman v Superman' (Exclusive)". Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2015. ^ a b Sims, Chris (October 21, 2015). "Bill Finger Has A Creator Credit On This Week's Batman Comics". Comics Alliance. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2015. ^ Batman #242 (June 1972) ^ Detective Comics #846 (Sept. 2008) ^ "DIAL B for BLOG – THE WORLD'S GREATEST COMIC BLOGAZINE". Archived from the original on August 19, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2015. ^ Daniels (1999), p. 18 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Steranko, Jim. The Steranko History of Comics 1. Reading, PA: Supergraphics, 1970. ( ISBN 978-0-517-50188-7) ^ Daniels (2004), pp. 18–20 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels2004 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), pp. 21, 23 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Havholm, Peter; Sandifer, Philip (Autumn 2003). "Corporate Authorship: A Response to Jerome Christensen". Critical Inquiry. 30 (#1): 192. doi:10.1086/380810. ISSN 0093-1896. S2CID 162105264. ^ Biography by Joe Desris, in The Batman Archives Volume 3 (DC Comics, 1994), p. 223. ISBN 978-1-56389-099-4 ^ Daniels (2004), pp. 21, 23 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels2004 (help) ^ a b Kane, Andrae, p. 44. ^ a b Kane, Andrae, p. 41. ^ Daniels (2003), p. 23 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels2003 (help) ^ Boichel, Bill. "Batman: Commodity as Myth." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, pp. 6–7. ^ Daniels (2004), p. 31 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels2004 (help) ^ Groth, Gary (October 2005). "Jerry Robinson". The Comics Journal. 1 (#271): 80–81. ISSN 0194-7869. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2007. ^ Comic Book Artist #3. Winter 1999. TwoMorrows Publishing ^ "Comic Book Interview Super Special: Batman" Fictioneer Press, 1989 ^ Daniels (1999), p. 25 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Wright, Bradford W. Comic Book Nation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 2001. ISBN 978-0-8018-7450-5, p. 19. ^ a b Daniels (1999), p. 29 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p), Sheldon Moldoff (i). "The Batman and How He Came to Be" Detective Comics #33: 1–2 (Nov. 1939), DC Comics ^ Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939), Grand Comics Database Archived October 25, 2003, at the Wayback Machine ^ John Jefferson Darowski, "The Mythic Symbols of Batman Archived April 21, 2008, at the Wayback Machine" December 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2008. Archived on March 20, 2008. ^ a b Wright, p. 17. ^ Daniels (1999), p. 38 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (2003), p. 36 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels2003 (help) ^ Eury, Michael (2009). The Batcave Companion: An Examination of the "New Look" (1964–1969) and Bronze Age (1970–1979) Batman and Detective Comics. Kronenberg, Michael. Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Pub. p. 11. ISBN 978-1-893905-78-8. OCLC 144224145. ^ "GCD :: Issue :: Detective Comics #37". www.comics.org. Retrieved April 24, 2019. ^ a b Daniels (1999), p. 42 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ a b Boichel, p. 9. ^ Wright (2001), p. 59 harvp error: no target: CITEREFWright2001 (help) ^ Edmund Hamilton (w), Curt Swan (p). "The Mightiest Team In the World" Superman #76 (June 1952), DC Comics ^ Daniels (1999), p. 88 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), p. 91 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), p. 84 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Boichel, p. 13. ^ York, Christopher (2000). "All in the Family: Homophobia and Batman Comics in the 1950s". The International Journal of Comic Art. 2 (#2): 100–110. ^ Daniels (1999), p. 94 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), p. 95 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Bill Finger (w), Sheldon Moldoff (p). "Gotham Gang Line-Up!" Detective Comics #328 (June 1964), DC Comics ^ Benton, Mike. The Comic Book in America: An Illustrated History. Dallas: Taylor, 1989. ISBN 978-0-87833-659-3, p. 69. ^ Daniels (1999), p. 115 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Wright, p. 233. ^ Pearson & Uricchio (1991), p. 18 harvp error: no target: CITEREFPearsonUricchio1991 (help) "Notes from the Batcave: An Interview with Dennis O'Neil." ^ Daniels (1999), p. 140 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), p. 141 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ "Batman Artist Rogers is Dead". SciFi Wire. March 28, 2007. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009: "Even though their Batman run was only six issues, the three laid the foundation for later Batman comics. Their stories include the classic 'Laughing Fish' (in which the Joker's face appeared on fish); they were adapted for Batman: The Animated Series in the 1990s. Earlier drafts of the 1989 Batman movie with Michael Keaton as the Dark Knight were based heavily on their work." ^ Boichel, p. 15 ^ Daniels (1999), pp. 147, 149 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Wright, p. 267. ^ Daniels (1999), pp. 155, 157 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), p. 161 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Weldon, Glen (2016). The Caped Crusade: Batman and the Rise of Nerd Culture. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4767-5669-1. ^ a b c d "2000s". DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle. Dorling Kindersley. 2010. ISBN 978-0-7566-6742-9. ^ "Diamond's 2005 Year-End Sales Charts & Market Share". newsarama.com. 2006. Archived from the original on May 25, 2006. Retrieved October 26, 2006. ^ "July 2005 Sales Charts: All-Star Batman & Robin Lives Up To Its Name". newsarama.com. 2005. Archived from the original on September 7, 2006. Retrieved October 26, 2006. ^ Review by Iann Robinson, Crave Online ^ Review by William Gatevackes, PopMatters, February 10, 2006 Archived February 22, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Phillips, Dan (August 8, 2009). "Grant Morrison's New Batman and Robin". IGN. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved August 8, 2009. ^ George, Richard (March 11, 2009). "Morrison discusses Batman and Robin". IGN. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2009. ^ Wilkins, Alasdair (June 27, 2009). "Batman Is Reborn ... With A Vengeance". io9. Archived from the original on June 30, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2009. ^ Joshua Yehl (March 23, 2016). "Batman's Scott Snyder and Greg Capullo on the New Batsuit and Bloom's Identity". IGN. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. ^ "'Dark Knight III: The Master Race' Comic Book Prompts Reflection and a Look Ahead". The New York Times. November 23, 2015. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2017. ^ ""Action," "Detective Comics" Return To Original Numbering For "Rebirth"". ComicBookResources.com. February 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2016. "Action Comics'" numbering will pick up with #957 and "Detective" will be at #934. Both series will be released on a twice-monthly schedule, at a $2.99 price. ^ Johnston, Rich (October 6, 2017). "The End Of DC Rebirth Announced At New York Comic-Con". bleedingcool. Retrieved March 11, 2018. ^ Bonthuys, Darryn (December 1, 2017). "The Rebirth era is over, as a new direction begins in DC Universe". criticalhit. Retrieved March 11, 2018. ^ "Batman #85". DCComics. December 18, 2019. Retrieved February 6, 2020. ^ Dennis O'Neil, Batman: Knightfall. 1994, Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-553-09673-6 ^ Daniels (1999) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help)[page needed] ^ Pearson & Uricchio (1991), p. 202 harvp error: no target: CITEREFPearsonUricchio1991 (help) ^ Morrison, Grant (w). Batman Incorporated v2, #0 (Sept. 2012), DC Comics ^ Scott Beatty, The Batman Handbook: The Ultimate Training Manual. 2005, Quirk Books, p51. ISBN 978-1-59474-023-7 ^ Aichele, G. (1997). "Rewriting Superman" in G. Aichele & T. Pippin (eds.), The Monstrous and the Unspeakable: The Bible as Fantastic Literature, pp. 75–101. Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press. ^ Superman (vol. 2) #53 ^ "Holy Wisdom, Batman!: 24 Most Famous Batman Quotes". brightdrops.com. Retrieved May 13, 2019. ^ Boucher, Geoff (August 13, 2010). "Batman versus Superman as class warfare? Grant Morrison: 'Bruce has a butler, Clark has a boss'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. ^ T. James Musler. 2006. Unleashing the Superhero in Us All. ^ Brooker, Will (2001). Batman Unmasked. NY/London: Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 368. ISBN 978-0-8264-1343-7. ^ a b c d e Pearson; Uricchio. "'I'm Not Fooled By That Cheap Disguise.'" p. 186. ^ Pearson; Uricchio. "Notes from the Batcave: An Interview with Dennis O'Neil" p. 23. ^ Daniels (1999), p. 31 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ a b c Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939), Bill Finger, Bob Kane ^ a b c Batman #1 (spring 1940), Bill Finger, Bob Kane ^ Pearson & Uricchio (1991), p. 194 harvp error: no target: CITEREFPearsonUricchio1991 (help) ^ Lewis, Andrew. "Batman: 15 Things You Didn't Know About Bruce Wayne". ScreenRant. Retrieved May 13, 2019. ^ Sharrett, Christopher. "Batman and the Twilight of the Idols: An Interview with Frank Miller". The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 44. ^ Pearson, p. 208. ^ Dennis O'Neil, Wizard Batman Special 1998 ^ Terrence R. Wandtke. The Amazing Transforming Superhero!: Essays on the Revision of Characters on the Revision of Characters in Comic Books, Film and Television. p. 91. ^ Kane, Bob (1989). Batman & Me: An Autobiography. Andrae, Tom. Forestville, CA: Eclipse Books. p. 45. ISBN 1-56060-017-9. OCLC 21114759. ^ Alex S. Romagnoli; Gian S. Pagnucci. Enter the Superheroes: American Values, Culture, and the Canon of Superhero Literature. p. 27. ^ a b Boichel, p. 8. ^ a b Daniels (1995), p. 138 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1995 (help) ^ Loeb, Jeph (w), McGuinness, Ed (p), Vines, Dexter (i). "Running Wild" Superman/Batman #3 (Dec. 2003), DC Comics ^ Boichel, p. 7. ^ Langley, Travis (2012). Batman and Psychology: A Dark and Stormy Knight. John Wiley & Sons. p. 179. ^ Langley, 180–210 ^ Esposito, Joey (March 5, 2013). "Why Damian Wayne is the Best Robin". IGN. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. ^ Saul, Josh (February 25, 2013). "DC killing off Batman's 'Boy Wonder' Damian Wayne in new comic book". The New York Post. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. ^ Franich, Darren (February 12, 2014). "Batman has a new female sidekick: Meet Bluebird". Entertainment Weekly Popwatch. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. ^ Batman #666 (page 2) ^ Grant Morrison. Batman #676 ^ geek-news.mtv.com/2011/03/22/batman's-top-10-love-interests/[dead link] ^ a b "Batman's Top 10 Love Interests". MTV News. March 22, 2011. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. ^ Catwoman (vol. 4) #1 (Sept. 2011) ^ a b Batman (vol. 3) #14 (March 2017) ^ Batman (vol. 3) #15 (March 2017) ^ a b c Batman (vol. 3) #32 (Dec. 2017) ^ Batman (vol. 3) #24 (Aug. 2017) ^ Mike Conray, 500 Great Comicbook Action Heroes. 2002, Collins & Brown. ISBN 978-1-84411-004-9 ^ Greenberger, Robert (2008). The Essential Batman Encyclopedia. Del Rey Books. ISBN 978-0-345-50106-6. ^ Grant Morrison (w), Howard Porter (p). "War of the Worlds" JLA #3 (March 1997), DC Comics ^ Scott Lobdell (w), Ed Benes and Jack Herbert (p). "Superman: Doomed" Superman #31 (July 2014), DC Comics ^ Wood, Robert (October 30, 2017). "What Skills Does Batman Have?". Building the Bat. Archived from the original on March 16, 2019. Retrieved September 10, 2019. ^ https://dc.fandom.com/wiki/Category:Peak_Human_Condition ^ Everytime Batman Has Used A Lazarus Pit. NeedleMouse Productions. March 11, 2019 – via YouTube. ^ a b c Daniels (1999) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help)[page needed] ^ Daniels (1999), p. 98 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Daniels (1999), pp. 159–60 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Batman Annual (vol. 3) #2 (Jan. 2018) ^ Pearson, p. 191. ^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p). "The Case of the Chemical Syndicate" Detective Comics #27 (May 1939), DC Comics ^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p). "The Batman Wars Against the Dirigible of Doom" Detective Comics #33 (Nov. 1939), DC Comics ^ She first appears in Detective Comics #31 (Sept. 1939) ^ Paul Levitz (w), Joe Staton (p). "The Untold Origin of the Justice Society" DC Special #29 (Sept. 1977), DC Comics ^ Gardner Fox (w). All Star Comics #3 (Winter 1940/1941), DC Comics ^ Bill Finger (w), Bob Kane (p). Batman #7 (Nov. 1941), DC Comics ^ Batman #16 (May 1943); his original last name, Beagle, is revealed in Detective Comics #96 (Feb. 1945) ^ One example is the Englehart/Rogers run of the late 1970s, which has editorial notes directing readers to issues such as Detective Comics #46 and Batman #1 and 59. ^ Bill Finger (w), Sheldon Moldoff (p). "The First Batman" Detective Comics #235 (Sept. 1956), DC Comics ^ Edmond Hamilton (w), Dick Sprang (p). "When Batman Was Robin" Detective Comics #226 (Dec. 1955), DC Comics ^ "Why Batman went to Yale". yalealumnimagazine.com. Retrieved 2020-08-15. ^ Beatty, Scott (2008). "Batman". In Dougall, Alastair (ed.). The DC Comics Encyclopedia. London: Dorling Kindersley. pp. 40–44. ISBN 978-0-7566-4119-1. ^ Miller, Frank; David Mazzucchelli; Richmond Lewis (1987). Batman: Year One. DC Comics. p. 98. ISBN 978-1-85286-077-6. ^ Alan Grant (w), Norm Breyfogle (p). "Master of Fear" Batman #457 (Dec. 1990), DC Comics ^ Dixon, Chuck. et al. "Batman: Prodigal". Batman #512–514, Shadow of the Bat #32–34, Detective Comics #679–681, Robin (vol. 4) #11–13. New York: DC Comics, 1995. ^ Infinite Crisis #7, p. 32 ^ 52 #30 ^ Batman #673 ^ Batman #681 ^ James Robinson (w), Don Kramer (p). "Face the Face – Conclusion" Batman #654 (Aug. 2006), DC Comics ^ Batman #656 (October 2006): Bruce: "I remember being drugged senseless and refusing to co-operate in some depraved eugenics experiment." Talia: "Believe me, you cooperated ...magnificently." ^ Brad Meltzer (w), Ed Benes (p). "The Tornado's Path" Justice League of America (vol. 2) #1 (Aug. 2006), DC Comics ^ Chuck Dixon (w), Julian Lopex (p). Batman and the Outsiders (vol. 2) #1 (Nov. 2007), DC Comics ^ Adams, Guy. "Holy smoke, Batman! Are you dead?" November 28, 2008, The Independent. Archived November 28, 2008. ^ Newsarama: "Batman R.I.P. – Finally?" January 15, 2009 Archived January 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ Grant Morrison (w), J. G. Jones (p). "How to Murder the Earth" Final Crisis #6 (Jan. 2009), DC Comics ^ Grant Morrison (w). Final Crisis #7 (Jan. 2009), DC Comics ^ "Grant Morrison: Final Crisis Exit Interview, Part 2". Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved June 7, 2009. ^ Tony Daniel (w). Battle for the Cowl #3 (May 2009), DC Comics ^ Chris Yost (w). Red Robin #1 (August 2009), DC Comics ^ Geoff Johns (w). Blackest Night #0 (June 2009), DC Comics ^ Grant Morrison (w). Batman and Robin #7 (Jan. 2010), DC Comics ^ Grant Morrison (w). Batman and Robin #8 (Feb. 2010), DC Comics ^ Geddes, John (December 9, 2009). "Grant Morrison on return of original Batman". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 12, 2009. Retrieved December 10, 2009. ^ Segura, Alex (December 9, 2009). "DCU in 2010: The Return of Bruce Wayne hits in April". DC Comics. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved December 10, 2009. ^ "Batman solicitations for May 2010 at DC's The Source". DC Comics. February 11, 2010. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved June 17, 2010. ^ Pearson, Roberta E.; Uricchio, William. "Introduction." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 1. ^ Finkelstein, David; Macfarlane, Ross (March 15, 1999). "Batman's big birthday". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on January 14, 2008. Retrieved June 19, 2007. ^ Daniels (1999), p. 50 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ a b Daniels (1999), p. 64 harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1999 (help) ^ Olsen, Lance (November 1986). "Linguistic Pratfalls in Barthelme". South Atlantic Review. 51 (#4): 69–77. doi:10.2307/3199757. JSTOR 3199757. ^ https://www.express.co.uk/showbiz/tv-radio/1367383/only-fools-and-horses-news-david-jason-bbc-batman-robin-nicholas-lyndhurst-leak-tv-uk-spt ^ Boichel, p. 14. ^ "The Greatest Comic Book Cartoons of All Time" Archived May 29, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. IGN. January 26, 2007. Retrieved May 31, 2011. ^ Serafino, Jason (January 13, 2012). "The 25 Best Animated Comic Book TV Shows Of All Time". Complex. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved February 10, 2012. ^ "Batman" (1992) – Awards. IMDB. Retrieved May 31, 2011. ^ "Batman / Superman Awards on Toon Zone". toonzone.net. Retrieved July 19, 2010. ^ "Top 25 Animated Movies of All-Time". IGN. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved October 10, 2012. ^ "Good News/Bad News Batman Fans". toonami.tumblr.com. September 22, 2014. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved September 22, 2014. ^ Boucher, Geoff (April 11, 2019). "'Game Of Thrones' Star Will Portray Bruce Wayne On 'Titans'". Deadline. Retrieved April 11, 2019. ^ Estorari, Daniel (December 14, 2018). "Alain Moussi to Be Batman on Titans" (in Spanish). Retrieved December 17, 2018 – via torredavigilancia.com. ^ Stauffer, Derek (December 20, 2018). "DC Universe's Titans TV Show Batman Actor Revealed". Screen Rant. Retrieved December 21, 2018. ^ Burlingame, Russ (August 4, 2019). "Kevin Conroy To Play Bruce Wayne in Crisis on Infinite Earths". comicbook.com. Retrieved August 10, 2019. ^ Damore, Meagan (May 17, 2020). "Batwoman Casts Alphas Star as Bruce Wayne". CBR.com. Retrieved May 18, 2020. ^ "Batman (1989)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007. Retrieved May 27, 2007. ^ "Batman". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Retrieved October 4, 2008.[permanent dead link] ^ "Before 'Batman Begins': Secret History of the Movies That Almost Got Made". Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. ^ "Opening Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 23, 2008. Retrieved July 20, 2008. ^ "Fastest to $400 million". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2008. ^ "All Time Domestic Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008. ^ "Academy Awards Database – Actor in a Supporting Role, 2008".[permanent dead link] ^ "Voice(s) of Batman". Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2017. ^ Sneider, Jeff (June 26, 2012). "Super voices in play for WB's Lego movie". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2012. ^ Kit, Borys (October 10, 2014). "'Lego Batman' Spinoff Movie in the Works at Warner Bros". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2014. ^ "Ben Affleck To Play Batman In Warner Bros' Batman-Superman Pic; Studio Sets July 17, 2015 Release Date". Deadline Hollywood. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. ^ "2016 brings Batman, Superman and the 'Dawn' of a new superhero universe, 2016". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. ^ "Justice League Producers Explain Where The Movie Picks Up, 2016". Comicbook.com. 2016. Archived from the original on June 26, 2016. ^ "Ben Affleck keeps the title for his Batman movie (very) simple". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 4, 2016. ^ "Joe Manganiello Cast As Deathstroke In Ben Affleck's Batman Movie". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. ^ "Batman standalone movie directed by Ben Affleck confirmed, 2018 release date likely". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. ^ "Ben Affleck Reminds Everyone 'The Batman' Doesn't Exist Until It Does, May Have A Different Title". /Film. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. ^ Davis, Brandon (October 23, 2018). "'Joker': Dante Pereira-Olson Cast as Young Bruce Wayne". ComicBook.com. Retrieved October 23, 2018. ^ Couch, Aaron (October 23, 2018). "Joker' Finds Its Young Bruce Wayne and Alfred Pennyworth". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 23, 2018. ^ McNary, Dave (May 31, 2019). "Robert Pattinson Is Officially 'The Batman'". Variety. Retrieved February 14, 2020. ^ Martin, Deborah (June 19, 2019). "Crystal Bridges exhibit 'Men of Steel, Women of Wonder' lands in San Antonio". ExpressNews.com. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ "Men of Steel, Women of Wonder Debuts at San Antonio Museum of Art". San Antonio Magazine. June 20, 2019. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Gural, Natasha. "Quickly To The Whitney, And Back Again To San Francisco, Chicago For Andy Warhol Beyond Superstardom". Forbes. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Sante, Luc (May 3, 2020). "Andy Warhol, Superstar". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Cohen, Alina (October 1, 2018). "How Roy Lichtenstein Unwittingly Invented Pop Art". Artsy. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Genzlinger, Neil (October 31, 2018). "Mel Ramos, Painter of Female Nudes and Comic Heroes, Dies at 83". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Inc, M. Shanken Communications. "Pop Goes The Easel: Pop Art". Cigar Aficionado. Retrieved July 8, 2020. ^ Jesus, Carlos Suarez De (January 31, 2008). "Immigrants Are Superheroes". Miami New Times. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ a b "Mr. Brainwash will convert a Richard Meier-designed building into a Beverly Hills art museum". The Architect’s Newspaper. February 18, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Storr, Robert (June 2, 2017). "Pettibon's World". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Schjeldahl, Peter. "The In-Your-Face Paintings of Peter Saul". The New Yorker. Retrieved July 7, 2020. ^ Batman: Arkham Asylum at Metacritic, accessed June 12, 2012 Archived August 17, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Batman: Arkham City at Metacritic, accessed June 12, 2012 Archived December 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ May Cover Revealed: Batman: Arkham Origins Archived April 11, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ Ramsay, Randolph. (March 6, 2014). "In Batman: Arkham Knight, the Batmobile Is More Than Just a Car, it's a Tank" Archived June 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine GameSpot. Retrieved June 7, 2015. ^ Webster, Andrew (September 24, 2016). "Telltale's Batman game continues to put its own stamp on the Dark Knight mythology". Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2017. ^ Telltale. "Batman: The Enemy Within". telltale.com. Retrieved January 30, 2018. ^ Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. p. 45. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ Varney, Allen (January 1991). "Roleplaying Reviews". Dragon. TSR, Inc. (165): 69. ^ Pearson & Uricchio (1991), p. 58 harvp error: no target: CITEREFPearsonUricchio1991 (help) ^ Wertham, Fredric. Seduction of the Innocent. Rinehart and Company, Inc., 1954. pp. 189–90. For discussion of Wertham's impact see Brooker (2001). ^ Medhurst, Andy. "Batman, Deviance, and Camp." The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. Routledge: London, 1991. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6, p. 150. ^ Brooker, Will (2001) Batman Unmasked: Analyzing a Cultural Icon, Continuum. ISBN 978-1-62356-752-1, pp. 101 ff. ^ "Mark Chamberlain (American, 1967)". Artnet. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. ^ "Gallery told to drop 'gay' Batman". BBC News Online. August 19, 2005. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. ^ "Is Batman Gay?". Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2005. ^ Sharrett, p. 38. ^ Playboy Grant Morrison interview, accessed May 2, 2012. ^ Langley, Travis. Batman and Psychology: A Dark and Stormy Knight. John Wiley & Sons; 1st edition, 2012, ISBN 1-118-16765-1 ^ "A Dark and Stormy Knight: Why Batman?". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 5, 2016. ^ https://www.hendrix.edu/news/news.aspx?id=61460 ^ Rosenberg, Robin S. "Batman's Mental Health, Part 1". ^ Carlson, Dustin. "Psychology Of Batman: Fictional Superhero Gets Troubling Real-Life Evaluation". ^ Defife, Jared. "Batman Psychological Disorders". Further reading[edit] Beatty, Scott (2005). The Batman Handbook: The Ultimate Training Manual. Quirk Books. ISBN 978-1-59474-023-7. Daniels, Les (1999). Batman: The Complete History. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-2470-5. Daniels, Les (1995). DC Comics: Sixty Years of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes. Bulfinch. ISBN 978-0-8212-2076-4. Daniels, Les (2003). DC Comics: A Celebration of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes. Billboard Books/Watson-Guptill Publications. ISBN 978-0-8230-7919-3. Daniels, Les (April 2004). Batman: The Complete History: The Life and Times of the Dark Knight. ISBN 978-0-8118-4232-7. Jones, Gerard (1995). Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book. Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-03657-8. Pearson, Roberta E.; Uricchio, William, eds. (1991). The Many Lives of the Batman: Critical Approaches to a Superhero and His Media. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-85170-276-6. Wright, Bradford W. (2001). Comic Book Nation: The Transformation of Youth Culture in America. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6514-5. External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Batman at DC Comics' official website Batman Bio at the Unofficial Guide to the DC Universe Batman on DC Database, an external wiki, a DC Comics wiki Batman (1940 – present) Comics Inventory Batman at Curlie v t e Batman Bob Kane Bill Finger Other contributors Characters Supporting characters Enemies In other media Locations in Gotham City Arkham Asylum Batcave Gotham City Police Department S.T.A.R. Labs Wayne Enterprises Wayne Manor Technology Equipment Batarang Batcomputer Batsuit utility belt Bat-Signal Bat phone Transport Batboat Batcopter Batcycle Batmobile Batplane Batman in other media In film In video games In amusement parks In children's books Ongoing publications Detective Comics Batman Batman Beyond Batgirl Batwoman Nightwing Harley Quinn Red Hood and the Outlaws DC Comics – The Legend of Batman Miscellaneous Detective Comics #27 Origin of Batman Homosexuality in the Batman franchise The Bat Whispers Batkid Batkid Begins The Essential Batman Encyclopedia Category v t e Justice League characters Founding members Aquaman Batman Flash/Barry Allen Green Lantern/Hal Jordan Martian Manhunter Superman Wonder Woman Recurring members Amazing-Man Animal Man Atom Ray Palmer Ryan Choi Batgirl Big Barda Black Canary Black Lightning Booster Gold Blue Beetle Captain Atom Captain Marvel/Shazam Catwoman Cyborg Detective Chimp Dr Fate Dr Light/Kimiyo Hoshi Elongated Man Fire Firestorm Flash Jay Garrick Wally West Geo-Force Green Arrow Green Lantern Guy Gardner Jade John Stewart Kyle Rayner Simon Baz Jessica Cruz Harley Quinn Hawkman Carter Hall Katar Hol Hawkgirl and Hawkwoman Shiera Sanders Hall Shayera Hol Kendra Saunders Huntress Ice Lobo Mera Metamorpho Mister Miracle Orion Plastic Man Red Arrow Red Tornado Robin/Nightwing Steel Supergirl Triumph Vixen Zatanna Other characters Supporting characters Alfred Pennyworth Arella A.R.G.U.S. Carol Ferris Highfather Iris West James Gordon Jimmy Olsen Lois Lane Lucius Fox Perry White Queen Hippolyta Allies Amazonians Atlanteans Birds of Prey Doom Patrol GCPD Justice League Dark John Constantine Deadman Detective Chimp Etrigan the Demon Swamp Thing Zatanna Justice Society of America Lantern Corps Guardians of the Universe Zamarons Blue Lantern Corps Green Lantern Corps Indigo Tribe Star Sapphire Corps White Lantern Corps Legion of Super-Heroes Marvel/Shazam Family New Gods Outsiders S.T.A.R. Labs Suicide Squad Teen Titans Robin Starfire Beast Boy Cyborg Raven Young Justice Enemies Villains Amanda Waller Amazo Amos Fortune Anti-Monitor Black Adam Black Hand Black Manta Blockbuster Brainiac Brain Storm Captain Cold Cheetah Circe Darkseid David Graves Despero Doctor Destiny Doctor Light Doctor Polaris Doctor Sivana Doomsday Eclipso Epoch Felix Faust Funky Flashman Gamemnae General Gentleman Ghost Gog Gorilla Grodd Hector Hammond Hyathis Imperiex Joker Kanjar Ro Key King Kull Klarion the Witch Boy Lex Luthor Libra Ma'alefa'ak Magog Manchester Black Manga Khan Manhunter Matter Master Maxwell Lord Merlyn Mongul Morgaine le Fey Nebula Man Nekron Neron OMAC Paragon Per Degaton Professor Ivo Prometheus Queen Bee Queen of Fables Ra's al Ghul Rama Khan Red King Reverse-Flash Shaggy Man Sinestro Siren Solaris Solomon Grundy Sonar Starbreaker Starro Steppenwolf T. O. Morrow Trigon Ultra-Humanite Vandal Savage Weapons Master Wizard Organizations Aryan Brigade Axis Amerika Brotherhood of Evil Cadre Crime Syndicate of America Fearsome Five Female Furies Kobra League of Assassins Legion of Doom Manhunters Parademons Phantom Zone Villains Red Lantern Corps Rogues Royal Flush Gang Secret Six Secret Society of Super Villains Sinestro Corps White Martians Alternative versions Alternate versions of the Justice League Extreme Justice Just'a Lotta Animals Justice Guild of America Justice League 3000 Justice League Dark Justice League Elite Justice League Europe Justice League International Justice League Task Force Justice League United Justice Legion Alpha Super Buddies Super Jrs. Young Justice Others Superman Wonder Woman In other media DC Extended Universe Superman Batman Wonder Woman Flash Aquaman Cyborg Category Articles and topics related to Batman v t e Batman characters Batman family By cryptonym Batman Robin Catwoman Batwoman Batgirl Huntress Nightwing Flamebird Red Robin Red Hood Batwing By public identity Bruce Wayne Dick Grayson Selina Kyle Kathy Kane Bette Kane Barbara Gordon Jason Todd Helena Bertinelli Tim Drake Stephanie Brown Cassandra Cain Kate Kane Damian Wayne Harper Row Duke Thomas Luke Fox Michael Washington Lane Jean-Paul Valley Pets Ace the Bat-Hound Core teams Batman Incorporated Batmen of All Nations Birds of Prey World's Finest Team Supporting characters Main supporting Alfred Pennyworth Julie Madison Martha Wayne Thomas Wayne Vicki Vale Knight Squire Dark Ranger Leslie Thompkins Silver St. Cloud Lucius Fox Orpheus Nightrunner Holly Robinson Legs Manhunter Sasha Bordeaux Misfit Onyx Professor Carter Nichols Ragman Simon Dark Victoria October Andrea Beaumont Police contacts James W. "Jim" Gordon Harvey Bullock Sarah Essen Maggie Sawyer Renee Montoya Crispus Allen Jason Bard Slam Bradley Superhero allies Aquaman Black Canary Cyborg Deadman Flash Green Arrow Green Lantern Hawkgirl Hawkman John Stewart Justice League Justice Society of America Martian Manhunter Metamorpho Plastic Man Power Girl Question Rorschach (Reggie Long) Shazam Spectre Superman Teen Titans Vixen Wally West Wonder Woman Zatanna Neutral characters Amanda Waller Arnold John Flass Azrael Bat-Mite Bronze Tiger Catwoman Creeper Gillian B. Loeb Hamilton Hill Harley Quinn Lady Shiva Lobo Nora Fries Nyssa Raatko Richard Dragon Poison Ivy Suicide Squad Talia al Ghul Vigilante (Dorian Chase) Antagonists Central rogues gallery Bane Black Mask Clayface Deadshot Deathstroke Firefly Hugo Strange Hush Joker Killer Croc Killer Moth Mad Hatter Man-Bat Mr. Freeze Penguin Ra's al Ghul Riddler Scarecrow Two-Face Ventriloquist Victor Zsasz Mobsters Alberto Falcone / Holiday Joe Chill Lew Moxon Carmine Falcone Mario Falcone Sofia Falcone Gigante Sal Maroni Squid Rupert Thorne Tobias Whale Johnny Witts Tony Zucco Recurring antagonists Amanda Waller Amygdala Anarky Black Spider Blockbuster Calendar Man Catman Cavalier Clock King Cluemaster Composite Superman Copperhead Cornelius Stirk Crazy Quilt Crime Doctor David Cain Deacon Blackfire Doctor Death Doctor Double X Doctor Phosphorus Dollmaker Electrocutioner Firebug Flamingo Gearhead Great White Shark Humpty Dumpty Jane Doe Joker's Daughter Key KGBeast King Snake Kite Man Kobra Lex Luthor Maxie Zeus Magpie Mirror Man Night-Slayer Nocturna Onomatopoeia Orca Outsider Owlman Phosphorus Rex Planet Master Polka-Dot Man Professor Milo Professor Pyg Prometheus Rag Doll Ratcatcher Reaper Sensei Signalman Simon Hurt Simon Stagg Solomon Grundy Snowman Spellbinder Swagman Tally Man Ten-Eyed Man Tiger Shark Tweedledum and Tweedledee Wrath Zebra-Man Organizations Circus of Strange Court of Owls League of Assassins Leviathan LexCorp Mutants Terrible Trio Alternative versions Batman Earth-Two Tlano Owlman The Batman Who Laughs Batzarro Thomas Wayne (Flashpoint version) Robin Earth-Two Carrie Kelley Helena Wayne Others Joker Other media 1966 Batman TV series Egghead King Tut 1989–1997 film series Bruce Wayne Joker Vicki Vale Catwoman Penguin Two-Face Riddler Dick Grayson Mr. Freeze Poison Ivy Chase Meridian DC Animated Universe Andrea Beaumont Harley Quinn Batman Beyond Terry McGinnis The Dark Knight Trilogy Bruce Wayne Rachel Dawes Joker DC Extended Universe Bruce Wayne Harley Quinn Joker Arkhamverse Arkham Knight Gotham Bruce Wayne James Gordon Selina Kyle Fish Mooney Oswald Cobblepot Jerome and Jeremiah Valeska Antagonists Music Meister Category v t e Batman publications and storylines Current series Detective Comics (#27) Batman Batman Beyond Catwoman Harley Quinn Nightwing Red Hood and the Outlaws Completed ongoing series Azrael Batgirl Batgirl and the Birds of Prey Batman and Robin Batman and the Outsiders Batman: Arkham Unhinged Batman: The Dark Knight Batman: Gotham Knights Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight Batman: Shadow of the Bat Batman: Streets of Gotham The Batman Adventures The Batman Chronicles Batman Confidential Batman Family Batman Incorporated Batman/Superman Batwing Batwoman Birds of Prey The Brave and the Bold Gotham by Midnight Gotham Central Gotham City Sirens The Huntress The Joker Man-Bat Red Hood/Arsenal Red Robin Robin Robin: Son of Batman Superman/Batman We Are... Robin World's Finest Comics Completed limited series Anarky Batgirl: Year One Batman & Dracula trilogy Batman and Robin Eternal Batman and the Mad Monk Batman and the Monster Men Batman: Arkham City Batman: Battle for the Cowl Batman Black and White Batman: Cacophony Batman: The Cult Batman: Damned Batman: The Dark Prince Charming The Dark Knight Returns The Dark Knight Strikes Again The Dark Knight III: The Master Race Batman: Dark Victory Batman: The Doom That Came to Gotham Batman Eternal Batman: Gates of Gotham Batman: GCPD Batman: Gotham County Line Batman: The Long Halloween Batman: Nosferatu Batman: Orpheus Rising Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Batman: Three Jokers Batman: Thrillkiller Batman: Turning Points Batman: White Knight The Batman Who Laughs Batman: The Widening Gyre Batman: Year 100 Bat-Mite First Wave Gotham Underground Man-Bat Red Hood: The Lost Days Robin: Year One Section 8 Superman & Batman: Generations Trinity The Untold Legend of the Batman One-shots Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth Castle of the Bat Dark Knight Dynasty Dark Night: A True Batman Story Death of Innocents Digital Justice Gotham Noir Holy Terror Batman/Houdini: The Devil's Workshop In Darkest Knight The Killing Joke KnightGallery Leatherwing The Man Who Laughs Nine Lives Noël Son of the Demon The 12 Cent Adventure Two Faces The Batman Adventures: Mad Love The Berlin Batman Gotham by Gaslight Joker Storylines "Dark Moon Rising" "The Man Behind the Red Hood!" "The Joker's Millions" "Year One" "Year Two" "Batman: A Death in the Family" "Year Three" "The Man Who Falls" "Anarky in Gotham City" "Gothic" "The Return of the Joker" "Prey" "The Last Arkham" "Knightfall" "Contagion" "Legacy" "Cataclysm" "No Man's Land" "Joker: Last Laugh" "Bruce Wayne: Fugitive" "Hush" "Batman: Broken City" "War Games" "City of Crime" "Under the Hood" "War Crimes" "Face the Face" "Batman and Son" "The Resurrection of Ra's al Ghul" "Batman R.I.P." "Whatever Happened to the Caped Crusader?" "Batwoman: Elegy" "Bruce Wayne: The Road Home" "Batman: Night of the Owls" "Batman: Death of the Family" "Zero Year" "Batman: Endgame" "Robin War" "Dark Nights: Metal" "Joker War" "Dark Nights: Death Metal" Intercompany crossovers Batman/Aliens Batman/Daredevil: King of New York Batman/Hellboy/Starman Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham Batman-Spawn: War Devil Batman & Spider-Man: New Age Dawning Batman/Tarzan: Claws of the Cat-woman Batman/Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Batman/The Spirit Batman Versus Predator Daredevil/Batman: Eye for an Eye Spawn/Batman Spider-Man and Batman: Disordered Minds Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Incomplete All Star Batman & Robin, the Boy Wonder Batman: Earth One Related topics Batman: Anarky Batman: Child of Dreams Batman: Haunted Knight Batman Legends DC Comics – The Legend of Batman Elseworlds Publications are listed alphabetically by published titles. Storylines are listed in publication order. Compiled without respect for canon or "current" continuity. v t e Batman franchise media Live-action television Batman episodes Batman OnStar commercials Birds of Prey Return to the Batcave: The Misadventures of Adam and Burt Gotham episodes season 1 2 3 4 5 characters Pennyworth Batwoman Live-action films Batman (1943) Batman and Robin Batman (1966) The Batman 1989–1997 film series Batman (1989) Batman Returns Batman Forever Batman & Robin The Dark Knight Trilogy Batman Begins The Dark Knight The Dark Knight Rises DC Extended Universe Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Suicide Squad Justice League production Zack Snyder's Justice League Animated television The Adventures of Batman The Batman/Superman Hour The Batman/Tarzan Adventure Hour The New Adventures of Batman Batman: The Animated Series episodes The New Batman Adventures episodes Batman Beyond episodes The Batman episodes Batman: The Brave and the Bold episodes Beware the Batman episodes Animated films Mask of the Phantasm SubZero Return of the Joker Mystery of the Batwoman The Batman vs. Dracula Gotham Knight Public Enemies Under the Red Hood Apocalypse Year One The Dark Knight Returns DC Super Heroes Unite Son of Batman Assault on Arkham Animal Instincts Batman vs. Robin Monster Mayhem Bad Blood The Killing Joke Mechs vs. Mutants Return of the Caped Crusaders The Lego Batman Movie Batman and Harley Quinn Batman vs. Two-Face Scooby-Doo! & Batman: The Brave and the Bold Gotham by Gaslight Batman Ninja Batman vs. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Hush Family Matters Soul of the Dragon Animated shorts Chase Me Strange Days Death in the Family Novels The Ultimate Evil Enemies & Allies Wayne of Gotham Enemies in other media Bane Joker Mr. Freeze Penguin Riddler Scarecrow Two-Face Supporting characters in other media Barbara Gordon Catwoman Robin Related topics Batman & Bill Bruce Wayne (unproduced series) Batkid Begins Batman action figures Lego Batman Batman Total Justice Bat phone Bat-Manga!: The Secret History of Batman in Japan List of Batman films cast members List of Batman television series cast members List of Batman video games List of Batman children's books Batman music Batman Live Holy Musical B@man! v t e Batman music Soundtracks Films Batman (score) Batman (soundtrack) Batman Returns Batman Forever (soundtrack) Batman Forever (score) Batman & Robin Batman Begins: Music from the Motion Picture The Dark Knight: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack The Dark Knight Rises Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Video games Music of Batman: Arkham City Batman: Arkham Origins Batman: Arkham Knight Songs TV series "Batman Theme" "Batusi" Batman "Batdance" "Partyman" "The Arms of Orion" "Scandalous!" "The Future" Batman Returns "Face to Face" Batman Forever "Hold Me, Thrill Me, Kiss Me, Kill Me" "Kiss from a Rose" "The Riddler" Batman & Robin "The End Is the Beginning Is the End" "Look into My Eyes" "Gotham City" "Foolish Games" "Moaner" "Lazy Eye" v t e Batman video games Lego series Lego Batman: The Videogame Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham Arkham series Arkham Asylum Arkham City Lockdown Arkham Origins Mobile Blackgate Arkham Knight Arkham VR Telltale series The Telltale Series The Enemy Within Film-based Batman (Ocean, 1989) Batman: The Video Game (NES, 1989) Batman (Mega Drive/Genesis, 1990) Batman (arcade, 1990) Returns Returns (Atari Lynx, 1992) Forever Forever: The Arcade Game Batman & Robin Begins Batman: The Dark Knight (canceled) Animation-based The Animated Series The Adventures of Batman & Robin Beyond: Return of the Joker Chaos in Gotham Gotham City Racer Vengeance Rise of Sin Tzu The Brave and the Bold – The Videogame Other games Batman (1986) The Caped Crusader Return of the Joker Dark Tomorrow DC Universe Online Gotham City Impostors Batman (2013) Gotham Knights Category v t e Batman in amusement parks Of Batman Batman Adventure – The Ride Batman: The Dark Knight Batman The Escape Batman: Knight Flight Batman: Arkham Asylum Batman: The Ride Batman: The Ride (S&S Free Spin) Batman & Robin: The Chiller The Dark Knight Coaster Of derivative characters Harley Quinn Crazy Train The Joker (S&S Worldwide) The Joker (Six Flags Discovery Kingdom) The Joker (Six Flags México) The Joker Funhouse Coaster The Joker's Jinx The Riddler Mindbender Mr Freeze: Reverse Blast The Penguin Riddler's Revenge Of derivative elements Arkham Asylum – Shock Therapy Batwing Spaceshot Batwing Catwoman's Whip Gotham City Gauntlet: Escape from Arkham Asylum v t e Batman in film Stand-alone films Batman (1943 serial) Batman and Robin (1949 serial) Batman (1966 film) The Batman 1989–1997 series Films Batman score soundtrack NES and Game Boy game Sega Genesis game home computer game arcade game Batman Returns soundtrack video game Batman Forever score soundtrack video game arcade game pinball game Batman & Robin soundtrack video game Characters Bruce Wayne Jack Napier Vicki Vale Catwoman Penguin Harvey Dent Riddler Dick Grayson Mr. Freeze Poison Ivy The Dark Knight Trilogy Films Batman Begins soundtrack video game The Dark Knight soundtrack canceled video game The Dark Knight Rises soundtrack Characters Bruce Wayne Rachel Dawes Joker DC Extended Universe Films Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice soundtrack Justice League Zack Snyder's Justice League Characters Bruce Wayne Harley Quinn Joker Theatrical animated films Batman: Mask of the Phantasm The Lego Batman Movie Spin-off films Catwoman video game Suicide Squad soundtrack Joker Arthur Fleck accolades soundtrack Birds of Prey soundtrack Unofficial and fan films Features Batman Dracula Alyas Batman at Robin James Batman Batman Fights Dracula Fight Batman Fight! Alyas Batman en Robin Shorts Batman: Dead End Grayson World's Finest City of Scars Batman: Dying Is Easy See also Batman franchise media List of Batman films cast members Batman OnStar commercials v t e Superman / Batman crossover media Comic books World's Finest Comics Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Superman/Batman Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Television The Batman/Superman Hour The Superman/Batman Adventures The New Batman/Superman Adventures Books Enemies & Allies Film Superman/Batman: Public Enemies Superman/Batman: Apocalypse Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Fan works World's Finest How It Should Have Ended Miscellaneaous Composite Superman Hiro Okamura DC Extended Universe v t e Justice League International Keith Giffen J. M. DeMatteis Initial members Pre-Flashpoint Batman Black Canary/Dinah Laurel Lance Blue Beetle/Ted Kord Booster Gold Captain Marvel Doctor Fate Kent Nelson Linda Stauss Doctor Light/Kimiyo Hoshi Green Lantern/Guy Gardner Martian Manhunter Mister Miracle The New 52 August General in Iron Booster Gold Fire Godiva Green Lantern/Guy Gardner Ice Rocket Red/Gavril Ivanovich Vixen Supporting characters L-Ron Catherine Cobert Maxwell Lord Oberon Superman Enemies Antagonists Anti-Monitor Black Hand Darkseid Despero Doomsday Kite Man Lobo Magog Major Disaster Manga Khan Maxwell Lord Neron Queen Bee Signal Men Sinestro Starbreaker Weapons Master Weather Wizard Wizard Organizations Cadre Extremists Injustice League Royal Flush Gang Suicide Squad Publications and storylines Legends Formerly Known as the Justice League Justice League: Generation Lost Spinoff teams Extreme Justice Justice League America Justice League Europe Justice League Task Force v t e Catwoman Bob Kane Bill Finger Incarnations Selina Kyle Holly Robinson Eiko Hasigawa Supporting characters Batgirl Batman Slam Bradley Gotham City Sirens Dick Grayson Huntress Justice League Outsiders Alfred Pennyworth Poison Ivy Harley Quinn Leslie Thompkins Wildcat Antagonists Angle Man Bane Black Mask Harvey Bullock Clayface Film Freak James Gordon Hush Joker Penguin Poison Ivy Harley Quinn Riddler Scarecrow Hugo Strange Two-Face Zeiss Publications Catwoman: Guardian of Gotham Catwoman: When in Rome Gotham City Sirens Nine Lives In other media Catwoman (film) Chase Me DC Showcase: Catwoman Catwoman (video game) Selina Kyle (Gotham character) Selina Kyle (Gotham episode) Selina Kyle (Batman Returns) "The Cat and the Fiddle" "The Cat and the Claw" Catwoman: Soulstealer Related articles Catwoman's Whip Category v t e Batgirl Bill Finger Sheldon Moldoff Gardner Fox Carmine Infantino Incarnations Bette Kane Barbara Gordon Helena Bertinelli Cassandra Cain Stephanie Brown Supporting characters Batman Birds of Prey Black Canary Catwoman James Gordon Dick Grayson Lucius Fox Justice League Misfit Alfred Pennyworth Proxy Harley Quinn Robin Supergirl Leslie Thompkins Alysia Yeoh Antagonists Black Mask Brutale Calculator David Cain Doctor Death Joker Joker's Daughter Killer Moth Knightfall Lady Shiva Livewire Mr. Freeze Penguin Poison Ivy Harley Quinn Riddler Ravager Scarecrow Trigger Twins Related identities Flamebird Oracle Huntress Publications Batgirl Batgirl: Year One Batgirl and the Birds of Prey Elseworld's Finest: Supergirl & Batgirl Ghost/Batgirl: The Resurrection Machine Related articles "Enter Batgirl, Exit Penguin" Barbara Gordon in other media Alternative versions of Barbara Gordon Batwoman Category v t e Robin Bill Finger Jerry Robinson Bob Kane Robins Dick Grayson Jason Todd Tim Drake Stephanie Brown Damian Wayne Supporting characters Batgirl Batman Catwoman Jack Drake Lucius Fox Tamara Fox Barbara Gordon James Gordon Justice League Alfred Pennyworth Nocturna Outsiders Teen Titans Leslie Thompkins Warlock's Daughter Antagonists Anarky Bane Blockbuster Brutale Clock King Cluemaster Deathstroke Firefly The General Joker Joker's Daughter Killer Croc Killer Moth King Snake Lady Shiva Lynx Mad Hatter Mr. Freeze Penguin Prankster Harley Quinn Ra's al Ghul Riddler Scarecrow Shrike Trigger Twins Two-Face Tony Zucco Related identities Nightwing Red Robin Red Hood Squire Red X In other media Batman and Robin (serial) "Robin's Reckoning" Dick Grayson (character) Batman & Robin (film) soundtrack video game Son of Batman Batman vs. Robin Publications Robin: Year One Robin War All Star Batman & Robin, the Boy Wonder Batman and Robin We Are... Robin Red Robin Batman and Robin Eternal Batman and Son Alternative versions Carrie Kelley Earth-Two Helena Wayne Related Haly's Circus Redbird Alyas Batman en Robin Alyas Batman at Robin Batman & Robin: The Chiller Batman and Robin Have an Altercation "Holy..." Category v t e The Joker Bill Finger Bob Kane Jerry Robinson Supporting characters Bane Clayface Deathstroke Firefly Hush Killer Croc Killer Moth Lex Luthor Mad Hatter Mr. Freeze Penguin Poison Ivy Harley Quinn Riddler Scarecrow Two-Face Ventriloquist Victor Zsasz Antagonists Batman Black Mask Harvey Bullock Catwoman Creeper Barbara Gordon James Gordon Joker's Daughter Justice League Nightwing Red Hood Red Robin Robin Penguin Harley Quinn Riddler Robin Scarecrow Hugo Strange Suicide Squad Superman Two-Face Amanda Waller Publications and stories The Joker "The Joker's Double Jeopardy" Batman: The Killing Joke The Joker: Devil's Advocate Batman: The Man Who Laughs The Further Adventures of The Joker Joker (graphic novel) "The Joker's Millions" Joker: Last Laugh "The Man Behind the Red Hood!" "The Return of the Joker" Batman: Three Jokers Alternative versions Red Hood The Batman Who Laughs In other media Incarnations Arthur Fleck Joker (The Dark Knight) Joker (DC Extended Universe) Jerome and Jeremiah Valeska Jack Napier Other media Joker accolades Batman Beyond: Return of the Joker video game Batman: The Killing Joke "The Joker's Hard Times" "The Joker Is Wild" "The Joker Goes to School" Batman: Return of the Joker "Joker's Favor" "Christmas with the Joker" Mortal Kombat 11 Rides The Joker's Jinx The Joker (S&S Worldwide) The Joker (Six Flags Discovery Kingdom) The Joker Funhouse Coaster The Joker (Six Flags México) Related Ace Chemicals Arkham Asylum Barack Obama "Joker" poster Blackgate Penitentiary Joker Stairs Jokerz Green Goblin (Norman Osborn) Category v t e Harley Quinn Paul Dini Bruce Timm Supporting characters Batman Birds of Prey Bud and Lou Catwoman Gotham City Sirens Barbara Gordon Joker Justice League Nightwing Poison Ivy Robin Secret Six The Society Suicide Squad Antagonists Amanda Waller Batman Black Mask Harvey Bullock Doctor Psycho Barbara Gordon James Gordon Mercy Graves Joker Joker′s Daughter Nightwing Penguin Riddler Robin Scarecrow Hugo Strange Two-Face Titles The Batman Adventures: Mad Love Harley & Ivy Meet Betty & Veronica In other media Batman and Harley Quinn TV series Birds of Prey [and the Fantabulous Emancipation of One Harley Quinn] Harley Quinn (DC Extended Universe) Related articles Harley Quinn Crazy Train Harley Quinn Smith Category v t e The Outsiders Mike W. Barr Jim Aparo Members Founders Batman Black Lightning Geo-Force Halo Katana Metamorpho Others Arsenal Atomic Knight (Gardner Grayle) Batgirl (Cassandra Cain) Captain Boomerang (Owen Mercer) Captain Marvel Jr. Grace Choi The Creeper The Eradicator Sebastian Faust Green Arrow Indigo Huntress (Helena Bertinelli) Jade Francine Langstrom Looker Nightwing The Olympian Owlman (Roy Raymond Jr.) Red Robin ReMAC Starfire Technocrat Duke Thomas Thunder Supporting characters Alfred Pennyworth Checkmate Helga Jace Sapphire Stagg Simon Stagg Enemies Baron Bedlam Brother Blood Doctor Sivana Fearsome Five Doctor Light Gizmo Mammoth Psimon Shimmer Felix Faust Gorilla Grodd Joker Kobra Masters of Disaster Mr. Freeze Nuclear Family Sabbac (Ishmael Gregor) Syonide Tobias Whale Locations Batcave Stagg Enterprises v t e Birds of Prey Creators: Chuck Dixon Jordan B. Gorfinkel Gail Simone Titles Batgirl and the Birds of Prey Main characters Barbara Gordon Black Canary Huntress (Helena Bertinelli) Notable members Big Barda Black Alice Catwoman Gypsy Harley Quinn Hawk and Dove Hawkgirl (Kendra Saunders) Jade Canary Judomaster (Sonia Sato) Katana Lady Blackhawk Manhunter (Kate Spencer) Misfit Poison Ivy Power Girl Vixen Supporting characters Batman Blue Beetle (Ted Kord) Booster Gold James Gordon Creote Cyborg Green Arrow Kurt Lance Lois Lane Metamorpho Nightwing Power Girl Richard Dragon Robin Savant Sin Superman Wildcat Antagonists Atomic Skull Black Mask Blockbuster Brutale Calculator Captain Nazi Chemo Cheshire Copperhead Crime Doctor Deathstroke Electrocutioner Gorilla Grodd Gotham City Sirens Hector Hammond Hellgrammite H.I.V.E. Joker Killer Moth Killer Shark Kobra Lady Spellbinder Lady Vic Lashina Mammoth Penguin Prometheus Psimon Secret Six Secret Society Shadow Thief Shrapnel Spy Smasher Twelve Brothers in Silk and White Canary In other media TV series Film Birds of Prey: The Album Category v t e Plastic Man Creators Jack Cole Supporting characters All-Star Squadron Batman Freedom Fighters Justice League Martian Manhunter Offspring Robby Reed Woozy Winks Enemies Amazo Doctor Psycho Dollmaker Per Degaton Prankster Queen Bee Publications Police Comics In other media Batman: The Brave and the Bold DC Nation Shorts ("Plastic Man" segment") The Plastic Man Comedy/Adventure Show v t e Superman characters Superman family By code name Superman Superboy Supergirl Superwoman Mon-El Nightwing Flamebird Eradicator Steel Krypto By public identity Clark Kent Kal-El Kon-El Jon Kent Kara Zor-El Matrix Linda Danvers Chris Kent/Lor-Zod Thara Ak-Var Dr. David Connor John Henry Irons Natasha Irons Kong Kenan Supporting characters Lois Lane Jimmy Olsen Jor-El Lara Jonathan and Martha Kent Perry White Inspector Henderson Lana Lang Lucy Lane Lori Lemaris Zor-El Alura Dubbilex Sam Lane Lyla Lerrol Pete Ross Professor Potter Lena Luthor Maxima Morgan Edge Dan Turpin Steve Lombard Cat Grant Professor Hamilton Maggie Sawyer Bibbo Bibbowski Ron Troupe Strange Visitor Associated characters Justice Society of America Guardian Newsboy Legion Project Cadmus Legion of Super-Heroes Cosmic Boy Saturn Girl Lightning Lad Chameleon Boy Colossal Boy Invisible Kid Star Boy Phantom Girl Triplicate Girl Shrinking Violet Bouncing Boy Sun Boy Brainiac 5 Ultra Boy Element Lad Matter-Eater Lad Lightning Lass Dream Girl Timber Wolf Princess Projectra Ferro Lad Karate Kid White Witch Shadow Lass Chemical King Wildfire Tyroc Dawnstar Laurel Gand Justice League Atom Aquaman Batman Black Canary Blue Beetle Cyborg Flash Green Arrow Green Lantern John Stewart Martian Manhunter Robin/Nightwing Orion Captain Marvel Wonder Woman Legion of Super-Pets Legion of Super-Villains Cosmic King Lightning Lord Saturn Queen Legion of Substitute Heroes World's Finest Team Lobo Maxima Silent Knight Super-Chief Enemies Central rogues gallery Bizarro Brainiac Bruno Mannheim Cyborg Superman Hank Henshaw Darkseid Doomsday General Zod Lex Luthor Livewire Mercy Graves Metallo Mister Mxyzptlk Mongul Parasite Silver Banshee Toyman Ultra-Humanite Recurring adversaries Anti-Monitor Atlas Atomic Skull Blaze and Satanus Bloodsport Chemo Composite Superman Conduit Dev-Em Equus Faora Funky Flashman Gog Hellgramite Imperiex Jax-Ur Joker Kalibak Kryptonite Man Magpie Mammoth Manchester Black Morgan Edge Neutron Non Prankster Professor Hamilton Quarmer Quex-Ul Rampage Riot Solomon Grundy Terra-Man Titano Ultraman Ursa Vyndktvx Organizations Black Zero Fearsome Five Intergang Masters of Disaster Royal Flush Gang Secret Society of Super Villains Suicide Squad Superman Revenge Squad Alternative versions Superman Earth-One version Ultraman Earth-Two version Superboy-Prime Kingdom Come version Supergirl Power Girl In other media 1978–87 film series Superman Lois Lane Lex Luthor General Zod Supergirl DC Extended Universe Clark Kent Lois Lane Smallville Clark Kent Lex Luthor Lana Lang Chloe Sullivan Lionel Luthor Lois Lane Justice League Related Superman and Lois Lane Daily Planet Category v t e Wonder Woman William Moulton Marston Elizabeth Holloway Marston H. G. Peter Other contributors Characters Wonder Women Diana Prince Orana Artemis of Bana-Mighdall Hippolyta Donna Troy Supporting characters Antiope Drusilla Etta Candy Fury Hephaestus Heracles/Hercules Hermes I Ching Julia and Vanessa Kapatelis Justice League Mala Nemesis (Thomas Tresser) Nubia The Olympian Paula von Gunther Philippus Poseidon Queen Desira Helena Sandsmark Sarge Steel Steve Trevor Wonder Girl (Cassie Sandsmark / Donna Troy) Zeus Zola Enemies Ares/Mars Baron Blitzkrieg Baroness Paula von Gunther Blue Snowman Veronica Cale Cheetah Circe Dark Angel Decay Doctor Cyber Doctor Poison Doctor Psycho Duke of Deception Egg Fu/Chang Tzu Eviless First Born Genocide Giganta Hades Hypnota Kung Mask Maxwell Lord Medusa Minister Blizzard Osira Queen Clea Silver Swan Superwoman Tezcatlipoca Zara Factions Amazons of Themyscira Amazons of Bana-Mighdall Children of Ares Godwatch Olympian Gods Secret Society of Super Villains Titans of Myth Villainy Inc. Locations Aeaea Themyscira (The Paradise Islands) Publications All Star Comics Wonder Woman Amazonia Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity The Blue Amazon Comic Cavalcade The Legend of Wonder Woman Sensation Comics Superman and Wonder Woman: The Hidden Killer Superman/Wonder Woman Wonder Woman '77 The Wonder Woman Chronicles Wonder Woman: Earth One The World's Greatest Superheroes Storylines “Introducing Wonder Woman” (1941) Gods and Mortals (1987) Challenge of the Gods (1987–88) War of the Gods (1991) The Contest (1994) The Challenge of Artemis (1995) Paradise Island Lost (2001) Our Worlds at War (2001) The Hiketeia (2002) Down to Earth (2003–04) Who Is Wonder Woman? (2006–07) Amazons Attack! (2007) The Circle (2008) Ends of the Earth (2008) Rise of the Olympian (2009) Flashpoint (2011) The Lies (2016) Year One (2016) The Truth (2017) Godwatch (2017) Technology Golden Girdle of Gaea Invisible plane Lasso of Truth Mental radio Wonder Woman's bracelets In other media 1974 film TV series episodes 2009 film 2011 TV pilot 2017 film Wonder Woman: Bloodlines Wonder Woman 1984 soundtrack Miscellaneous Alternative versions DCEU Earth-Two Bizarra Superwoman Olive Byrne Cultural impact Professor Marston and the Wonder Women Literature Wonder Women! The Untold Story of American Superheroines Category v t e Golden Age of Comic Books Ace Comics Captain Courageous Doctor Nemesis The Flag Lash Lightning The Raven Unknown Soldier Vulcan All-American Publications The Atom Al Pratt Black Canary Dinah Drake Doctor Mid-Nite Charles McNider Doiby Dickles The Flash Jay Garrick The Gay Ghost Green Lantern Alan Scott Hawkgirl Shiera Sanders Hall Hawkman Carter Hall Hop Harrigan Johnny Thunder Jumpa Justice Society of America The King Mister Terrific Terry Sloane Neptune Perkins Red Tornado Sargon the Sorcerer The Terrific Whatzit Thunderbolt Ultra-Man The Whip Wildcat Ted Grant Wonder Woman Diana Prince Centaur Comics Airman Amazing-Man The Arrow The Clock The Eye Fantom of the Fair Magician from Mars The Masked Marvel Minimidget Charlton Comics Atomic Mouse Captain Atom Nightshade Mr. Muscles Nature Boy Space Adventures Yellowjacket Zaza the Mystic Dell Comics Doctor Hormone Flash Gordon The Owl Supermind's Son Zorro Fawcett Comics Bulletgirl Bulletman Captain Marvel Captain Marvel Jr. Captain Midnight Dan Dare Hoppy the Marvel Bunny Ibis the Invincible Lieutenant Marvels Marvel Family Mary Marvel Master Man Minute-Man Mr. Scarlet Nyoka the Jungle Girl Phantom Eagle Pinky the Whiz Kid Scoop Smith Spy Smasher Squadron of Justice Sweethearts Uncle Marvel Fox Comics Black Fury Blue Beetle Dan Garret The Bouncer Bronze Man Dynamo The Flame Green Mask The Moth Samson Stardust the Super Wizard U.S. Jones V-Man Wonder Man Harvey Comics Black Cat Captain 3-D Captain Freedom Green Hornet Invisible Scarlet O'Neil Kato Shock Gibson Spirit of '76 Lev Gleason Publications Captain Battle Crimebuster Daredevil Little Wise Guys Silver Streak MLJ Comics The Black Hood Bob Phantom Captain Flag The Comet The Firefly The Fox The Hangman The Shield Super Duck The Web The Wizard National Allied Publications Ace the Bat-Hound Air Wave Aquaman Batman Batwoman Black Pirate Boy Commandos Captain Comet Chris KL-99 Congo Bill Crimson Avenger Lee Travis Dan the Dyna-Mite Dark Ranger Detective Chimp Doctor Fate Kent Nelson Doctor Occult Genius Jones Gimmick Girl Green Arrow Guardian Hourman Rex Tyler Johnny Quick Johnny Chambers King Faraday The Knight Krypto Liberty Belle Manhunter Paul Kirk Martian Manhunter Miss X Mr. America Newsboy Legion Phantom Stranger Rex the Wonder Dog Robin Dick Grayson Robotman Rose Psychic Sandman Wesley Dodds Sandy the Golden Boy Seven Soldiers of Victory Shining Knight Sir Justin Slam Bradley The Spectre Jim Corrigan Speedy Roy Harper Squire Star-Spangled Kid Sylvester Pemberton Starman Ted Knight Stripesy Stuff the Chinatown Kid Superboy Kal-El Superman Superwoman Lois Lane Tarantula TNT Tommy Tomorrow Vigilante Greg Saunders Wing Wonder Woman Zatara Nedor Comics American Crusader American Eagle Black Terror Captain Future Doc Strange Fighting Yank The Ghost Grim Reaper Judy of the Jungle Kara the Jungle Princess Lance Lewis, Space Detective Liberator The Magnet Miss Masque Princess Pantha Pyroman The Scarab The Woman in Red Novelty Press Blue Bolt Dick Cole The Target The Targeteers The Twister Prize Publications Atomic-Man Black Owl Fighting American Green Lama Yank & Doodle Quality Comics #711 The Black Condor Blackhawk Blue Tracer Bozo the Iron Man Captain Triumph Doll Girl Doll Man Firebrand The Human Bomb Invisible Hood The Jester Kid Eternity Lady Luck Madame Fatal Magno Manhunter Merlin the Magician Midnight Miss America Miss Fear Mouthpiece Neon the Unknown Phantom Lady Plastic Man Quicksilver The Ray Red Bee Red Torpedo The Spider Spider Widow Uncle Sam Wildfire Wonder Boy Woozy Winks Timely Comics All-Winners Squad American Ace The Angel Black Marvel Black Widow Claire Voyant Blazing Skull Blonde Phantom Blue Blade Blue Diamond Breeze Barton Bucky Bucky Barnes Captain America Captain Wonder The Challenger Citizen V The Destroyer Dynamic Man Father Time The Ferret Fiery Mask The Fin Golden Girl The Human Torch Jack Frost Laughing Mask Marvel Boy Mercury Miss America Miss Fury Mister E Namor Namora The Patriot Phantom Reporter Red Raven Rockman Silver Scorpion Sun Girl Super Rabbit Thin Man Thunderer Tim Mulrooney Toro Venus The Vision The Whizzer Robert Frank The Witness Young Allies Misc. American Comics Group Superkatt Anglo-American Publishing Commander Steel Atlas Publications Captain Atom Bell Features The Brain Johnny Canuck Nelvana of the Northern Lights Cardal Publishing Streamline Columbia Comics The Face Skyman David McKay Publications Mandrake the Magician The Phantom DC Thomson The Amazing Mr X Jack Flash Dynamic Publications Dynamic Man Yankee Girl Eastern Color Printing Buck Rogers Hydroman Phantom Magician EC Comics Moon Girl Superduperman Elliot Publishing Company Kismet, Man of Fate Fiction House Fantomah Hillman Periodicals Airboy The Heap Holyoke Publishing Cat-Man Kitten Miss Victory L. Miller & Son, Ltd. Kid Marvelman Marvelman Young Marvelman Magazine Enterprises Funnyman Maple Leaf Publishing Brok Windsor Iron Man Rural Home Publications Green Turtle Street & Smith The Avenger Doc Savage The Shadow Supersnipe v t e Forbes Fictional 15 2002 Santa Claus Richie Rich Oliver "Daddy" Warbucks Scrooge McDuck Thurston Howell III Willy Wonka Bruce Wayne Lex Luthor J. R. Ewing Auric Goldfinger C. Montgomery Burns Charles Foster Kane Cruella de Vil Gordon Gekko Jay Gatsby 2005 Santa Claus Oliver "Daddy" Warbucks Richie Rich Lex Luthor C. Montgomery Burns Scrooge McDuck Jed Clampett Bruce Wayne Thurston Howell III Willy Wonka Arthur Bach Ebenezer Scrooge Lara Croft Cruella de Vil Lucius Malfoy 2006 Oliver "Daddy" Warbucks C. Montgomery Burns Scrooge McDuck Richie Rich Jed Clampett Mr. Monopoly Bruce Wayne Tony Stark Prince Abakaliki of Nigeria Thurston Howell III Willy Wonka Lucius Malfoy Tony Montana Lara Croft Mario 2007 Scrooge McDuck Ming the Merciless Richie Rich Mom Jed Clampett C. Montgomery Burns Carter Pewterschmidt Bruce Wayne Thurston Howell III Tony Stark Fake Steve Jobs Gomez Addams Willy Wonka Lucius Malfoy Princess Peach 2008 Uncle Sam Scrooge McDuck Richie Rich Gordon Gekko Jabba the Hutt Ebenezer Scrooge Tony Stark Thurston Howell III Bruce Wayne Adrian Veidt Jed Clampett Artemis Fowl II C. Montgomery Burns Lara Croft Mr. Monopoly 2010 Carlisle Cullen Scrooge McDuck Richie Rich Tony Stark Jed Clampett Adrian Veidt Bruce Wayne Tooth fairy Thurston Howell III Sir Topham Hatt Artemis Fowl II C. Montgomery Burns Chuck Bass Jay Gatsby Lucille Bluth 2011 Scrooge McDuck Carlisle Cullen Artemis Fowl II Richie Rich Jed Clampett Tony Stark Smaug Bruce Wayne Mr. Monopoly Arthur Bach Jo Bennett C. Montgomery Burns Chuck Bass Gordon Gekko Jeffrey Lebowski 2012 Smaug Flintheart Glomgold Carlisle Cullen Jed Clampett Tony Stark Richie Rich Charles Foster Kane Bruce Wayne Forrest Gump Mr. Monopoly Lisbeth Salander Tywin Lannister C. Montgomery Burns Robert Crawley Jo Bennett 2013 Scrooge McDuck Smaug Carlisle Cullen Tony Stark Charles Foster Kane Bruce Wayne Richie Rich Christian Grey Tywin Lannister C. Montgomery Burns Walden Schmidt Lara Croft Mr. Monopoly Mary Crawley Jay Gatsby United States portal Comics portal Speculative fiction portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125