2003 film by Sandy Collora Batman: Dead End Directed by Sandy Collora[1] Produced by Daren Hicks Simon Tams Written by Sandy Collora Based on Characters by Bob Kane Bill Finger Jerry Robinson Dan O'Bannon Ronald Shusett Jim Thomas John Thomas Starring Clark Bartram Andrew Koenig Distributed by Collora Studios TheForce.Net Release date July 19, 2003 (2003-07-19) Running time 8 minutes Country United States Language English Batman: Dead End is a fan film written and directed by Sandy Collora that premiered July 19, 2003 at the San Diego Comic-Con, and on the internet shortly thereafter. The film crosses over the DC Comics superhero Batman with the Alien and Predator science fiction film franchises. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Reception 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] During a stormy night in Gotham City, the Joker escapes from Arkham Asylum while Batman prepares to hunt for him. Batman finds the Joker at a deserted dockyard, but before the Dark Knight can take him back to the asylum, the Joker is quickly dragged off by an Alien and is seemingly killed. Another Alien attacks Batman, but is killed by a Predator, which the Dark Knight fights and defeats. Suddenly, more Predators appear just as more Aliens emerge from the darkness behind Batman. The film ends abruptly with a cliffhanger as the Dark Knight is surrounded by the two monster species. Cast[edit] Clark Bartram as Bruce Wayne/Batman Andrew Koenig as the Joker Kurt Carley as the Predator Jake McKinnon as the Alien Dragon Dronet, Patrick Magee and Kurt Carley as other Predators Production[edit] The film was made for a reported $30,000 and filmed in parts of North Hollywood, California, as a stand-in for Gotham City.[2][3] Collora filmed a similar project, 2004's World's Finest, with much of the same cast and crew. Reception[edit] Film director and comic book writer Kevin Smith called it "possibly the truest, best Batman movie ever made",[4] and comic book artist Alex Ross praised it as "Batman the way I've always wanted to see him".[5] Collora has stated in interviews that the film was made as a demonstration reel to attract attention to his directing skills, and as such, succeeded in its goal. Fan Films Quarterly listed Batman: Dead End as one of the 10 most pivotal moments in fan film history in its Summer 2006 issue.[6] See also[edit] The Dark Horse comic books which first touched on similar themes are: Batman/Aliens Batman versus Predator References[edit] ^ Keller, Adam (May 13, 2018). "Behind The Mask: The Batman Dead End Story". Film Threat. Retrieved 31 July 2018. ^ Pethokoukis, James (August 8, 2003). "Finally, a good Batman sequel". US News & World Report. Washington DC: US News & World Report, LP. Archived from the original on May 22, 2009. ^ Weldon, Glen (March 21, 2017). Crusade: Batman and the Rise of Nerd Culture. Simon and Schuster. p. 227. ISBN 1476756732. ^ JoBlo (pseudonym) (2004-01-02). "BATMAN: DEAD END". Joblo.com. Archived from the original on 2012-12-30. Retrieved 2011-01-01. ^ "BATMAN: DEAD END". Filmthreat.com. Archived from the original on 2009-01-13. Retrieved 2011-01-01. ^ "10 Most Pivotal Moments In Fan Film History". Fan Films Quarterly. Summer 2006. External links[edit] Batman: Dead End Collora Studios - Filmmaker's website API at IMDb Batman: Dead End at TheForce.net Batman: Dead End review at Film Threat Batman: Dead End behind the scenes at EW.com v t e Alien vs. Predator Films Alien vs. Predator (2004) Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (2007) Characters Alien Predator Music Alien vs. Predator Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem "Wach auf! Comics Aliens versus Predator Aliens/Predator: Deadliest of the Species Aliens versus Predator versus The Terminator Mindhunter Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Alien vs. Predator: Sand Trap Fire and Stone Novels Aliens vs. Predator: Prey Aliens vs. Predator: Hunter's Planet Aliens vs. Predator: War Games Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game Alien vs Predator (SNES) Alien vs. Predator (arcade) Alien vs Predator (Jaguar) Aliens versus Predator (1999) Aliens versus Predator 2 Aliens versus Predator: Extinction Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Aliens vs. Predator (2010) Other AVPX Franchises Alien Predator Related AVH: Alien vs. Hunter Alien Loves Predator Batman: Dead End Category v t e Batman in film Stand-alone films Batman (1943 serial) Batman and Robin (1949 serial) Batman (1966 film) The Batman 1989–1997 series Films Batman score soundtrack NES and Game Boy game Sega Genesis game home computer game arcade game Batman Returns soundtrack video game Batman Forever score soundtrack video game arcade game pinball game Batman & Robin soundtrack video game Characters Bruce Wayne Jack Napier Vicki Vale Catwoman Penguin Harvey Dent Riddler Dick Grayson Mr. Freeze Poison Ivy The Dark Knight Trilogy Films Batman Begins soundtrack video game The Dark Knight soundtrack canceled video game The Dark Knight Rises soundtrack Characters Bruce Wayne Rachel Dawes Joker DC Extended Universe Films Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice soundtrack Justice League Zack Snyder's Justice League Characters Bruce Wayne Harley Quinn Joker Theatrical animated films Batman: Mask of the Phantasm The Lego Batman Movie Spin-off films Catwoman video game Suicide Squad soundtrack Joker Arthur Fleck accolades soundtrack Birds of Prey soundtrack Unofficial and fan films Features Batman Dracula Alyas Batman at Robin James Batman Batman Fights Dracula Fight Batman Fight! Alyas Batman en Robin Shorts Batman: Dead End Grayson World's Finest City of Scars Batman: Dying Is Easy See also Batman franchise media List of Batman films cast members Batman OnStar commercials