API Cover of the trade paperback collection of the first miniseries. Art by Bernie Wrightson. Publisher Dark Horse Comics DC Comics Batman/Aliens Series publication information Schedule Monthly Format Mini-series Publication date (vol. 1) March – April 1997 (vol. 2) December 2002 – February 2003 Number of issues 2 (vol. 1) 3 (vol. 2) Creative team Writer(s) Ron Marz (vol. 1) Ian Edginton (vol. 2) Penciller(s) Bernie Wrightson (vol. 1) Staz Johnson (vol. 2) Colorist(s) Gregory Wright (vol. 1 - 2) Digital Chameleon (vol. 2) Collected editions Batman/Aliens ISBN 1-56971-305-7 Batman/Aliens Two ISBN 1-4012-0081-8 DC Comics/Dark Horse: Aliens ISBN 1401266363 Batman/Aliens is a crossover between the Batman and Aliens comic book franchises. It was published in 1997. A sequel was released in 2003.[1] Contents 1 Batman/Aliens 2 Batman/Aliens II 3 Collected editions 4 See also 5 References Batman/Aliens[edit] Batman parachutes into the jungle near the Guatemala and Mexico borderline, investigating the disappearance of a Wayne Enterprises geologist. He encounters an American Special Ops team hunting a target, and both are set upon by the Aliens. Several members of the team are killed, but along the way Batman becomes familiar with the Aliens' life cycle, and collects two facehuggers in specimen jars. The team leader sacrifices himself to blow up a nest of the Aliens, leaving only Batman and two members of the team alive, making their way to the team's evacuation point. One of the survivors, an intensely ambitious woman named Hyatt, leaves her teammate to be killed by one of the last Aliens and ambushes Batman, holding him at gunpoint while she relieves him of the lost geologist's voice recorder and one of the specimen jars. She says that the Aliens are an incredibly potent weapon if properly used, and bringing the information about them back to the U.S. government will make her career. She is so fixated on Batman that she fails to notice a gargantuan Alien hybrid - the result of an Alien embryo being implanted into a crocodile - rise behind her. The hybrid kills Hyatt, but Batman kills the creature by tying its legs and tipping it into the mouth of an active volcano. Alone, he escapes from the jungle. In the Batcave, Bruce Wayne listens to the geologist's last message to his family, cut off as the man is attacked by an Alien. Bruce decides to drop the specimen jars containing the facehuggers into the cave's depths and tell no one about them. The Aliens are much too dangerous, he believes, "not because of what they are, but because of what we are." This story was spun off of a two-part short story featured in Dark Horse Presents #101-102 entitled Aliens: Incubation. The events that Batman discovers on the geologist's recordings are fully depicted in this short story. Batman/Aliens II[edit] In 1927, an explorer discovered something frozen in Antarctica's ice, and he brought it home with him to Gotham City, where he sealed himself in a lab. It remained undiscovered until a present-day construction crew broke it open to find the explorer torn apart. Dr. Fortune, an army scientist, soon gets wind of this when the Alien escapes into Gotham. Although Batman is able to find its nest and arrange for three victims to have the Alien embryos extracted before they can hatch on their own, Fortune takes custody of the Alien corpses for herself even after Batman is forced to kill the prime Alien in a desperate struggle through Gotham. When the Aliens attack Arkham Asylum, Batman is able to fight them off using Mister Freeze's freeze gun and a suit of empowered armor, but he is subsequently captured by Fortune. Awakening on Fortune's base on a disused oil rig, Batman finds himself confronted by Alien/human hybrids created from DNA samples extracted from the Arkham inmates-examples depicted are Joker, Two-Face, Scarecrow and Poison Ivy-which have already defeated various special forces operatives from all major nations. Despite the odds against him, Batman is able to defeat the hybrids by using his knowledge of the original Aliens' abilities and the emotional 'weakness' of their hybrid natures, allowing him to trap them all in an area of the rig after he triggers an explosion. Confronting Fortune, Batman learns that she plans to use the Alien/supervillain hybrids to keep the superheroes in check, as various governments fear their power if they turn their judgement on the common man. Fortune also reveals that she has been 'host' to an Alien queen embryo for decades, as a form of dry leprosy she contracted before being implanted prevented the queen from hatching, while allowing her to use some of its abilities. She now believes that she can use DNA samples from the Arkham inmates to harness the supervillains' genetic traits for survival and strength without their insanity, with the resulting hybrids guaranteed to be loyal to her due to her 'queen' status. However, when she uses the DNA of the new Alien and splices it with a sample taken from Killer Croc, her plan fails as the new Alien has no natural loyalty to her and Croc was naturally vicious without any psychological trauma. As a result, the Croc/Alien hybrid tears Fortune's head off before Batman escapes, the oil rig where Fortune was carrying out her work being destroyed in the resulting fight. Collected editions[edit] The stories have been collected into trade paperbacks: Batman/Aliens (by Ron Marz and Bernie Wrightson, 128 pages, 1998, Titan Books, ISBN 1-85286-887-2, Dark Horse, ISBN 1-56971-305-7) Batman/Aliens II (by Ian Edginton and Staz Johnson, 160 pages, 2003, Titan Books, ISBN 1-84023-734-1, DC, ISBN 1-4012-0081-8) DC Comics/Dark Horse: Aliens (by Ian Edginton, Ron Marz, James Hodgkins, Staz Johnson, Kevin Nowlan, Chris Sprouse, Bernie Wrightson, 400 Pages, 2016, DC Comics/Dark Horse, ISBN 1401266363) See also[edit] Batman: Dead End, a fan film where Batman fights groups of both the Predators and Aliens. Batman Versus Predator, a comic book confrontation with the Predator Aliens, a line of comics from Dark Horse Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator (by Mark Schultz and Ariel Olivetti, two-issue miniseries, January 2007) References[edit] ^ Cyriaque Lamar. "The 10 most deranged Alien crossover stories". io9. Archived from the original on 2011-10-13. Batman/Aliens at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) Batman/Aliens II at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) v t e Alien Films Alien (1979) Aliens (1986) Alien 3 (1992) Alien Resurrection (1997) Prometheus (2012) Alien: Covenant (2017) Media Soundtracks Alien Aliens Alien 3 Alien Resurrection Prometheus Alien: Covenant Comics Alien: The Illustrated Story Dark Horse line Superman/Aliens Batman/Aliens WildC.A.T.s/Aliens Green Lantern Versus Aliens Judge Dredd vs. Aliens Novels Alien: Out of the Shadows Aliens: Earth Hive Aliens: Nightmare Asylum Aliens: The Female War Aliens: Phalanx Games Alien (1982) Alien (1984) Aliens: The Computer Game (Activision) Aliens: The Computer Game (Software Studios) Aliens (1990) Aliens Adventure Game (tabletop) Alien 3 Alien 3: The Gun Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Alien Trilogy Aliens Online Alien Resurrection Aliens: Thanatos Encounter Aliens Infestation Aliens: Colonial Marines Alien: Isolation Aliens: Fireteam Other media Aliens: Colonial Marines Technical Manual Alien: Isolation – The Digital Series Universe Characters Ellen Ripley Ash Bishop Amanda Ripley David 8 Corporal Dwayne Hicks Hudson Concepts USS Sulaco Alien Other Accolades for the film series Alien War Alien vs. Predator franchise Related Ripley (crater) Alien 2: On Earth Memory: The Origins of Alien Category v t e Batman publications and storylines Current series Detective Comics (#27) Batman Batman Beyond Catwoman Harley Quinn Nightwing Red Hood and the Outlaws Completed ongoing series Azrael Batgirl Batgirl and the Birds of Prey Batman and Robin Batman and the Outsiders Batman: Arkham Unhinged Batman: The Dark Knight Batman: Gotham Knights Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight Batman: Shadow of the Bat Batman: Streets of Gotham The Batman Adventures The Batman Chronicles Batman Confidential Batman Family Batman Incorporated Batman/Superman Batwing Batwoman Birds of Prey The Brave and the Bold Gotham by Midnight Gotham Central Gotham City Sirens The Huntress The Joker Man-Bat Red Hood/Arsenal Red Robin Robin Robin: Son of Batman Superman/Batman We Are... Robin World's Finest Comics Completed limited series Anarky Batgirl: Year One Batman & Dracula trilogy Batman and Robin Eternal Batman and the Mad Monk Batman and the Monster Men Batman: Arkham City Batman: Battle for the Cowl Batman Black and White Batman: Cacophony Batman: The Cult Batman: Damned Batman: The Dark Prince Charming The Dark Knight Returns The Dark Knight Strikes Again The Dark Knight III: The Master Race Batman: Dark Victory Batman: The Doom That Came to Gotham Batman Eternal Batman: Gates of Gotham Batman: GCPD Batman: Gotham County Line Batman: The Long Halloween Batman: Nosferatu Batman: Orpheus Rising Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Batman: Three Jokers Batman: Thrillkiller Batman: Turning Points Batman: White Knight The Batman Who Laughs Batman: The Widening Gyre Batman: Year 100 Bat-Mite First Wave Gotham Underground Man-Bat Red Hood: The Lost Days Robin: Year One Section 8 Superman & Batman: Generations Trinity The Untold Legend of the Batman One-shots Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth Castle of the Bat Dark Knight Dynasty Dark Night: A True Batman Story Death of Innocents Digital Justice Gotham Noir Holy Terror Batman/Houdini: The Devil's Workshop In Darkest Knight The Killing Joke KnightGallery Leatherwing The Man Who Laughs Nine Lives Noël Son of the Demon The 12 Cent Adventure Two Faces The Batman Adventures: Mad Love The Berlin Batman Gotham by Gaslight Joker Storylines "Dark Moon Rising" "The Man Behind the Red Hood!" "The Joker's Millions" "Year One" "Year Two" "Batman: A Death in the Family" "Year Three" "The Man Who Falls" "Anarky in Gotham City" "Gothic" "The Return of the Joker" "Prey" "The Last Arkham" "Knightfall" "Contagion" "Legacy" "Cataclysm" "No Man's Land" "Joker: Last Laugh" "Bruce Wayne: Fugitive" "Hush" "Batman: Broken City" "War Games" "City of Crime" "Under the Hood" "War Crimes" "Face the Face" "Batman and Son" "The Resurrection of Ra's al Ghul" "Batman R.I.P." "Whatever Happened to the Caped Crusader?" "Batwoman: Elegy" "Bruce Wayne: The Road Home" "Batman: Night of the Owls" "Batman: Death of the Family" "Zero Year" "Batman: Endgame" "Robin War" "Dark Nights: Metal" "Joker War" "Dark Nights: Death Metal" Intercompany crossovers Batman/Aliens Batman/Daredevil: King of New York Batman/Hellboy/Starman Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham Batman-Spawn: War Devil Batman & Spider-Man: New Age Dawning Batman/Tarzan: Claws of the Cat-woman Batman/Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Batman/The Spirit Batman Versus Predator Daredevil/Batman: Eye for an Eye Spawn/Batman Spider-Man and Batman: Disordered Minds Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Incomplete All Star Batman & Robin, the Boy Wonder Batman: Earth One Related topics Batman: Anarky Batman: Child of Dreams Batman: Haunted Knight Batman Legends DC Comics – The Legend of Batman Elseworlds Publications are listed alphabetically by published titles. Storylines are listed in publication order. Compiled without respect for canon or "current" continuity.