14th-century shield with the arms of Berne. The bear as heraldic charge is not as widely used as the lion, boar or other beasts. In England it occurs mostly in canting arms, e.g. in the familial coats of arms of Barnard, Baring, Barnes, Bearsley, etc. In British and Irish heraldry, a bear's head is usually muzzled (reflecting the lack of wild bears in those islands), and is more commonly used as a charge than the whole beast. In England and Ireland, the bear's head traditionally includes the neck, while in Scottish heraldry bear heads are cut off close behind the ears.[1] The bear in the coat of arms of Berlin is also used cantingly, and appears in representations of the Berlin coats of arms in the early modern period (used alongside the Prussian and Brandenburg eagles until the early 20th century).[2] Also canting, but associated with a legendary false etymology of the city's name, is the bear in the coat of arms of Berne.[a] In 1544 Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, granted to Madrid the titles of "Imperial" and "Crowned" for this reason, a crown was added on the shield above the tree. At the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 between Alfonso VIII of Castile and the Almohads, the council of Madrid sent a detachment in support of the Christian king. According to chronicles of the time, these troops carried a flag or banner which identified them: a statant bear on a silver field. Coat of arms of Appenzell (since 1597 of Appenzell Innerrhoden). The bear is also used in arms representing Saint Gall, based on a legend of the saint involving a bear.[3] This is the origin of the bear in the coat of arms in the Abbey of Saint Gall and of Appenzell. The bear of Appenzell is represented pizzled; omission of the bear's penis from the coat of arms of Appenzell was seen as a grave insult, and was notoriously forgotten by the printer of a calendar printed in Saint Gallen 1579, which brought Appenzell to the brink of war with Saint Gallen.[4][5][6] Coat of arms of Freising. The saddled bear of Saint Corbinian's legend is the heraldic symbol of Freising, Bavaria, and the Diocese of Munich and Freising. Pope Benedict XVI, former archbishop of Munich, also applied it in his Papal Arms. Coat of arms of Greenland since 1989. In 1666 a polar bear on a blue field was added to the greater/royal arms of the king of Denmark to represent Greenland. It has since then been adopted by Greenland itself as its coat of arms, with the current version having been adopted in 1989. The Greenlandic version bucks European heraldic tradition in favour of Inuit custom by having the bear's left arm raised rather than the right; when used in Denmark the right is raised. It is officially blazoned Azure, a polar bear rampant argent and as such neither version contradicts the other. Contents 1 Modern civic and provincial heraldry 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Modern civic and provincial heraldry[edit] A demi bear appears in the crest of Lawson in Canada.[7] A grizzly bear, with wings, appears as a supporter in the bearings of Norris, also in Canada.[8] Canada has armigers with polar bears in their bearings.[9] Chimerical half-bear, half-ravens appear as supporters of the Canadian Heraldic Authority. Civic heraldry in Warwickshire abounds in bears.[10] A bear is also used, cantingly, in the arms of the Berwick-upon-Tweed Borough Council. Russian bears (brown bears) and polar bears appear on the coats of arms and flags of numerous Russian federal subjects and cities, including the Republic of Karelia, the Mari El Republic, the city of Veliky Novgorod and Novgorod Oblast, the Yaroslavl Oblast, Khabarovsk Krai, Perm Krai, the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, and the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug. The Finnish region of Satakunta and the corresponding historical province feature a crowned sword-wielding bear on their coats of arms. Pori, Satakunta's capital, features a crowned bear's head on its arms. The coat of arms of Madrid depicts a bear reaching up into a madroño or strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo) to eat some of its fruit. The coat of arms of Carpathian Ukraine, which features a red bear, is used as the coat of arms of the Ukrainian Zakarpattia Oblast; it was formerly used by Subcarpathian Ruthenia, the oblast's predecessor within Czechoslovakia. A black bear appears on the coat of arms (and flag) of Przemyśl, Poland. A black bear with silver claws and a collar appears on the coat of arms of Samogitia which is now a province of Lithuania. The coat of arms of Madrid The coat of arms of Berlin The coat of arms of the Republic of Karelia The coat of arms of the Mari El Republic The coat of arms of Veliky Novgorod The coat of arms of the Yaroslavl Oblast The coat of arms of Khabarovsk Krai The coat of arms of Perm Krai The coat of arms of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug The coat of arms of the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug The coat of arms of Satakunta, Finland The coat of arms of Pori, Satakunta, Finland The coat of arms of Zakarpattia Oblast, Ukraine The coat of arms of Przemyśl, Poland The coat of arms of Samogitia The coat of arms of Chełm See also[edit] Bear in mythology Russian Bear Buddy bears Notes[edit] a.^ The bear was the heraldic animal of the seal and coat of arms of Bern from the 1220s, attested shortly after its foundation by Berchtold V, Duke of Zähringen in 1191. Swiss chronicles are unanimous in deriving the name of the city from the name of the animal; modern historiography has long assumed, however, that the city had been named for Verona, until the discovery of the Bern zinc tablet in the 1980s, which suggested that the toponymy is of Celtic origin.[11] References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bears in heraldry. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) ^ Arthur Charles Fox-Davies, A Complete Guide to Heraldry, London (1909), p. 198 ^ Werner Vogel, Berlin und seine Wappen. Ullstein, Berlin 1987 ^ "St. Gall's Bear", St. Gall's Church, Bangor, County Down, Northern Ireland ^ Neubecker, Ottfried (1976). Heraldry : sources, symbols, and meaning. New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 120. ISBN 9780070463080. ^ Strehler, Hermann (1965). "Das Churer Missale von 1589". Gutenberg-Jahrbuch. 40: 186. ^ Grzimek, Bernhard (1972). Grzimek’s Animal life encyclopedia. 12. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. p. 119. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2010-10-30. Retrieved 2010-06-12.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-02-12. Retrieved 2010-06-12.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Arms of Sylvain Bissonnette of Saint-Bruno, Quebec ^ http://www.civicheraldry.co.uk/warwicks.html ^ Andres Kristol (ed.): Lexikon der schweizerischen Gemeindenamen. Huber, Frauenfeld 2005, ISBN 3-7193-1308-5, p. 143. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources