"Round City" redirects here. For the city planning concept, see List of circular cities. Coordinates: 39°55′28″N 116°22′59″E﻿ / ﻿39.92444°N 116.38306°E﻿ / 39.92444; 116.38306 Beihai Park The White Dagoba (a stupa) on Qionghua Island Lua error in Module:Location_map at line 422: No value was provided for longitude. Type Urban park Location Beijing, China Area 71 hectares Created 1150 (Original) 1925 (Modern Park) Owned by Beijing Municipal Administration Center of Parks Status Open all year Satellite image of Beihai Park, 20 September 1967. Chinese gardens can be found throughout the site The entrance to the Chanfu Temple, located on the northern shore of the lake The Nine-Dragon Wall Beihai Park (Chinese: 北海公園; 北海公园), also known as the Winter Palace, is a public park and former imperial garden located in the northwestern part of the Imperial City, Beijing. First built in the 11th century, it is among the largest of all Chinese gardens and contains numerous historically important structures, palaces, and temples. Since 1925, the place has been open to the public as a park. It is also connected at its northern end to the Shichahai. The park has an area of more than 69 hectares (171 acres), with a lake that covers more than half of the entire park. At the center of the park is an island called Jade Flower Island (瓊華島; 琼华岛; Qiónghuádǎo), whose highest point is 32 meters (105 ft). Beihai literally means "Northern Sea". There are also corresponding Central (Zhonghai) and Southern (Nanhai) "Seas" elsewhere. These latter two are joined inside a complex of buildings known after them as Zhongnanhai; it is the home of China's paramount leaders. The Beihai Park, as with many of Chinese imperial gardens, was built to imitate renowned scenic spots and architecture from various regions of China such as Lake Tai, the elaborate pavilions and canals of Hangzhou and Yangzhou, the delicate garden structures in Suzhou and others all served as inspirations for the design of the numerous sites in this imperial garden. The structures and scenes in the Beihai Park are described as masterpieces of gardening technique that reflects the style and the superb architectural skill and richness of traditional Chinese garden art.[1] Contents 1 History 2 Notable places 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links History[edit] The bridge and tablets in park 1910 In 1179, Emperor Zhangzong of the Jin dynasty had a country resort built northeast of Zhongdu, the Jin capital, located in the southwestern part of modern Beijing. Taiye Lake was excavated along the Jinshui River[2] and Daning Palace (大寧宮) was erected on Qionghua Island in the lake.[3] During the reign of Kublai Khan in the Yuan dynasty, the Qionghua island was redesigned by various architects and officials such as Liu Bingzhong, Guo Shoujing and Amir al-Din.[4][5] Taiye Lake was enclosed in the Imperial City of Yuan's new capital Dadu After the Ming dynasty moved its capital to Beijing, construction on the existing Imperial City began in 1406. At this time, the Taiye Lake were divided into three lakes by bridges, Northern Sea (Beihai, 北海), Central Sea (Zhonghai, 中海) and Southern Sea (Nanhai, 南海). The lakes were part of an extensive royal park called Xiyuan (Western Park, 西苑) in the west part of the Imperial City, Beijing. Notable places[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The White Pagoda (白塔, Bai Ta, "White Tower") is a 40-meter (131 ft)-high stupa placed on the highest point on Jade Flower Island, built to honor the visit of the 5th Dalai Lama in 1651. Its body is made of white stone. Sun, moon and flame engravings decorate the surface of the tower. Destroyed by the 1679 Sanhe-Pinggu earthquake, it was rebuilt the following year, and restored again in 1976 because of the Tangshan earthquake near Beijing. A reliquary, secreted inside the structure are Buddhist scriptures, monk's mantles and alms bowl, and the bones of monks (their remains after cremation). There are several renowned Buddhist temples located within Beihai Park, such as the Yong'an Temple (Temple of Everlasting Peace) and the Chanfu Temple. On the north bank lies the Five-Dragon Pavilions, five connected pavilions with spires and pointed upswept eaves, which was built in the Ming dynasty. The Nine-Dragon Wall lies north of the Five-Dragon Pavilion. It was built in 1402 and is one of three walls of its kind in China. It is made of glazed bricks of seven-colors. Nine complete dragons playing in the clouds decorate both sides of the wall. Also on the north bank is the Jingxin Room (Quieting Heart Room). It is a garden within the garden, and covers an area of more than 4,000 square meters (43,056 sq ft). Many small traditional Chinese gardens exist throughout the park. The Round City (團成, Tuancheng) has as its main structure the Hall of Received Light (Chengguangdian), a spacious building with a double-eaved roof made of yellow glazed tiles bordered in green. Inside there is a 1.6 m tall Buddha presented to the Guangxu Emperor of the Qing dynasty by a Khmer (Cambodian) king. It is carved from a single piece of pure white jade inlaid with precious stones. The Eight-Nation Alliance damaged the statue's left arm in the Battle of Beijing in 1900. In Beihai Park, one could find Taihu rocks shipped from Henan province and a variety of art collections ranging from jade jars from the Yuan dynasty to a collection of 495 steles bearing inscriptions by trees of hundreds of years old.[1] Gallery[edit] Jade Flower Island The White Pagoda The Five-Dragon Pavilions One of the Five-Dragon Pavilions Pavilion of Sharing Coolness The Dacizhenru Hall Xiao Xi Tian The Miaoxiang Pavilion The Nine-Dragon Wall See also[edit] Imperial City, Beijing Zhongnanhai Summer Palace Old Summer Palace Miaoying Temple, the site of another famous White Dagoba in Beijing Ming tombs Star Art Exhibition of 1979 took place here References[edit] ^ a b "Beihai Park". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. 2008-09-03. Archived from the original on 2007-07-02. ^ Du, Pengfei & al. "History of Water Supply in Pre-Modern China" from Evolution of Water Supply through the Millennia, pp. 169 ff. Accessed 16 November 2013. ^ Rinaldi, Bianca. The Chinese Garden: Garden Types for Contemporary Landscape Architecture, p. 137. Walter de Gruyter, 2011. Accessed 16 November 2013. ^ Steinhardt, Nancy Riva Shatzman (1981). Imperial Architecture under Mongolian Patronage: Khubilai's Imperial City of Daidu. Harvard University. p. 222. ^ "Yeheidie'erding" (Amir al-Din) in Bai Shouyi, Zhongguo Huihui minzu shi. Yang Huaizhong. pp. 813–818. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Beihai Park. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Official Website (in Chinese) Beihai Park, Beijing The Circular Wall (Tuancheng) - China.org.cn v t e Xicheng District Former districts Xuanwu District Areas Caishikou Dashilan (Dashilar) Liulichang Niujie Xidan Xisi Xizhimen Education Beijing No. 4 High School Beijing No. 8 High School Experimental High School Attached to Beijing Normal University High School Affiliated to Beijing Normal University Second High School Attached to Beijing Normal University Beijing Normal University Xicheng Campus Central Conservatory of Music People's Public Security University of China National Library of China Ancient Books Library Landmarks Beihai Park Beijing Financial Street Beijing Planetarium Beijing Zoo Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception Cultural Palace of Nationalities Deshengmen Fayuan Temple Former Residence of Soong Ching-ling Great Hall of the People Guanghua Temple Houhai Huguang Guild Hall Jingshan Park Lingjing hutong Minzu Hotel National Centre for the Performing Arts Niujie Mosque Prince Chun Mansion Prince Gong's Mansion Shichahai Zhongnanhai China Railway stations Beijing North railway station (Xizhimen) Beijing Subway stations Anhua Qiao Beihai North Beijing Zoo Caishikou Changchunjie Chegongzhuang Chegongzhuang West Daguanying Fuchengmen Fuxingmen Guang'anmennei Guloudajie (part) Hepingmen Hufangqiao Jishuitan Lingjing Hutong Muxidi Nanlishilu Ping'anli Shichahai (part) Taoranting Tianqiao (part) Tiananmen West Wanzi Xidan Xinjiekou Xisi Xizhimen Xuanwumen Zhushikou (part) History Caishikou Execution Grounds This list is incomplete. v t e East Asian traditional landscape design Topics Chinese garden Japanese garden Korean garden Jiangnan style Classical Gardens of Suzhou Yu Garden Gardens around the West Lake Zhan Garden Mochou Lake Royal style Huaqing Pool Beihai Park Zhongnanhai Summer Palace Old Summer Palace Fragrant Hills Chengde Mountain Resort Rear Garden of Changdeokgung Katsura Imperial Villa Shugakuin Imperial Villa Hayama Imperial Villa Suzaki Imperial Villa North China style Garden of the Prince Gong Mansion Gardens in Peking University Lingnan style Ke Yuan Qing Hui Yuan Yu Yin Shan Fang Sichuanese style Du Fu Thatched Cottage v t e Parks, gardens and landscapes in urban Beijing Geography of Beijing Imperial and classical Forbidden City Temple of Heaven Summer Palace Old Summer Palace Temple of Earth Temple of Agriculture Temple of Moon Temple of Sun Zhongshan Park Purple Bamboo Park Yuyuantan Park Taoranting Park Beihai Park Fragrant Hills Jingshan Park Lotus Pond Park Yuan Dadu City Wall Ruins Park Ming City Wall Ruins Park Badachu Daguanyuan Shichahai Prince Gong Mansion Modern Beijing Zoo Beijing Botanical Garden Side Park Olympic Forest Park Olympic Green Fahai Temple Forest Park Daoxiang Lake Park Honglingjin Park Chaoyang Park Tuanjiehu Park Beijing Garden Expo Park Beijing World Park Elk Park Longtan Lake Park Qingnianhu Park Haidian Park Guta Park Eucommia Park White Deer Park Dongba Park Jintian Park Jingyi Park Yaowa Lake Park v t e Old city of Beijing Subdivisions Imperial City Forbidden City Fortifications and towers Andingmen Bell and Drum towers Chaoyangmen Chongwenmen Di'anmen Dongzhimen Duanmen Deshengmen Fuchengmen Guang'anmen Tiananmen Xizhimen Xuanwumen Yongdingmen Zhengyangmen Zhonghuamen Forbidden City Meridian Gate Gate of Supreme Harmony Hall of Mental Cultivation Hall of Supreme Harmony Belvedere of Embodying Benevolence Hall of Central Harmony Belvedere of Spreading Righteousness Hall of Preserving Harmony Gate of Thriving Imperial Clan Gate of Heavenly Purity Palace of Heavenly Purity Hall of Union Palace of Earthly Tranquility Gate of Divine Might Imperial gardens, temples and offices Jingshan Park Beihai Park Zhongnanhai Taimiao (Imperial Ancestral Temple) Zhongshan Park Confucius Temple Guozijian Beijing Ancient Observatory Beijing Zoo Old Summer Palace Summer Palace Fragrant Hills Jade Spring Hill Temple of Heaven Temple of Earth Temple of the Sun Temple of the Moon Xiannongtan (Temple of Agriculture) Temples and gardens Shichahai Yonghe Temple Fayuan Temple White Cloud Temple Zhenjue Temple Miaoying Temple Wanshou Temple Temple of Azure Clouds Badachu Dongyue Temple Guanghua Temple Tanzhe Temple Wofo Temple Big Bell Temple Bailin Temple Guangji Temple Fahai Temple Changchun Temple Zhihua Temple Yunju Temple Tianning Temple Mosques and churches Xuanwumen Cathedral Xishiku Cathedral Xizhimen Cathedral Wangfujing Cathedral St. Michael's Church Niujie Mosque