Further information: Culture of Bangladesh and Culture of West Bengal Part of a series on the Culture of Bengal History People Bengalis Bengali Renaissance List of Bengalis Languages Script Dialects Vocabulary Grammar Bengali Language Movement Bengali Language Movement (Manbhum) Bengali Language Movement (Barak Valley) Bengali language Movement (North Dinajpur) Traditions Bengali Hindu wedding Bengali Muslim wedding Gaye holud Panjika Bhadralok Walima Mythology and folklore Myths Chand Sadagar Bonbibi Oladevi Satya Pir Manasa Lores Thakurmar Jhuli Cuisine Festivals Durga_Puja Shakta Rash Kali puja Pohela Boishakh Poush Mela Nabanna Ekushey Book Fair Kolkata Book Fair Art Arts of West Bengal Patachitra Chalchitra Manasa chali Bangladeshi art Bengal School of Art Kalighat painting Literature Charyapada Shreekrishna Kirtana Mangal-Kāvya Vaishnava Padavali Laila Majnu Puthi Genres Poetry Novels Science fiction Folk literature Tarja Institutions Literary institutions Bangiya Sahitya Parishad Paschimbanga Bangla Akademi Bangla Academy Awards Literary awards Rabindra Puraskar Bangla Academy Literary Award Ananda Puraskar Music and performing arts Music Performing arts Folk genres Agamani-Vijaya Bhatiali Bhawaiya Gombhira Kavigan Maimansingha Gitika Devotional Baul Bhandari Shreekrishna Kirtana Classical genres Bishnupur Gharana Maihar gharana Modern genres Bengali band Bangladeshi rock Rock music of West Bengal People Rabindra Sangeet Nazrul Geeti Dwijendralal Ray Ramprasad Sen Lalon Hason Raja Polligeeti Instruments Bansuri Dhak Harmonium Dance Alkap Chhau Theater Jatra Group theatre of Kolkata Organizations Indian People's Theatre Association People Gerasim Lebedev Media Cinema of Bangladesh Cinema of West Bengal Sport Kabaddi Boli Khela Lathi khela Chaturaṅga Kho kho v t e Part of a series on Bengalis Bengali history Vanga Kingdom Gangaridai Gauda Kingdom Pala Empire Bengal Sultanate Bengal Subah Bengal Presidency Partition of Bengal (1905) Eastern Bengal and Assam Partition of Bengal (1947) East Bengal East Pakistan Names of Bengal Bengali homeland Bengal Bangladesh West Bengal Tripura Barak Valley Assam Bengali people Social group: Bangal Ghotis Diaspora Religious community: Hindus Buddhists Christians Bengali name Subgroups: Dhakaiyas Sylhetis Bengali culture Language Dialects Alphabet Romanisation Literature Poetry Science fiction Novels Folklore Art Music Cinema Bangladesh West Bengal Theatre Weddings Bengali Hindu wedding Cuisine Architecture Bengal Temple Calendar Festivals New Year Spring Monsoon Harvest Bengali symbols Bangamata Joy Bangla Bengal tiger Bengal cat Bungalow Bengal fire Bengali Renaissance Amar Sonar Bangla National symbols of Bangladesh Fish and rice Ilish Chingri malai curry Rasgulla Chomchom Jamdani Ganges Suvarnabhumi Bay of Bengal Politics United Bengal Bengali nationalism Bangabhumi Greater Bangladesh v t e This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The culture of Bengal defines the cultural heritage of the Bengali people native to eastern regions of the Indian subcontinent, mainly what is today Bangladesh and the Indian states of West Bengal, Tripura and Assam's Barak Valley, where the Bengali language is the official and primary language. Bengal has a recorded history of 1,400 years.[1] The Bengali people are its dominant ethnolinguistic tribe. The region has been a historical melting point, blending indigenous traditions with cosmopolitan influences from pan-Indian subcontinental empires. Bengal was considered to be the richest part of Islamic medieval India and during the era of the Bengal Sultanate it was described to be a major trading nation in the world, while during Mughal times, having triggered the proto-industrialization, its economy was worth 12% of global GDP. As a part of the Bengal Presidency, it also hosted the region's most advanced political and cultural centers during British rule.[1] The partition of Bengal left its own cultural legacy. Bangladesh is the scene of a dominant Bengali Muslim culture, whereas Indian Bengali-speaking regions have a Bengali Hindu majority. Muslim-majority Bangladesh is home to a significant Hindu minority, whereas West Bengal has a large Muslim minority. Apart from these, there are also numerous ethnic and religious minorities. Kolkata, the capital of West Bengal, is a cosmopolitan city which houses a sizeable number of ethnic communities. Bengal is an important hub of classical South Asian arts. Festivals on the secular Bengali calendar are widely celebrated. Contents 1 Literature 2 Philosophy 3 Fine arts 3.1 Performing arts 3.1.1 Music 3.1.2 Theatre 3.1.3 Dance 3.2 Visual arts 3.2.1 Painting 3.2.2 Architecture 3.2.3 Sculpture 4 Lifestyle 4.1 Textiles 4.2 Clothing 4.3 Transport 4.4 Weddings 5 Cultural institutions, organisations and events 6 Pastimes 6.1 Cinema 6.2 Sports 6.3 Media 7 See also 8 Notes Literature[edit] Main articles: Bengali literature and Bengali poetry Bengal has one of the most developed literary traditions in Asia. A descent of ancient Sanskrit and Magadhi Prakrit, the Bengali language evolved circa 1000-1200 CE under the Pala Empire and the Sena dynasty. It became an official court language of the Sultanate of Bengal and absorbed influences from Arabic and Persian. Middle Bengali developed secular literature in the 16th and 17th centuries. It was also spoken in Arakan. The Bengali Renaissance in Calcutta developed the modern standardized form of the language in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Rabindranath Tagore became the first Bengali writer to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1913, and was also the first non-European Nobel laureate. Kazi Nazrul Islam became known as the Rebel Poet of British India. After the partition of Bengal, a distinct literary culture developed in East Bengal, which later became East Pakistan and Bangladesh. Rabindranath Tagore Biswa Kabi (the poet of world) Kazi Nazrul Islam Bidrohi Kabi (the rebel poet) Jasimuddin Polli Kabi (the rural poet) Philosophy[edit] The works of ancient philosophers from Bengal have been preserved at libraries in Tibet, China and Central Asia. These include the works of Atisa and Tilopa.[2] Medieval Hindu philosophy featured the works of Chaitanya. Sufi philosophy was highly influential in Islamic Bengal. Prominent Sufi practitioners were disciples of Jalaluddin Rumi, Abdul-Qadir Gilani and Moinuddin Chishti. One of the most revered Sufi saints of Bengal is Shah Jalal. Fine arts[edit] Performing arts[edit] Music[edit] See also: Music of West Bengal and Music of Bangladesh Bengal has produced leading figures of Indian classical music, including Alauddin Khan, Ravi Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan. Common musical instruments include the sitar, tabla and sarod. The Baul tradition is a unique regional folk heritage. The most prominent practitioner was Lalon Shah. Other folk music forms include Gombhira, Bhatiali and Bhawaiya (Jhumur). Folk music in Bengal is often accompanied by the ektara, a one-stringed instrument. Other instruments include the dotara, dhol, bamboo flute, and tabla. Songs written by Rabindranath Tagore (Rabindra Sangeet) and Kazi Nazrul Islam (Nazrul geeti) are highly popular. Bangladesh is the center of Bangla rock, as well as indie, Sufi rock and fusion folk music. Ravi Shankar A Bangladeshi rock band Bauls in a village Theatre[edit] See also: Theatre in Bangladesh Bengali theater traces its roots to Sanskrit drama under the Gupta Empire in the 4th century CE. It includes narrative forms, song and dance forms, supra-personae forms, performance with scroll paintings, puppet theatre and the processional forms like the Jatra. Dance[edit] See also: Gaudiya Nritya and Chhau dance Bengal has an extremely rich heritage of dancing dating back to antiquity. It includes classical, folk and martial dance traditions.[3][4] Visual arts[edit] Painting[edit] See also: List of Bangladeshi painters A Kalighat painting describing a scene from Manasamangal Kavya In antiquity, Bengal was a pioneer of painting in Asia under the Pala Empire. Miniature and scroll painting flourished during the Mughal Empire. Kalighat painting or Kalighat Pat originated in the 19th century Bengal, in the vicinity of Kalighat Kali Temple of Kolkata, and from being items of souvenir taken by the visitors to the Kali temple, the paintings over a period of time developed as a distinct school of Indian painting. From the depiction of Hindu gods other mythological characters, the Kalighat paintings developed to reflect a variety of themes. Modern painting emerged in Calcutta with the Bengal school. East Pakistan developed its own contemporary painting tradition under Zainul Abedin. Modern Bangladeshi art has produced many of South Asia's leading painters, including SM Sultan, Mohammad Kibria, Shahabuddin Ahmed, Kanak Chanpa Chakma, Kafil Ahmed, Saifuddin Ahmed, Qayyum Chowdhury, Rashid Choudhury, Quamrul Hassan, Rafiqun Nabi and Syed Jahangir among others. Architecture[edit] Main article: Architecture of Bengal The earliest fortified cities in the region include Wari-Bateshwar, Chandraketugarh and Mahasthangarh. Bengal has a glorious legacy of terracotta architecture from the ancient and medieval periods. The style includes many mosques, temples, palaces, forts, monasteries and caravanserais. Mughal Dhaka was known as the City of Mosques and the Venice of the East. Indo-Saracenic architecture flourished during the British period, particularly among the landed gentry. British Calcutta was known as the City of Palaces. Modernist terracotta architecture in South Asia by architects like Muzharul Islam and Louis Kahn. Bengali village housing is noted as the origin of the bungalow. Sculpture[edit] Ancient Bengal was home to the Pala-Sena school of Sculptural Art.[5] Ivory sculptural art flourished across the region under the Nawabs of Bengal. Notable modernist sculptors include Novera Ahmed and Nitun Kundu. Lifestyle[edit] Textiles[edit] See also: Textile arts of Bangladesh Kantha, a Bengali cotton textile Muslin production in Bengal dates back to the 4th century BCE. The region exported the fabric to Ancient Greece and Rome.[5] Bengali silk was known as Ganges Silk in the 13th century Republic of Venice.[6] Mughal Bengal was a major silk exporter. The Bengali silk industry declined after the growth of Japanese silk production. Rajshahi silk continues to be produced in northern Bangladesh. Murshidabad and Malda are the centers of the silk industry in West Bengal. After the reopening of European trade with medieval India, Mughal Bengal became the world's foremost muslin exporter in the 17th century. Mughal-era Dhaka was a center of the worldwide muslin trade. The weaving of Jamdani muslin saris in Bangladesh are classified by UNESCO as intangible cultural heritage. Modern Bangladesh is one of the world's largest textile producers, with a large cotton based ready made garments industry. Clothing[edit] Bengali women commonly wear the shari (sari), often distinctly designed according to local cultural customs. In urban areas, many women and men wear Western-style attire. Men also wear traditional costumes such as the kurta. lungi, a variant of the sarong, is widely worn by Bangladeshi men. At Jorashanko (Rabindranath Tagore’s home in Kolkata) different drapes of sari were improvised on so that women could step out of the andarmahal (inner house) where they were relegated. This had Tagore’s sister-in-law, Jnanadanandini Devi, bringing the Parsi way of draping the sari from Mumbai to Bengal.[7] Chitra Deb, in her book Thakurbarir Andarmahal, describes the entire process of how the Parsi sari was adapted into Bengali culture.[8] Bengal has produced several of South Asia's leading fashion designers, including Sabyasachi Mukherjee, Bibi Russell, Rukhsana Esrar Runi and Rina Latif. Transport[edit] Kolkata is the only city in India to have a tram network. The trams are claimed to slow down other traffic, leading to groups who currently voice abolishing the trams, though the environment-friendliness and the old charm of the trams attract many people. Kolkata was also the first city in South Asia to have an underground railway system that started operating from 1984. It is considered to have the status of a zonal railway. The metered-cabs are mostly of the brand "Ambassador" manufactured by Hindustan Motors (now out of production). These taxis are painted with yellow colour, symbolising the transport tradition of Kolkata. Bangladesh has the world's largest number of cycle rickshaws. Its capital city Dhaka is known as the Rickshaw Capital of the World. The country's rickshaws display colorful rickshaw art, with each city and region have their own distinct style. Rickshaw driving provides employment for nearly a million Bangladeshis. Historically, Kolkata has been home to the hand-pulled rickshaw. Attempts to ban its use have largely failed. There are 150 different types of boats and canoes in Bengal. The region was renowned for shipbuilding in the medieval period, when its shipyards catered to major powers in Eurasia, including the Mughals and Ottomans. The types of timber used in boat making are from local woods Jarul (dipterocarpus turbinatus), sal (shorea robusta), sundari (heritiera fomes) and Burma teak (tectons grandis). Weddings[edit] Bengali Muslim bride and groom Bengali Hindu wedding Main article: Bengali wedding (disambiguation) Bengali weddings includes many rituals and ceremonies that can span several days. Although Muslim and Hindu marriages have their distinctive religious rituals, there are many common secular rituals.[9][10] The Gaye Holud ceremony is held in Bengali weddings of all faiths. Cultural institutions, organisations and events[edit] Major organisations responsible for funding and promoting Bengali culture are: National Art Gallery (Bangladesh) Shilpakala Academy Bangladesh Folk Arts and Crafts Foundation Ministry of Cultural Affairs (Republic of Bangladesh) Ministry of Information & Cultural Affairs (West Bengal) List of institutions and organisations Chhayanaut Bulbul Lalitakala Academy Nazrul Institute Samdani Art Foundation Bangladesh Shishu Academy Bangladesh Short Film Forum Bishwo Shahitto Kendro Bangladeshi Photographers Bangladesh National Philatelic Association Bangla Academy Moviyana Film Society Theatre Institute Chattagram Bangladesh Film Development Corporation Bangladesh Film Archive Biswa Bangla Paschimbanga Bangla Akademi Paschim Banga Natya Akademi Bangiya Sahitya Parishad Festivals Main articles: List of festivals in Bangladesh and List of festivals in West Bengal Both Bangladesh and West Bengal have many festivals and fairs throughout the year. Muslim Hindu Buddhist Christian Secular Eid al-Fitr Durga Puja Buddha Purnima Christmas Nababarsha (New Year/ Summer); Wearing colour:     Eid al-Adha Kali Puja Madhu Purnima Easter Basanta Utsab (Spring Festival); Wearing colour:     Muharram Saraswati Puja Kathin Chibardan Barsha Mangal (Monsoon salutation); Wearing colour:     Milad un Nabi Dolyatra (Holi) Nabanna (Harvest Festival); Wearing colour:     Shab-e-Barat Janmashtami Poush Sangkranti (Winter Festival) Laylat al-Qadr Jagaddhatri Puja Events Ekushey Book Fair Bishwa Ijtema Ganga Sagar Mela Rath Yatra Ramadan International Mother Language Day Kolkata Film Festival Dhaka Art Summit Kolkata Book Fair Eid prayer in Comilla Shindur khela in Durga Puja at Kolkata Celebration of Pohela Boishakh in Dhaka Bashanto Utsav festival Pastimes[edit] See also: Lost Rural Sports of Bengal Cinema[edit] Main articles: Cinema of Bangladesh and Cinema of West Bengal Kolkata and Dhaka are the centers of Bengali cinema. The region's film industry is notable for the history of art films in South Asia, including the works of Academy Award winning director Satyajit Ray and the Cannes Film Festival award-winning director Tareque Masud. Sports[edit] Cricket and football are popular sports in the Bengal region. Dhaka and Chittagong are home to some of the most renowned football clubs in South Asia and are prominent venues for international cricket. Kolkata is one of the major centers for football in India. Shakib Al Hasan, Mushfiqur Rahim, Mashrafe Bin Mortaza, Tamim Iqbal from Bangladesh and Pankaj Roy, Sourav Ganguly, Manoj Tiwary, Wriddhiman Saha, Mohammed Shami from West Bengal are internationally known cricketers .[11] Local games include sports such as Kho Kho and Kabaddi, the latter being the national sport of Bangladesh. Media[edit] Bangladesh's Prothom Alo is the largest circulated Bengali newspaper in the world. It is followed by Ananda Bazar Patrika, which has the largest circulation for a single-edition, regional language newspaper in India. Other prominent Bengali newspapers include the Ittefaq, Jugantor, Samakal, Janakantha and Bartaman. Major English-language newspapers in Bangladesh include The Daily Star, New Age, and the weekly Holiday. The Statesman, published from Kolkata, is the region's oldest English-language publication. See also[edit] Culture of Bangladesh Culture of West Bengal Notes[edit] ^ a b Minahan, James B. (2012). Ethnic Groups of South Asia and the Pacific: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781598846607. ^ Islam, Aminul (2012). "Philosophy". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. ^ Hasan, Sheikh Mehedi (2012). "Dance". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. ^ Ahmed, Wakil (2012). "Folk Dances". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. ^ a b Snodgrass, Mary Ellen (2015). World Clothing and Fashion: An Encyclopedia of History, Culture, and Social Influence. Routledge. ISBN 9781317451679. ^ Van Schendel, Willem (2012). "Silk". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. ^ "Have you heard of Rabindra Vastra? | Latest News & Updates at Daily News & Analysis". dna. 2018-05-13. Retrieved 2018-05-19. ^ Deba, Citrā; ১৯৪৩-, দেব, চিত্রা (2006). Ṭhākurabārira andaramahala (3. paribardita o parimārjita saṃskaraṇa ed.). Kalakātā: Ānanda. ISBN 8177565966. OCLC 225391789.CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) ^ "Bengali Wedding Rituals - A Traditional Bengali Marriage Ceremony". about.com. Retrieved 2008-11-21. ^ "Weddings In India - Wedding in Exotic Indian Locations". www.weddingsinindia.com. Retrieved 2008-11-21. ^ Prabhakaran, Shaji (18 January 2003). "Football in India - A Fact File". LongLiveSoccer.com. Archived from the original on 23 October 2006. Retrieved 2006-10-26. "The Bengali Wedding Magazine" v t e Bangladesh articles History Timeline Outline Topics: Bengal Aviation Literature Military Postal Rulers Cyclones Years Ancient Vedic period Anga Vanga Pundra Suhma Kingdom Magadha Pradyota Shaishunaga Nanda Gangaridai Maurya Empire Shunga Empire Kanva dynasty Gupta Empire Classical and Medieval Classical Empires: Pala Kamboja Sena Sultanates: Islamic rulers Delhi Sultanate Khalji dynasty Bengal Sultanate Sur Empire Baro-Bhuyan Mughal period: Bengal Subah Nawabs of Bengal Battle of Plassey Colonial and Pakistan era Portuguese Bengala British Bengal: Famine of 1770 Sepoy Rebellion Bengali Renaissance Partition of Bengal (1905) Prime Minister of Bengal Lahore Resolution Famine of 1943 Direct Action Day Partition of Bengal (1947) East Pakistan: Language Movement Legislative election in 1954 Six point movement 1969 Uprising General election in 1970 Proclamation of Independence Bangladesh Liberation War: Provisional Government Genocide Rape Timeline Republic Bangladesh Famine of 1974 Military coups 1975 1981 1982 1990 Uprising Political crisis in 2006–08 Bangladesh Rifles revolt Protests in 2013 COVID-19 pandemic Regional Chittagong Dhaka Noakhali Rangpur Sylhet Geography Administrative: Divisions Districts Sub-districts Cities and Towns Borders Nature: Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers Places: Bay of Bengal Bengal Fan Chittagong Hill Tracts Cox's Bazar Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Hatirjheel Jat Area Sundarbans World Heritage Sites Politics Government Executive: President Prime Minister Cabinet Elections: Election Commission General elections Presidential elections Political parties Foreign relations Foreign policies Jatiya Sangsad (parliament): Constituencies Speaker Local government: City Corporations Municipalities Upazila Parishads Union councils Law: Constitution Supreme Court High Court Division International Crimes Tribunal Chief Justice Attorney General Human rights: Forced disappearance Freedom of religion LGBT rights Women Military and Enforcement Armed Forces: Army Navy Air Force Paramilitary: Border Guard Coast Guard Ansar Village Defence Party President Guard Regiment Special Security Force Intelligence: NSI DGFI CTIB Special Branch Police: APBn CID CTTC PBI RAB SPBn Economy Bangladesh Planning Commission Industries: Automotive Ceramics Electronics Food Pharmaceutical Textile Shipbuilding Steel Tea production Finance Sectors: Banking Bangladesh Bank (central bank) Bangladeshi taka (currency) Financial system Stock Exchange: Chittagong Dhaka 2011 scam Energy and Resources: Energy policy Electricity Natural gas and petroleum Nuclear energy Renewable energy Export Processing Zones Agriculture: Poultry Fishing Forestry Tourism Poverty Infrastructure: Post Telecommunications Real estate Water supply and sanitation Transport: Airports Airlines Railway Roads Ports Society Demographics Ethnic groups Bangladeshis Names Crime Education Schools Universities Health Religion Society Culture Architecture Baul Bengalization Calendars Cinema Cuisine Language Bengal studies Literature Music Public holidays Sports Theatre Radio stations Sexuality Marriage Symbols Amar Shonar Bangla Bangamata Bengal fire Bengal tiger Bungalow Flag Government Seal Ilish Jackfruit Kabaddi Bengal cat Mango tree National Emblem National Martyrs’ Memorial Notuner Gaan Oriental magpie-robin Water lily Inventions and discoveries Outline Index Category Portal v t e State of West Bengal Capital: Kolkata State symbols Emblem: Emblem of West Bengal Animal: Fishing cat Bird: White-throated kingfisher Flower: Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli) Tree: Devil's tree (Saptaparni) Fish: Ilish History Gauda Kingdom Shashanka Pala Empire Sena dynasty Mallabhum Cooch Behar State Sher Shah Suri Mughal Empire Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad British East India Company Battle of Plassey Bengal Presidency Bengal famine of 1770 Indian rebellion of 1857 Bengal Renaissance Bardhaman Raj Nadia Raj Jhargram Raj Sovabazar Raj Panchkot Raj Partition of Bengal (1905) Revolutionary movement for Indian independence Anushilan Samiti Jugantar Bengal famine of 1943 Direct Action Day Noakhali riots Partition of Bengal (1947) Bangladesh Liberation War Naxalite movement Geography Darjeeling Himalayan hill region Terai North Bengal plains Dooars Rarh region Sundarbans Reserve Forest Western plateau and high lands Ganges Delta Climate Sandakphu (Highest point) Protected areas Rivers Khoai Tiger Hill, Darjeeling Siliguri Corridor Governance Chief Ministers Governor Legislative Assembly Human Rights Commission Political parties (All India Trinamool Congress Communist Party (Marxist) Indian National Congress Bharatiya Janata Party) Parliamentary constituencies Assembly constituencies CID West Bengal Kolkata Police Rights groups Matua Mahasangha Bangla Pokkho Jatiyo Bangla Sammelan Division and Districts Burdwan division Birbhum Hooghly Paschim Bardhaman Purba Bardhaman Jalpaiguri division Alipurduar Cooch Behar Darjeeling Jalpaiguri Kalimpong Malda division Dakshin Dinajpur Maldah Murshidabad Uttar Dinajpur Medinipur division Bankura Jhargram Paschim Medinipur Purba Medinipur Purulia Presidency division Howrah Kolkata Nadia North 24 Parganas South 24 Parganas Cities and towns Alipore Asansol Baharampur Balurghat Bankura Barasat Bardhaman Bishnupur Chinsurah Cooch Behar Darjeeling Durgapur English Bazar Haldia Howrah Jalpaiguri Jaynagar Majilpur Kalimpong Kharagpur Kolkata Krishnanagar Kurseong Malda Midnapore Murshidabad Purulia Raiganj Siliguri Siuri Tamluk List of cities in West Bengal Cities and towns by district Culture Bengali Renaissance Bônggabdô (calendar) Patachitra Chalchitra Arts of West Bengal Baul Bhadu Gombhira Chau dance Cuisine Rabindra Sangeet Rabindra Nritya Natya Dolyatra Pohela Baishakh Durgapuja Architecture Bengal temple Language Literature Cinema Jatra Ghosts in Bengali culture GI product Patachitra Chhau Mask Roshogolla Darjeeling tea Baluchari Sari Dhaniakhali Sari Dhokra Fazli Himsagar Jaynagarer Moa Mihidana Nakshi Kantha Santiniketan Leather Goods Tulaipanji Demographics Bengali people Bihari people Economy of West Bengal Gurkha Adivasi Anglo-Indian Ethnic communities in Kolkata List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate People Rabindranath Tagore Satyajit Ray Kazi Nazrul Islam Anil Kumar Gain Ritwik Ghatak Subhas Chandra Bose Jamini Roy Nandalal Bose Jagdish Chandra Bose Meghnad Saha Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons