A Japanese Buddhist goddess who originated from the Hindu goddess Saraswati This article is about the goddess. For the music album, see Osamu Kitajima. "Benten" redirects here. For the animated series by Cartoon Network, see Ben 10. Sarasvatī (Buddhism) Sanskrit सरस्वती Sarasvatī Burmese သူရဿတီ Thurathadi Chinese (Traditional) 辯才天 (Simplified) 辩才天 (Pinyin: Biàncái Tiān) Japanese 弁財天 or 弁才天（べんざいてん） (romaji: Benzaiten) Korean 변재천 (RR: Byeonjae Cheon) Mongolian Сарасвати Thai สุรัสวดี (RTGS: Suratsawadi) Tibetan དབྱངས་ཅན་མ་ Wylie: dbyangs can ma THL: Yangchenma Vietnamese Biện Tài Thiên Information Venerated by Mahāyāna, Vajrayāna  Religion portal Benzaiten (弁才天, 弁財天) (also known as Benten)[1] is a Japanese Buddhist goddess who originated from the Hindu goddess Saraswati.[2] Worship of Benzaiten arrived in Japan during the 6th through 8th centuries, mainly via the Chinese translations of the Sutra of Golden Light, which has a section devoted to her. She is also mentioned in the Lotus Sutra and often depicted holding a biwa, a traditional Japanese lute, just as Saraswati holds a veena. Benzaiten is a syncretic entity with both a Buddhist and a Shinto aspect. Benzaiten was worshiped as the personification of wisdom in the Tokugawa period.[3] Contents 1 Transfer from India to Japan 2 Benzaiten as a kami (God) 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Sources 6 External links Transfer from India to Japan[edit] Benzaiten shrine, Inokashira Park, Tokyo Referred to as Sarasvatî Devî in Sanskrit (meaning "Goddess Saraswati"),[4] Benzaiten is the goddess of everything that flows: water, time, words, speech, eloquence, music and by extension, knowledge.[5] The original characters used to write her name read "Biancaitian" in Chinese and "Bensaiten" in Japanese (辯才天) and reflect her role as the goddess of eloquence. Because the Sutra of Golden Light promised protection of the state, in Japan she became a protector-deity, at first of the state and then of people. Lastly, she became one of the Seven Gods of Fortune (fukujin) when the Sino-Japanese characters used to write her name changed to 弁財天 (Benzaiten), emphasizing her role in bestowing monetary fortune. Sometimes she is called Benten, or Benzaitennyo (弁才天女), where the final tennyo (天女) translates as "goddess". When Kisshoutennyo is counted among the seven fukujin and fellow fukujin Daikoku is regarded in feminine form, together with Benzaitennyo all three of the Hindu Tridevi are represented in the fukujin. Benzaiten in Japan (above) is often shown holding a biwa, just as the Hindu goddess Saraswati (from whom she is derived) is often portrayed with a veena in India and Bali (Indonesia). Her temples are more common on islands and coastal regions of Japan.[6] In the Rig-Veda (6.61.7) Sarasvati is credited with killing the three-headed Vritra also known as Ahi ("snake"). Vritra is also strongly associated with rivers, as is Sarasvati. This is probably one of the sources of Sarasvati/Benzaiten's close association with snakes and dragons in Japan. She is enshrined on numerous locations throughout Japan; for example, the Enoshima Island in Sagami Bay, the Chikubu Island in Lake Biwa and the Itsukushima Island in Seto Inland Sea (Japan's Three Great Benzaiten Shrines); and she and a five-headed dragon are the central figures of the Enoshima Engi, a history of the shrines on Enoshima written by the Japanese Buddhist monk Kōkei (皇慶) in AD 1047. According to Kōkei, Benzaiten is the third daughter of the dragon-king of Munetsuchi (無熱池; literally "lake without heat"), known in Sanskrit as Anavatapta, the lake lying at the center of the world according to an ancient Buddhist cosmological view. Earlier documents such as those recorded by Buddhist monks link the periodic appearance of comets with the goddess Benzaiten. For example, the comet that appeared in 552 AD, and again in late 593 AD were associated with deity Benzaiten.[7] These records suggest that the exchange of cultural and spiritual ideas from Buddhism and Hinduism in India to Japan, through deities such as Benzaiten, occurred well before the 5th century. Two qualities of Saraswati that were transposed to the Buddhist version of Benzaiten are music and wisdom. She is sometimes referred to as Myoonten "goddess of wonderful sounds."[8] Benzaiten as a kami (God)[edit] Benzaiten is a female kami to Shinto with the name Ichikishima-hime-no-mikoto (市杵島姫命).[9] She is also believed by Tendai Buddhists to be the essence of the kami Ugajin, whose effigy she sometimes carries on her head together with a torii (see photo above).[10] As a consequence, she is sometimes also known as Uga (宇賀) Benzaiten or Uga Benten.[1] Shrine pavilions called either Benten-dō or Benten-sha (弁天社), or even entire Shinto shrines can be dedicated to her, as in the case of Kamakura's Zeniarai Benzaiten Ugafuku Shrine or Nagoya's Kawahara Shrine. Benzaiten, in Japanese mythology, is also one of the Seven Lucky Gods. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Benzaiten. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Omoikane Tenjin Buddhist Tenbu (天部) deities Hinduism in Japan Seven Lucky Gods Shinbutsu-shūgō Three Great Shrines of Benzaiten Notes[edit] ^ a b Ludvik, Catherine. “Uga-Benzaiten: The Goddess and the Snake.” Impressions, no. 33, 2012, pp. 94–109. JSTOR, JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/42597966. ^ Catherine Ludvik (2001), From Sarasvati to Benzaiten, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Toronto, National Library of Canada; PDF Download ^ MacWilliams, Mark W. (1997). "Temple Myths and the Popularization of Kannon Pilgrimage in Japan: A Case Study of Ōya-ji on the Bandō Route". Japanese Journal of Religious Studies. 24–25: 397. ^ Saraswati meets Buddha, SHAILAJA TRIPATHI, The Hindu, March 21, 2016 ^ Artstor. "Artstor". library.artstor.org. Retrieved 2018-11-26. ^ T. Suzuki (1907), The seven gods of bliss, The Open Court, 1907 (7), 2 ^ Juhl et al, DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE FOR THE APPARITION OF A COMET IN LATE 593 AND EARLY 594 AD, Lunar and Planetary Science XXXVIII (2007), Antarctic Institute of Canada ^ Pye, Michael (2013). Strategies in the study of religions. Volume two, Exploring religions in motion. Boston: De Gruyter. p. 279. ISBN 9781614511915. OCLC 852251932. ^ Bocking, Brian (1997). A Popular Dictionary of Shinto - 'Benzaiten'. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7007-1051-5. ^ Itō, Satoshi: "Ugajin". Encyclopedia of Shinto, Kokugakuin University, retrieved on August 15, 2011 Sources[edit] Japan and Indian Asia by Hajime Nakamura. Publisher: Firma KLM, 1961. Publication Date: 1961 India and Japan: A Study in interaction during 5th cent - 14th century - By Upendra Thakur External links[edit] A Study of the Enoshima Engi Sacred Texts account of Benzaiten v t e Japanese mythology Mythic texts Kojiki Nihon Shoki Fudoki Kujiki Kogo Shūi Hotsuma Tsutae Nihon Ryōiki Konjaku Monogatarishū Shintōshū Butsuzōzui Japanese creation myth Kotoamatsukami Amenominakanushi Kamiyo (Kamiyonanayo) Kuniumi Kamiumi Izanami Izanagi Kagutsuchi Watatsumi Takamagahara mythology Amaterasu Susanoo Tsukuyomi Ame-no-Uzume Izumo mythology Yamata no Orochi Hare of Inaba Ōkuninushi Kuni-yuzuri Kotoshironushi Takeminakata Hyūga mythology Tenson kōrin Ninigi Konohanasakuya-hime Hoderi Hoori Toyotama-hime Ugayafukiaezu Human age Emperor Jimmu Tagishimimi Kesshi Hachidai Mythical locations Ashihara no Nakatsukuni Amano-Iwato Onogoro Island Ne-no-kuni Ryūgū-jō Takamagahara Yomi Major Buddhist figures Amida Nyorai Daruma Five Tathagatas Seven Lucky Gods Benzaiten Bishamonten Daikokuten Ebisu Fukurokuju Hotei Jurōjin Kisshōten Legendary creatures Dragon Kappa Kitsune Oni Tengu Yōkai Yūrei Other Shinigami Ryukyuan religion Amamikyu Tenson dynasty Ainu mythology Kamuy Kamuy-huci Hasinaw-uk-kamuy Shinto deities Mythology in popular culture Japanese deities Sacred objects Japanese religions v t e Japanese Buddhist pantheon Buddhas 如来部 (Nyorai-bu) Śākyamuni (Shaka Nyorai) Amitābha (Amida Nyorai) Bhaiṣajyaguru (Yakushi Nyorai) Vairocana (Dainichi Nyorai) Five Wisdom Buddhas (Godai Nyorai) Bodhisattvas 菩薩部 (Bosatsu-bu) Maitreya (Miroku) Avalokiteśvara (Kannon) Samantabhadra (Fugen) Mañjuśrī (Monju) Mahāpratisarā(Daizuigu) Kṣitigarbha (Jizō) Ākāśagarbha (Kokūzō) Mahāsthāmaprāpta (Seishi) Vajrasattva (Kongōsatta) Vajraparamita (Kongō-Haramitsu) Wisdom Kings 明王部 (Myōō-bu) Five Wisdom Kings Acala (Fudō-Myōō) Rāgarāja (Aizen-Myōō) Ucchuṣma (Ususama-Myōō) Hayagrīva (Batō-Myōō) Mahāmāyūrī (Kujaku-Myoō) Yamāntaka (Daiitoku-Myoō) Heavenly deities 天部 (Ten-bu) Four Heavenly Kings (Shitennō) Eight Legions (Hachi-Bushū) Twelve Devas (Jūni-ten) Twelve Heavenly Generals (Jūni Shinshō) Twenty-Eight Legions (Nijūhachi-Bushū) Sarasvatī (Benzaiten) Vaiśravaṇa (Bishamonten) Śakra (Taishakuten) Brahmā(Bonten) Maheśvara (Daijizaiten) Mahākāla (Daikokuten) Ḍākinī (Dakiniten) Yama (Enma-Daiō) Gigeiten Skanda (Idaten) Īśāna (Ishanaten) Pṛthvī (Jiten) Gaṇapati (Kankiten) Hārītī (Kishimojin) Apsara (Hiten) Kalaviṅka (Karyōbinga) Lakṣmī (Kisshōten) Mārīcī (Marishiten) Vajrapāṇi (Niō) Circumstantial appearances 垂迹身部 (Suijakushin-bu) Akiha Gongen Ishizuchi Daigongen Ochi Daigongen Kumano Gongen Sanki Daigongen Zaō Gongen Suzuka Gongen Seiryū Gongen Tateyama Gongen Chimyō Gongen Nezu Gongen Hakusan Gongen Haguro Gongen Hachiōji Gongen Hiryō Gongen Sannō Gongen Futara Gongen Yuga Daigongen Hikosan Gongen Shiromine Gongen Izuna Gongen Atago Gongen Konpira Daigongen Religious masters 高僧・祖師部 (Kōsō・Soshi-bu) Nāgārjuna (Ryūju) Vasubandhu (Seshin) Bodhidharma Prince Shōtoku Kūkai Saichō Eisai Dōgen Kigen Genshin Hōnen Ippen Shinran Nichiren Sixteen Arhats Zen Tendai Shingon Pure Land Shugendō Nichiren Japanese mythology v t e Hinduism in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Artsakh Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125