Collection of religious texts in Judaism and Christianity For other uses, see API (disambiguation). "Biblical" redirects here. For the song by Biffy Clyro, see Biblical (song). For the song cycle by Antonín Dvořák, see Biblical Songs. For Christian scriptures used in addition to or instead of the Bible, see Religious text § Additional and alternate scriptures. The Gutenberg Bible, the first printed Bible (mid-15th century) Part of a series on the Bible Canons and books Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Old Testament (OT) New Testament (NT) Deuterocanon Antilegomena Chapters and verses Apocrypha Jewish OT NT Authorship and development Authorship Dating Hebrew canon Old Testament canon New Testament canon Composition of the Torah Mosaic authorship Pauline epistles Petrine epistles Johannine works Translations and manuscripts Samaritan Torah Dead Sea scrolls Masoretic Text Targumim Peshitta Septuagint Vetus Latina Vulgate Gothic Bible Luther Bible English Bibles Biblical studies Archeology Artifacts Dating Historicity Internal consistency People Places Names Rahlfs' Septuagint Novum Testamentum Graece Documentary hypothesis Synoptic problem NT textual categories Biblical criticism Historical Textual Source Form Redaction Canonical Interpretation Hermeneutics Pesher Midrash Pardes Allegorical interpretation Historical-grammatical method Literalism Prophecy Inspiration Humor Violence Alcohol Ethics Slavery Women Muhammad Homosexuality Death penalty Incest Rape Sex Serpents Conspiracy theory Perspectives Gnostic Islamic Quranic Inerrancy Infallibility Criticism of the Bible Outline of Bible-related topics  Bible portal · v t e The Bible (from Koine Greek τὰ βιβλία, tà biblía, "the books") is a collection of religious texts or scriptures sacred to Christians, Jews, Samaritans, Rastafari and others. It appears in the form of an anthology, a compilation of texts of a variety of forms that are all linked by the belief that they are collectively revelations of God. These texts include theologically-focused historical accounts, hymns, prayers, proverbs, parables, didactic letters, poetry, and prophecies. Believers also generally consider the Bible to be a product of divine inspiration. Those books included in the Bible by a tradition or group are called canonical, indicating that the tradition/group views the collection as the true representation of God's word and will. A number of biblical canons have evolved, with overlapping and diverging contents from denomination to denomination.[1] The Hebrew Bible overlaps with the Greek Septuagint and the Christian Old Testament. The Christian New Testament is a collection of writings by early Christians, believed to be mostly Jewish disciples of Christ, written in first-century Koine Greek. Among Christian denominations there is some disagreement about what should be included in the canon, primarily about the biblical apocrypha, a list of works that are regarded with varying levels of respect. Attitudes towards the Bible also differ among Christian groups. Roman Catholics, high church Anglicans, Methodists and Eastern Orthodox Christians stress the harmony and importance of both the Bible and sacred tradition,[2][3] while many Protestant churches focus on the idea of sola scriptura, or scripture alone. This concept rose to prominence during the Reformation, and many denominations today support the use of the Bible as the only infallible source of Christian teaching. Others, though, advance the concept of prima scriptura in contrast.[2] The Bible has had a profound influence on literature and history, especially in the Western world, where the Gutenberg Bible was the first book printed using movable type.[4][5] According to the March 2007 edition of Time, the Bible "has done more to shape literature, history, entertainment, and culture than any book ever written. Its influence on world history is unparalleled, and shows no signs of abating."[4] With estimated total sales of over five billion copies, it is widely considered to be the best-selling book of all time.[4][6][7] As of the 2000s, it sells approximately 100 million copies annually.[8][9] Contents 1 Etymology 2 Development 3 Textual history 4 Hebrew Bible 4.1 Torah 4.2 Nevi'im 4.2.1 Former Prophets 4.2.2 Latter Prophets 4.3 Ketuvim 4.3.1 The poetic books 4.3.2 The five scrolls (Hamesh Megillot) 4.3.3 Other books 4.3.4 Order of the books 4.3.5 Canonization 4.4 Original languages 5 Samaritan Pentateuch 6 Septuagint 6.1 Incorporations from Theodotion 6.2 Final form 7 Christian Bibles 7.1 Old Testament 7.1.1 Apocryphal or deuterocanonical books 7.1.2 Pseudepigraphal books 7.1.2.1 Book of Enoch 7.1.2.2 Denominational views of pseudepigrapha 7.1.3 Role of the Old Testament in Christian theology 7.2 New Testament 7.2.1 Original language 7.2.2 Historic editions 7.3 Development of the Christian canons 7.3.1 Ethiopian Orthodox canon 7.4 Peshitta 8 Divine inspiration 9 Versions and translations 10 Views 10.1 Other religions 10.2 Biblical studies 10.3 Higher criticism 11 Archaeological and historical research 12 Bible museums 13 Gallery 14 Illustrations 15 See also 16 Notes 17 References 17.1 Works cited 18 Further reading 19 External links Etymology[edit] The English word Bible is derived from Koinē Greek: τὰ βιβλία, romanized: ta biblia, meaning "the books" (singular βιβλίον, biblion).[10] The word βιβλίον itself had the literal meaning of "paper" or "scroll" and came to be used as the ordinary word for "book". It is the diminutive of βύβλος byblos, "Egyptian papyrus", possibly so called from the name of the Phoenician sea port Byblos (also known as Gebal) from whence Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece. By the 2nd century BCE, Jewish groups began calling the books of the Bible the "scriptures" and they referred to them as "holy", or in Hebrew כִּתְבֵי הַקֹּדֶשׁ (Kitvei hakkodesh), and Christians now commonly call the Old and New Testaments of the Christian Bible "The Holy Bible" (in Greek τὰ βιβλία τὰ ἅγια, tà biblía tà ágia) or "the Holy Scriptures" (η Αγία Γραφή, e Agía Graphḗ).[11] The Greek ta biblia (lit. "little papyrus books")[12] was "an expression Hellenistic Jews used to describe their sacred books" (the Septuagint).[13][14] Christian use of the term can be traced to c. 223 CE. The biblical scholar F. F. Bruce notes that Chrysostom appears to be the first writer (in his Homilies on Matthew, delivered between 386 and 388) to use the Greek phrase ta biblia ("the books") to describe both the Old and New Testaments together.[15] Medieval Latin biblia is short for biblia sacra "holy book", while biblia in Greek and Late Latin is neuter plural (gen. bibliorum). It gradually came to be regarded as a feminine singular noun (biblia, gen. bibliae) in medieval Latin, and so the word was loaned as singular into the vernaculars of Western Europe.[16] Latin biblia sacra "holy books" translates Greek τὰ βιβλία τὰ ἅγια tà biblía tà hágia, "the holy books".[17] Development[edit] See also: Authorship of the Bible and Dating the Bible The Bible is not a single book but a collection of books, whose complex development is not completely understood. The books began as songs and stories orally transmitted from generation to generation before being written down in a process that began sometime around the start of the first millennium BCE and continued for over a thousand years. The Bible was written and compiled by many people, from a variety of disparate cultures, most of whom are unknown.[18] British biblical scholar John K. Riches wrote:[19] [T]he biblical texts were produced over a period in which the living conditions of the writers – political, cultural, economic, and ecological – varied enormously. There are texts which reflect a nomadic existence, texts from people with an established monarchy and Temple cult, texts from exile, texts born out of fierce oppression by foreign rulers, courtly texts, texts from wandering charismatic preachers, texts from those who give themselves the airs of sophisticated Hellenistic writers. It is a time-span which encompasses the compositions of Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Thucydides, Sophocles, Caesar, Cicero, and Catullus. It is a period which sees the rise and fall of the Assyrian empire (twelfth to seventh century) and of the Persian empire (sixth to fourth century), Alexander's campaigns (336–326), the rise of Rome and its domination of the Mediterranean (fourth century to the founding of the Principate, 27 BCE), the destruction of the Jerusalem Temple (70 CE), and the extension of Roman rule to parts of Scotland (84 CE). Hebrew Bible from 1300. Genesis. Considered to be scriptures (sacred, authoritative religious texts), the books were compiled by different religious communities into various biblical canons (official collections of scriptures). The earliest compilation, containing the first five books of the Bible and called the Torah (meaning "law", "instruction", or "teaching") or Pentateuch ("five books"), was accepted as Jewish canon by the fifth century BCE. A second collection of narrative histories and prophesies, called the Nevi'im ("prophets"), was canonized in the third century BCE. A third collection called the Ketuvim ("writings"), containing psalms, proverbs, and narrative histories, was canonized sometime between the second century BCE and the second century CE. These three collections were written mostly in Hebrew, with some parts in Aramaic, and together form the Hebrew Bible or "TaNaKh" (a portmanteau of "Torah", "Nevi'im", and "Ketuvim").[20] Greek-speaking Jews in Alexandria and elsewhere in the Jewish diaspora considered additional scriptures, composed between 200 BCE and 100 CE and not included in the Hebrew Bible, to be canon. These additional texts were included in a translation of the Hebrew Bible into Koine Greek (common Greek spoken by ordinary people) known as the Septuagint (meaning "the work of the seventy"), which began as a translation of the Torah made around 250 BCE and continued to develop for several centuries. The Septuagint contained all of the books of the Hebrew Bible, re-organized and with some textual differences, with the additional scriptures interspersed throughout.[21] Saint Paul Writing His Epistles, 16th-century painting. During the rise of Christianity in the first century CE, new scriptures were written in Greek about the life and teachings of Jesus Christ, who Christians believed was the messiah prophesized in the books of the Hebrew Bible. Two collections of these new scriptures—the Pauline epistles and the Gospels—were accepted as canon by the end of the second century CE. A third collection, the catholic epistles, were canonized over the next few centuries. Christians called these new scriptures the "New Testament", and began referring to the Septuagint as the "Old Testament".[22] Between 385 and 405 CE, the early Christian church translated its canon into Vulgar Latin (the common Latin spoken by ordinary people), a translation known as the Vulgate, which included in its Old Testament the books that were in the Septuagint but not in the Hebrew Bible. The Vulgate introduced stability to the Bible, but also began the East-West Schism between Latin-speaking Western Christianity (led by the Catholic Church) and multi-lingual Eastern Christianity (led by the Eastern Orthodox Church). Christian denominations' biblical canons varied not only in the language of the books, but also in their selection, organization, and text.[23] Jewish rabbis began developing a standard Hebrew Bible in the first century CE, maintained since the middle of the first millennium by the Masoretes, and called the Masoretic Text. Christians have held ecumenical councils to standardize their biblical canon since the fourth century CE. The Council of Trent (1545–63), held by the Catholic Church in response to the Protestant Reformation, authorized the Vulgate as its official Latin translation of the Bible. The Church deemed the additional books in its Old Testament that were interspersed among the Hebrew Bible books to be "deuterocanonical" (meaning part of a second or later canon). Protestant bibles either separated these books into a separate section called the "Apocrypha" (meaning "hidden away") between the Old and New Testaments, or omitted them altogether. The 17th century Protestant King James Version was the most ubiquitous English Bible of all time, but it has largely been superseded by modern translations.[24] Textual history[edit] The books of the Bible were written and copied by hand, initially on papyrus scrolls. No originals survive, and the oldest existing scrolls are copies that were made centuries after the books were first written. The copies contained both errors and intentional changes, resulting in different versions of the books in circulation, ultimately diverging into distinct lineages, called "text families" or "text types". Over time, the individual scrolls were gathered into collections, but these collections had different scrolls, and different versions of the same scrolls, with no standard organization. By the 3rd century CE, scrolls were supplanted by early bound books called codexes, and collections of biblical books began being copied as a set.[25] The Isaiah scroll, which is a part of the Dead Sea Scrolls, contains almost the whole Book of Isaiah. It dates from the 2nd century BCE. More than 220 Dead Sea Scrolls discovered in Qumran in 1947, which date between 250 BC and 100 CE, are the oldest existing copies of the books of the Hebrew Bible of any considerable length. The Qumran scrolls attest to many different biblical text types. In addition to the Qumran scrolls, there are three major manuscript witnesses (historical copies) of the Hebrew Bible: the Septuagint, the Masoretic Text, and the Samaritan Pentateuch. Existing complete copies of the Septuagint, a translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, date from the third to the fifth centuries CE, with fragments dating back to the second century BCE. The Masoretic Text is a standardized version of the Hebrew Bible that began to be developed in the first century CE and has been maintained by the Masoretes since the latter half of the first millennium CE. Its oldest complete copy in existence is the Leningrad Codex, dating to c. 1000 CE. The Samaritan Pentateuch is a version of the Torah maintained by the Samaritan community since antiquity and rediscovered by European scholars in the 17th century; the oldest existing copies date to c. 1100 CE.[26] There are about 3,000 existing New Testament manuscripts, copied between the 2nd and 17th centuries. The manuscripts include papyri, over a hundred of which have been discovered in Egypt since 1890; about 300 great uncial codices, which are vellum or parchment books written in block Greek letters, mostly dating between the 3rd and 9th centuries CE; and about 2,900 minuscules, written in a cursive style (using connected letters) that superseded uncials beginning in the 9th century. These manuscripts differ in varying degrees from one another and are grouped according to their similarities into textual families or lineages; the four most commonly recognized are Alexandrian, Western, Caesarean, and Byzantine.[27] Hebrew Bible[edit] Tanakh Torah  (Instruction) Genesis Bereshit Exodus Shemot Leviticus Wayiqra Numbers Bemidbar Deuteronomy Devarim Nevi'im  (Prophets) Former Joshua Yehoshua Judges Shofetim Samuel Shemuel Kings Melakhim Latter Isaiah Yeshayahu Jeremiah Yirmeyahu Ezekiel Yekhezqel Minor Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Ketuvim  (Writings) Poetic Psalms Tehillim Proverbs Mishlei Job Iyov Five Megillot (Scrolls) Song of Songs Shir Hashirim Ruth Rut Lamentations Eikhah Ecclesiastes Qohelet Esther Ester Historical Daniel Daniyyel Ezra–Nehemiah Ezra Chronicles Divre Hayyamim v t e Main article: Development of the Hebrew Bible canon The Nash Papyrus (2nd century BCE) contains a portion of a pre-Masoretic Text, specifically the Ten Commandments and the Shema Yisrael prayer. The Masoretic Text is the authoritative Hebrew text of the Hebrew Bible. It defines the books of the Jewish canon, and also the precise letter-text of these biblical books, with their vocalization and accentuation. The oldest extant manuscripts of the Masoretic Text date from approximately the 9th century CE,[28] and the Aleppo Codex (once the oldest complete copy of the Masoretic Text, but now missing its Torah section) dates from the 10th century. The term "Keter" (crown, from the Arabic, taj) originally referred to this particular manuscript, Over the years, the term Keter came to refer to any full text of the Hebrew Bible, or significant portion of it, bound as a codex (not a scroll) and including vowel points, cantillation marks, and Masoretic notes. Medieval handwritten manuscripts were considered extremely precise, the most authoritative documents from which to copy other texts.[29] The name Tanakh (Hebrew: תנ"ך‎) reflects the threefold division of the Hebrew Scriptures, Torah ("Teaching"), Nevi'im ("Prophets") and Ketuvim ("Writings"). Torah[edit] Main article: Torah See also: Oral Torah A Torah scroll recovered from Glockengasse Synagogue in Cologne. The Torah (תּוֹרָה) is also known as the "Five Books of Moses" or the Pentateuch, meaning "five scroll-cases".[30] Traditionally these books were considered to have been written almost entirely by Moses himself.[31] In the 19th century, Julius Wellhausen and other scholars proposed that the Torah had been compiled from earlier written documents dating from the 9th to the 5th century BCE, the "documentary hypothesis".[31] Scholars Hermann Gunkel and Martin Noth, building on the form criticism of Gerhard von Rad, refined this hypothesis, while other scholars have proposed other ways that the Torah might have developed over the centuries.[31] Samaritan Inscription containing portion of the Bible in nine lines of Hebrew text, currently housed in the British Museum The Hebrew names of the books are derived from the first words in the respective texts. The Torah consists of the following five books: Genesis, Beresheeth (בראשית) Exodus, Shemot (שמות) Leviticus, Vayikra (ויקרא) Numbers, Bamidbar (במדבר) Deuteronomy, Devarim (דברים) The first eleven chapters of Genesis provide accounts of the creation (or ordering) of the world and the history of God's early relationship with humanity. The remaining thirty-nine chapters of Genesis provide an account of God's covenant with the biblical patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (also called Israel) and Jacob's children, the "Children of Israel", especially Joseph. It tells of how God commanded Abraham to leave his family and home in the city of Ur, eventually to settle in the land of Canaan, and how the Children of Israel later moved to Egypt. The remaining four books of the Torah tell the story of Moses, who lived hundreds of years after the patriarchs. He leads the Children of Israel from slavery in ancient Egypt to the renewal of their covenant with God at biblical Mount Sinai and their wanderings in the desert until a new generation was ready to enter the land of Canaan. The Torah ends with the death of Moses.[32] The commandments in the Torah provide the basis for Jewish religious law. Tradition states that there are 613 commandments (taryag mitzvot). Nevi'im[edit] Main article: Nevi'im Books of Nevi'im   Former Prophets Joshua Judges Samuel Kings Latter Prophets (major) Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel Latter Prophets (Twelve minor) Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Hebrew Bible v t e Nevi'im (Hebrew: נְבִיאִים‎, romanized: Nəḇî'îm, "Prophets") is the second main division of the Tanakh, between the Torah and Ketuvim. It contains two sub-groups, the Former Prophets (Nevi'im Rishonim נביאים ראשונים‎, the narrative books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings) and the Latter Prophets (Nevi'im Aharonim נביאים אחרונים‎, the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel and the Twelve Minor Prophets). The Nevi'im tell the story of the rise of the Hebrew monarchy and its division into two kingdoms, ancient Israel and Judah, focusing on conflicts between the Israelites and other nations, and conflicts among Israelites, specifically, struggles between believers in "the LORD God"[33] (Yahweh) and believers in foreign gods,[34][35] and the criticism of unethical and unjust behaviour of Israelite elites and rulers;[36][37][38] in which prophets played a crucial and leading role. It ends with the conquest of the Kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians followed by the conquest of the Kingdom of Judah by the Babylonians and the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem. Former Prophets[edit] The Former Prophets are the books Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings. They contain narratives that begin immediately after the death of Moses with the divine appointment of Joshua as his successor, who then leads the people of Israel into the Promised Land, and end with the release from imprisonment of the last king of Judah. Treating Samuel and Kings as single books, they cover: Joshua's conquest of the land of Canaan (in the Book of Joshua), the struggle of the people to possess the land (in the Book of Judges), the people's request to God to give them a king so that they can occupy the land in the face of their enemies (in the Books of Samuel) the possession of the land under the divinely appointed kings of the House of David, ending in conquest and foreign exile (Books of Kings) Latter Prophets[edit] The Latter Prophets are divided into two groups, the "major" prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Twelve Minor Prophets, collected into a single book. The collection is broken up to form twelve individual books in the Christian Old Testament, one for each of the prophets: Hosea, Hoshea (הושע) Joel, Yoel (יואל) Amos, Amos (עמוס) Obadiah, Ovadyah (עבדיה) Jonah, Yonah (יונה) Micah, Mikhah (מיכה) Nahum, Nahum (נחום) Habakkuk, Havakuk (חבקוק) Zephaniah, Tsefanya (צפניה) Haggai, Khagay (חגי) Zechariah, Zekharyah (זכריה) Malachi, Malakhi (מלאכי) Ketuvim[edit] Main article: Ketuvim Books of the Ketuvim   Three poetic books Psalms Proverbs Job Five Megillot (Scrolls) Song of Songs Ruth Lamentations Ecclesiastes Esther Other books Daniel Ezra–Nehemiah (Ezra Nehemiah) Chronicles Hebrew Bible v t e Ketuvim or Kəṯûḇîm (in Biblical Hebrew: כְּתוּבִים‎ "writings") is the third and final section of the Tanakh. The Ketuvim are believed to have been written under the Ruach HaKodesh (the Holy Spirit) but with one level less authority than that of prophecy.[39] The poetic books[edit] Hebrew text of Psalm 1:1–2 In Masoretic manuscripts (and some printed editions), Psalms, Proverbs and Job are presented in a special two-column form emphasizing the parallel stichs in the verses, which are a function of their poetry. Collectively, these three books are known as Sifrei Emet (an acronym of the titles in Hebrew, איוב, משלי, תהלים yields Emet אמ"ת, which is also the Hebrew for "truth"). These three books are also the only ones in Tanakh with a special system of cantillation notes that are designed to emphasize parallel stichs within verses. However, the beginning and end of the book of Job are in the normal prose system. The five scrolls (Hamesh Megillot)[edit] The five relatively short books of Song of Songs, Book of Ruth, the Book of Lamentations, Ecclesiastes and Book of Esther are collectively known as the Hamesh Megillot (Five Megillot). These are the latest books collected and designated as "authoritative" in the Jewish canon even though they were not complete until the 2nd century CE.[40] Other books[edit] Besides the three poetic books and the five scrolls, the remaining books in Ketuvim are Daniel, Ezra–Nehemiah and Chronicles. Although there is no formal grouping for these books in the Jewish tradition, they nevertheless share a number of distinguishing characteristics: Their narratives all openly describe relatively late events (i.e., the Babylonian captivity and the subsequent restoration of Zion). The Talmudic tradition ascribes late authorship to all of them. Two of them (Daniel and Ezra) are the only books in the Tanakh with significant portions in Aramaic. Order of the books[edit] The following list presents the books of Ketuvim in the order they appear in most printed editions. It also divides them into three subgroups based on the distinctiveness of Sifrei Emet and Hamesh Megillot. The Three Poetic Books (Sifrei Emet) Tehillim (Psalms) תְהִלִּים Mishlei (Book of Proverbs) מִשְלֵי Iyyôbh (Book of Job) אִיּוֹב The Five Megillot (Hamesh Megillot) Shīr Hashshīrīm (Song of Songs) or (Song of Solomon) שִׁיר הַשִׁירִים (Passover) Rūth (Book of Ruth) רוּת (Shābhû‘ôth) Eikhah (Lamentations) איכה (Ninth of Av) [Also called Kinnot in Hebrew.] Qōheleth (Ecclesiastes) קהלת (Sukkôth) Estēr (Book of Esther) אֶסְתֵר (Pûrîm) Other books Dānî’ēl (Book of Daniel) דָּנִיֵּאל ‘Ezrā (Book of Ezra–Book of Nehemiah) עזרא Divrei ha-Yamim (Chronicles) דברי הימים The Jewish textual tradition never finalized the order of the books in Ketuvim. The Babylonian Talmud (Bava Batra 14b–15a) gives their order as Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Daniel, Scroll of Esther, Ezra, Chronicles.[41] In Tiberian Masoretic codices, including the Aleppo Codex and the Leningrad Codex, and often in old Spanish manuscripts as well, the order is Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ruth, Song of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Esther, Daniel, Ezra.[42] Canonization[edit] The Ketuvim is the last of the three portions of the Tanakh to have been accepted as biblical canon. While the Torah may have been considered canon by Israel as early as the 5th century BCE and the Former and Latter Prophets were canonized by the 2nd century BCE, the Ketuvim was not a fixed canon until the 2nd century of the Common Era.[40] Evidence suggests, however, that the people of Israel were adding what would become the Ketuvim to their holy literature shortly after the canonization of the prophets. As early as 132 BCE references suggest that the Ketuvim was starting to take shape, although it lacked a formal title.[43] References in the four Gospels as well as other books of the New Testament indicate that many of these texts were both commonly known and counted as having some degree of religious authority early in the 1st century CE. Many scholars believe that the limits of the Ketuvim as canonized scripture were determined by the Council of Jamnia c. 90 CE. Against Apion, the writing of Josephus in 95 CE, treated the text of the Hebrew Bible as a closed canon to which "... no one has ventured either to add, or to remove, or to alter a syllable..."[44] For a long time following this date the divine inspiration of Esther, the Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes was often under scrutiny.[45] Original languages[edit] The Tanakh was mainly written in biblical Hebrew, with some small portions (Ezra 4:8–6:18 and 7:12–26, Jeremiah 10:11, Daniel 2:4–7:28)[46] written in biblical Aramaic, a sister language which became the lingua franca for much of the Semitic world.[47] Samaritan Pentateuch[edit] Main article: Samaritan Pentateuch Samaritans include only the Pentateuch in their biblical canon.[48] They do not recognize divine authorship or inspiration in any other book in the Jewish Tanakh.[49] A Samaritan Book of Joshua partly based upon the Tanakh's Book of Joshua exists, but Samaritans regard it as a non-canonical secular historical chronicle.[50] Septuagint[edit] Main article: Septuagint Fragment of a Septuagint: A column of uncial book from 1 Esdras in the Codex Vaticanus c. 325–350 CE, the basis of Sir Lancelot Charles Lee Brenton's Greek edition and English translation. The Septuagint, or the LXX, is a translation of the Hebrew Scriptures and some related texts into Koine Greek, begun in the late 3rd century BCE and completed by 132 BCE,[51][52][53] initially in Alexandria, but in time it was completed elsewhere as well.[54] It is not altogether clear which was translated when, or where; some may even have been translated twice, into different versions, and then revised.[55] As the work of translation progressed, the canon of the Septuagint expanded. The Torah always maintained its pre-eminence as the basis of the canon but the collection of prophetic writings, based on the Nevi'im, had various hagiographical works incorporated into it. In addition, some newer books were included in the Septuagint, among these are the Maccabees and the Wisdom of Sirach. However, the book of Sirach, is now known to have existed in a Hebrew version, since ancient Hebrew manuscripts of it were rediscovered in modern times. The Septuagint version of some Biblical books, like Daniel and Esther, are longer than those in the Jewish canon.[56] Some of these deuterocanonical books (e.g. the Wisdom of Solomon, and the second book of Maccabees) were not translated, but composed directly in Greek.[citation needed] Since Late Antiquity, once attributed to a hypothetical late 1st-century Council of Jamnia, mainstream Rabbinic Judaism rejected the Septuagint as valid Jewish scriptural texts. Several reasons have been given for this. First, some mistranslations were claimed. Second, the Hebrew source texts used for the Septuagint differed from the Masoretic tradition of Hebrew texts, which was chosen as canonical by the Jewish rabbis.[57] Third, the rabbis wanted to distinguish their tradition from the newly emerging tradition of Christianity.[53][58] Finally, the rabbis claimed a divine authority for the Hebrew language, in contrast to Aramaic or Greek – even though these languages were the lingua franca of Jews during this period (and Aramaic would eventually be given a holy language status comparable to Hebrew).[59] The Septuagint is the basis for the Old Latin, Slavonic, Syriac, Old Armenian, Old Georgian and Coptic versions of the Christian Old Testament.[60] The Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches use most of the books of the Septuagint, while Protestant churches usually do not. After the Protestant Reformation, many Protestant Bibles began to follow the Jewish canon and exclude the additional texts, which came to be called biblical apocrypha. The Apocrypha are included under a separate heading in the King James Version of the Bible, the basis for the Revised Standard Version.[61] Incorporations from Theodotion[edit] In most ancient copies of the Bible which contain the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, the Book of Daniel is not the original Septuagint version, but instead is a copy of Theodotion's translation from the Hebrew, which more closely resembles the Masoretic Text.[citation needed] The original Septuagint version was discarded in favour of Theodotion's version in the 2nd to 3rd centuries CE. In Greek-speaking areas, this happened near the end of the 2nd century, and in Latin-speaking areas (at least in North Africa), it occurred in the middle of the 3rd century. History does not record the reason for this, and St. Jerome reports, in the preface to the Vulgate version of Daniel, "This thing 'just' happened."[62] One of two Old Greek texts of the Book of Daniel has been recently rediscovered and work is ongoing in reconstructing the original form of the book.[63] The canonical Ezra–Nehemiah is known in the Septuagint as "Esdras B", and 1 Esdras is "Esdras A". 1 Esdras is a very similar text to the books of Ezra–Nehemiah, and the two are widely thought by scholars to be derived from the same original text. It has been proposed, and is thought highly likely by scholars, that "Esdras B" – the canonical Ezra–Nehemiah – is Theodotion's version of this material, and "Esdras A" is the version which was previously in the Septuagint on its own.[62] Final form[edit] Some texts are found in the Septuagint but are not present in the Hebrew. These additional books are Tobit, Judith, Wisdom of Solomon, Wisdom of Jesus son of Sirach, Baruch, the Letter of Jeremiah (which later became chapter 6 of Baruch in the Vulgate), additions to Daniel (The Prayer of Azarias, the Song of the Three Children, Susanna and Bel and the Dragon), additions to Esther, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, 3 Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, 1 Esdras, Odes, including the Prayer of Manasseh, the Psalms of Solomon, and Psalm 151. Some books that are set apart in the Masoretic Text are grouped together. For example, the Books of Samuel and the Books of Kings are in the LXX one book in four parts called Βασιλειῶν ("Of Reigns"). In LXX, the Books of Chronicles supplement Reigns and it is called Paralipomenon (Παραλειπομένων – things left out). The Septuagint organizes the minor prophets as twelve parts of one Book of Twelve.[63] The Orthodox Old Testament[54][64][a] Greek-based name Conventional English name Law Γένεσις Génesis Genesis Ἔξοδος Éxodos Exodus Λευϊτικόν Leuitikón Leviticus Ἀριθμοί Arithmoí Numbers Δευτερονόμιον Deuteronómion Deuteronomy History Ἰησοῦς Nαυῆ Iêsous Nauê Joshua Κριταί Kritaí Judges Ῥούθ Roúth Ruth Βασιλειῶν Αʹ[b] I Reigns I Samuel Βασιλειῶν Βʹ II Reigns II Samuel Βασιλειῶν Γʹ III Reigns I Kings Βασιλειῶν Δʹ IV Reigns II Kings Παραλειπομένων Αʹ I Paralipomenon[c] I Chronicles Παραλειπομένων Βʹ II Paralipomenon II Chronicles Ἔσδρας Αʹ I Esdras 1 Esdras Ἔσδρας Βʹ II Esdras Ezra–Nehemiah Τωβίτ[d] Tobit Tobit or Tobias Ἰουδίθ Ioudith Judith Ἐσθήρ Esther Esther with additions Μακκαβαίων Αʹ I Makkabaioi 1 Maccabees Μακκαβαίων Βʹ II Makkabaioi 2 Maccabees Μακκαβαίων Γʹ III Makkabaioi 3 Maccabees Wisdom Ψαλμοί Psalms Psalms Ψαλμός ΡΝΑʹ Psalm 151 Psalm 151 Προσευχὴ Μανάσση Prayer of Manasseh Prayer of Manasseh Ἰώβ Iōb Job Παροιμίαι Proverbs Proverbs Ἐκκλησιαστής Ekklesiastes Ecclesiastes Ἆσμα Ἀσμάτων Song of Songs Song of Solomon or Canticles Σοφία Σαλoμῶντος Wisdom of Solomon Wisdom Σοφία Ἰησοῦ Σειράχ Wisdom of Jesus the son of Seirach Sirach or Ecclesiasticus Ψαλμοί Σαλoμῶντος Psalms of Solomon Psalms of Solomon[65] Prophets Δώδεκα The Twelve Minor Prophets Ὡσηέ Αʹ I. Osëe Hosea Ἀμώς Βʹ II. Amōs Amos Μιχαίας Γʹ III. Michaias Micah Ἰωήλ Δʹ IV. Ioël Joel Ὀβδίου Εʹ[e] V. Obdias Obadiah Ἰωνᾶς Ϛ' VI. Ionas Jonah Ναούμ Ζʹ VII. Naoum Nahum Ἀμβακούμ Ηʹ VIII. Ambakum Habakkuk Σοφονίας Θʹ IX. Sophonias Zephaniah Ἀγγαῖος Ιʹ X. Angaios Haggai Ζαχαρίας ΙΑʹ XI. Zacharias Zachariah Ἄγγελος ΙΒʹ XII. Messenger Malachi Ἠσαΐας Hesaias Isaiah Ἱερεμίας Hieremias Jeremiah Βαρούχ Baruch Baruch Θρῆνοι Lamentations Lamentations Ἐπιστολή Ιερεμίου Epistle of Jeremiah Letter of Jeremiah Ἰεζεκιήλ Iezekiêl Ezekiel Δανιήλ Daniêl Daniel with additions Appendix Μακκαβαίων Δ' Παράρτημα IV Makkabees 4 Maccabees[f] Christian Bibles[edit] Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Crucifixion Resurrection Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations Groups Western Roman Catholic Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Moravian Pentecostal Quaker Reformed Eastern Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East (Nestorian) Restorationist Jehovah's Witness Latter Day Saint Iglesia ni Cristo Related topics Art Criticism Ecumenism Music Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship  Christianity portal v t e Main articles: Biblical canon and List of English Bible translations A page from the Gutenberg Bible A Christian Bible is a set of books that a Christian denomination regards as divinely inspired and thus constituting scripture. Although the Early Church primarily used the Septuagint or the Targums among Aramaic speakers, the apostles did not leave a defined set of new scriptures; instead the canon of the New Testament developed over time. Groups within Christianity include differing books as part of their sacred writings, most prominent among which are the biblical apocrypha or deuterocanonical books. Significant versions of the Christian Bible in English include the Douay-Rheims Bible, the Authorized King James Version, the Revised Version, the American Standard Version, the Revised Standard Version, the New American Standard Version, the New King James Version, the New International Version, the New American Bible, and the English Standard Version. Old Testament[edit] Main article: Old Testament The books which make up the Christian Old Testament differ between the Catholic (see Catholic Bible), Orthodox, and Protestant (see Protestant Bible) churches, with the Protestant movement accepting only those books contained in the Hebrew Bible, while Catholic and Orthodox traditions have wider canons. A few groups consider particular translations to be divinely inspired, notably the Greek Septuagint and the Aramaic Peshitta.[citation needed] The Old Testament consists of many distinct books produced over a period of centuries: The first five books – Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, book of Numbers and Deuteronomy – reached their present form in the Persian period (538–332 BC), and their authors were the elite of exilic returnees who controlled the Temple at that time.[66] The books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings follow, forming a history of Israel from the Conquest of Canaan to the Siege of Jerusalem c. 587 BC.[67] These history books make up around half the total content of the Old Testament. Of the remainder, the books of the various prophets – Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the twelve "minor prophets" – were written between the 8th and 6th centuries BC, with the exceptions of Jonah and Daniel, which were written much later. The "wisdom" books – Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Psalms, Song of Solomon – have various dates: Proverbs possibly was completed by the Hellenistic time (332–198 BC), though containing much older material as well; Job completed by the 6th century BC; Ecclesiastes by the 3rd century BC.[68] Apocryphal or deuterocanonical books[edit] In Eastern Christianity, translations based on the Septuagint still prevail. The Septuagint was generally abandoned in favour of the 10th-century Masoretic Text as the basis for translations of the Old Testament into Western languages.[citation needed] Some modern Western translations since the 14th century make use of the Septuagint to clarify passages in the Masoretic Text, where the Septuagint may preserve a variant reading of the Hebrew text.[citation needed] They also sometimes adopt variants that appear in other texts, e.g., those discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls.[69][70] A number of books which are part of the Peshitta or the Greek Septuagint but are not found in the Hebrew Bible (i.e., among the protocanonical books) are often referred to as deuterocanonical books by Roman Catholics referring to a later secondary (i.e., deutero) canon, that canon as fixed definitively by the Council of Trent 1545–1563.[71][72] It includes 46 books for the Old Testament (45 if Jeremiah and Lamentations are counted as one) and 27 for the New.[73] Most Protestants term these books as apocrypha. Modern Protestant traditions do not accept the deuterocanonical books as canonical, although Protestant Bibles included them in Apocrypha sections until the 1820s. However, Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches include these books as part of their Old Testament. The Roman Catholic Church recognizes:[74] Tobit Judith 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus) Baruch The Letter of Jeremiah (Baruch Chapter 6) Greek Additions to Esther (Book of Esther, chapters 10:4–12:6) The Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children verses 1–68 (Book of Daniel, chapter 3, verses 24–90) Susanna (Book of Daniel, chapter 13) Bel and the Dragon (Book of Daniel, chapter 14) In addition to those, the Greek and Russian Orthodox Churches recognize the following:[citation needed] 3 Maccabees 1 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 Russian and Georgian Orthodox Churches include:[citation needed] 2 Esdras i.e., Latin Esdras in the Russian and Georgian Bibles There is also 4 Maccabees which is only accepted as canonical in the Georgian Church, but was included by St. Jerome in an appendix to the Vulgate, and is an appendix to the Greek Orthodox Bible, and it is therefore sometimes included in collections of the Apocrypha.[citation needed] The Syriac Orthodox tradition includes:[citation needed] Psalms 151–155 The Apocalypse of Baruch The Letter of Baruch The Ethiopian Biblical canon includes:[citation needed] Jubilees Enoch 1–3 Meqabyan and some other books. The Anglican Church uses some of the Apocryphal books liturgically, though rarely and with alternative reading available. Therefore, editions of the Bible intended for use in the Anglican Church may include the Deuterocanonical books accepted by the Catholic Church, plus 1 Esdras, 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh, which were in the Vulgate appendix.[75][self-published source] Pseudepigraphal books[edit] Main article: Pseudepigrapha The term pseudepigrapha commonly describes numerous works of Jewish religious literature written from about 300 BCE to 300 CE. Not all of these works are actually pseudepigraphical. It also refers to books of the New Testament canon whose authorship is misrepresented. The Old Testament pseudepigraphal works include the following:[76] 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Assumption of Moses Ethiopic Book of Enoch (1 Enoch) Slavonic Book of Enoch (2 Enoch) Hebrew Book of Enoch (3 Enoch) (also known as "The Revelation of Metatron" or "The Book of Rabbi Ishmael the High Priest") Book of Jubilees Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch (2 Baruch) Letter of Aristeas (Letter to Philocrates regarding the translating of the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek) Life of Adam and Eve Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah Psalms of Solomon Sibylline Oracles Greek Apocalypse of Baruch (3 Baruch) Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs Book of Enoch[edit] Notable pseudepigraphal works include the Books of Enoch (such as 1 Enoch, 2 Enoch, surviving only in Old Slavonic, and 3 Enoch, surviving in Hebrew, c. 5th to 6th century CE). These are ancient Jewish religious works, traditionally ascribed to the prophet Enoch, the great-grandfather of the patriarch Noah. They are not part of the biblical canon used by Jews, apart from Beta Israel. Most Christian denominations and traditions may accept the Books of Enoch as having some historical or theological interest or significance. It has been observed that part of the Book of Enoch is quoted in the Epistle of Jude (part of the New Testament) but Christian denominations generally regard the Books of Enoch as non-canonical or non-inspired.[77] However, the Enoch books are treated as canonical by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church. The older sections (mainly in the Book of the Watchers) are estimated to date from about 300 BCE, and the latest part (Book of Parables) probably was composed at the end of the 1st century BCE.[78] Denominational views of pseudepigrapha[edit] There arose[when?] in some Protestant biblical scholarship an extended use of the term pseudepigrapha for works that appeared as though they ought to be part of the biblical canon, because of the authorship ascribed to them, but which stood outside both the biblical canons recognized by Protestants and Catholics. These works were also outside the particular set of books that Roman Catholics called deuterocanonical and to which Protestants had generally applied the term Apocryphal. Accordingly, the term pseudepigraphical, as now used often among both Protestants and Roman Catholics (allegedly for the clarity it brings to the discussion), may make it difficult to discuss questions of pseudepigraphical authorship of canonical books dispassionately with a lay audience. To confuse the matter further, Eastern Orthodox Christians accept books as canonical that Roman Catholics and most Protestant denominations consider pseudepigraphical or at best of much less authority. There exist also churches that reject some of the books that Roman Catholics, Orthodox and Protestants accept. The same is true of some Jewish sects. Many works that are apocryphal are otherwise considered genuine.[clarification needed] Role of the Old Testament in Christian theology[edit] Further information: Sola scriptura and Christian theology The Old Testament has always been central to the life of the Christian church. Bible scholar N.T. Wright says "Jesus himself was profoundly shaped by the scriptures."[79] He adds that the earliest Christians also searched those same Hebrew scriptures in their effort to understand the earthly life of Jesus. They regarded the "holy writings" of the Israelites as necessary and instructive for the Christian, as seen from Paul's words to Timothy (2 Timothy 3:15), and as pointing to the Messiah, and as having reached a climactic fulfilment in Jesus himself, generating the "new covenant" prophesied by Jeremiah.[80] New Testament[edit] Main article: Development of the New Testament canon The New Testament is the name given to the second and final portion of the Christian Bible. Jesus is its central figure. The term "New Testament" came into use in the second century during a controversy among Christians over whether the Hebrew Bible should be included with the Christian writings as sacred scripture. The New Testament presupposes the inspiration of the Old Testament.[81] Some other works which were widely read by early churches were excluded from the New Testament and relegated to the collections known as the Apostolic Fathers (generally considered orthodox) and the New Testament Apocrypha (including both orthodox and heretical works). The New Testament is a collection of 27 books[82] of 4 different genres of Christian literature (Gospels, one account of the Acts of the Apostles, Epistles and an Apocalypse). These books can be grouped into: The Gospels Synoptic Gospels Gospel According to Matthew Gospel According to Mark Gospel According to Luke Gospel According to John Narrative literature, account and history of the Apostolic age Acts of the Apostles Pauline Epistles Epistle to the Romans First Epistle to the Corinthians Second Epistle to the Corinthians Epistle to the Galatians Epistle to the Ephesians Epistle to the Philippians Epistle to the Colossians First Epistle to the Thessalonians Second Epistle to the Thessalonians Pastoral epistles First Epistle to Timothy Second Epistle to Timothy Epistle to Titus Epistle to Philemon Epistle to the Hebrews General epistles, also called catholic epistles Epistle of James First Epistle of Peter Second Epistle of Peter First Epistle of John Second Epistle of John Third Epistle of John Epistle of Jude Apocalyptic literature, also called Prophetical Revelation, or the Apocalypse The New Testament books are ordered differently in the Catholic/Orthodox/Protestant tradition, the Slavonic tradition, the Syriac tradition and the Ethiopian tradition. Original language[edit] See also: Language of the New Testament The mainstream consensus is that the New Testament was written in a form of Koine Greek,[83][84] which was the common language of the Eastern Mediterranean[85][86][87][88] from the Conquests of Alexander the Great (335–323 BCE) until the evolution of Byzantine Greek (c. 600). Historic editions[edit] See also: Biblical manuscript and Textual criticism An early German translation by Martin Luther. His translation of the text into the vernacular was highly influential. The original autographs, that is, the original Greek writings and manuscripts written by the original authors of the New Testament, have not survived.[89] But historically copies exist of those original autographs, transmitted and preserved in a number of manuscript traditions. There have been some minor variations, additions or omissions, in some of the texts. When ancient scribes copied earlier books, they sometimes wrote notes on the margins of the page (marginal glosses) to correct their text – especially if a scribe accidentally omitted a word or line – and to comment about the text. When later scribes were copying the copy, they were sometimes uncertain if a note was intended to be included as part of the text. The three main textual traditions of the Greek New Testament are sometimes called the Alexandrian text-type (generally minimalist), the Byzantine text-type (generally maximalist), and the Western text-type (occasionally wild). Together they comprise most of the ancient manuscripts. Development of the Christian canons[edit] Main articles: Development of the Old Testament canon and Development of the New Testament canon St. Jerome in his Study, by Marinus van Reymerswaele, 1541. Jerome produced a 4th-century Latin edition of the Bible, known as the Vulgate, that became the Catholic Church's official translation. The Old Testament canon entered into Christian use in the Greek Septuagint translations and original books, and their differing lists of texts. In addition to the Septuagint, Christianity[vague] subsequently added various writings that would become the New Testament. Somewhat different lists of accepted works continued to develop in antiquity. In the 4th century a series of synods produced a list of texts equal to the 39, 46, 51, or 54-book canon of the Old Testament and to the 27-book canon of the New Testament that would be subsequently used to today, most notably the Synod of Hippo in 393 CE. Also c. 400, Jerome produced a definitive Latin edition of the Bible (see Vulgate), the canon of which, at the insistence of the Pope, was in accord with the earlier Synods. With the benefit of hindsight, it can be said that this process effectively set the New Testament canon, although there are examples of other canonical lists in use after this time. The Protestant Old Testament of today has a 39-book canon – the number of books (though not the content) varies from the Jewish Tanakh only because of a different method of division – while the Roman Catholic Church recognizes 46 books (51 books with some books combined into 46 books) as the canonical Old Testament. The Eastern Orthodox Churches recognize 3 Maccabees, 1 Esdras, Prayer of Manasseh and Psalm 151 in addition to the Catholic canon. Some include 2 Esdras. The Anglican Church also recognizes a longer canon.[citation needed] The term "Hebrew Scriptures" is often used as being synonymous with the Protestant Old Testament, since the surviving scriptures in Hebrew include only those books, while Catholics and Orthodox include additional texts that have not survived in Hebrew. Both Catholics and Protestants (as well as Greek Orthodox) have the same 27-book New Testament Canon.[90] The New Testament writers assumed the inspiration of the Old Testament, probably earliest stated in 2 Timothy 3:16, "All scripture is given by inspiration of God".[12] Some denominations have additional canonical holy scriptures beyond the Bible, including the standard works of the Latter Day Saints movement and Divine Principle in the Unification Church. Ethiopian Orthodox canon[edit] Main article: Ethiopian Biblical canon The Canon of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church is wider than the canons used by most other Christian churches. There are 81 books in the Ethiopian Orthodox Bible.[91] The Ethiopian Old Testament Canon includes the books found in the Septuagint accepted by other Orthodox Christians, in addition to Enoch and Jubilees which are ancient Jewish books that only survived in Ge'ez but are quoted in the New Testament,[citation needed] also Greek Ezra First and the Apocalypse of Ezra, 3 books of Meqabyan, and Psalm 151 at the end of the Psalter. The three books of Meqabyan are not to be confused with the books of Maccabees. The order of the other books is somewhat different from other groups', as well. The Old Testament follows the Septuagint order for the Minor Prophets rather than the Jewish order.[citation needed] Peshitta[edit] Main article: Peshitta The Peshitta (Classical Syriac: ܦܫܺܝܛܬܳܐ‎ or ܦܫܝܼܛܬܵܐ pšīṭtā) is the standard version of the Bible for churches in the Syriac tradition. The consensus within biblical scholarship, although not universal, is that the Old Testament of the Peshitta was translated into Syriac from biblical Hebrew, probably in the 2nd century AD, and that the New Testament of the Peshitta was translated from the Greek.[92] This New Testament, originally excluding certain disputed books (2 Peter, 2 John, 3 John, Jude, Revelation), had become a standard by the early 5th century. The five excluded books were added in the Harklean Version (616 AD) of Thomas of Harqel.[93][94][95] Divine inspiration[edit] Main articles: Biblical inspiration, Biblical literalism, Biblical infallibility, and Biblical inerrancy A Bible is placed centrally on a Lutheran altar, highlighting its importance The Second Epistle to Timothy says that "all scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness". (2 Timothy 3:16)[96] Various related but distinguishable views on divine inspiration include: the view of the Bible as the inspired word of God: the belief that God, through the Holy Spirit, intervened and influenced the words, message, and collation of the Bible[97] the view that the Bible is also infallible, and incapable of error in matters of faith and practice, but not necessarily in historic or scientific matters the view that the Bible represents the inerrant word of God, without error in any aspect, spoken by God and written down in its perfect form by humans Within these broad beliefs many schools of hermeneutics operate. "Bible scholars claim that discussions about the Bible must be put into its context within church history and then into the context of contemporary culture."[80] Fundamentalist Christians are associated[by whom?] with the doctrine of biblical literalism, where the Bible is not only inerrant, but the meaning of the text is clear to the average reader.[98] Jewish antiquity attests to belief in sacred texts,[99][100] and a similar belief emerges in the earliest of Christian writings. Various texts of the Bible mention divine agency in relation to its writings.[101] In their book A General Introduction to the Bible, Norman Geisler and William Nix write: "The process of inspiration is a mystery of the providence of God, but the result of this process is a verbal, plenary, inerrant, and authoritative record."[102] Most evangelical biblical scholars[103][104][105] associate inspiration with only the original text; for example some American Protestants adhere to the 1978 Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy which asserted that inspiration applied only to the autographic text of Scripture.[106] Among adherents of Biblical literalism, a minority, such as followers of the King-James-Only Movement, extend the claim of inerrancy only to a particular version.[107] Versions and translations[edit] Further information: Bible translations and List of Bible translations by language Title page from the first Welsh translation of the Bible, 1588. William Morgan (1545–1604) The original texts of the Tanakh were almost entirely written in Hebrew; about one per cent is written in Aramaic. In addition to the authoritative Masoretic Text, Jews still refer to the Septuagint, the translation of the Hebrew Bible into Greek, and the Targum Onkelos, an Aramaic version of the Bible. There are several different ancient versions of the Tanakh in Hebrew, mostly differing by spelling, and the traditional Jewish version is based on the version known as Aleppo Codex. Even in this version there are words which are traditionally read differently from written, because the oral tradition is considered more fundamental than the written one, and presumably mistakes had been made in copying the text over the generations.[citation needed] The primary biblical text for early Christians was the Septuagint. In addition, they translated the Hebrew Bible into several other languages. Translations were made into Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and Latin, among other languages. The Latin translations were historically the most important for the Church in the West, while the Greek-speaking East continued to use the Septuagint translations of the Old Testament and had no need to translate the New Testament. The earliest Latin translation was the Old Latin text, or Vetus Latina, which, from internal evidence, seems to have been made by several authors over a period of time. It was based on the Septuagint, and thus included books not in the Hebrew Bible. According to the Latin Decretum Gelasianum (also known as the Gelasian Decree), thought to be of a 6th-century document[108][109] of uncertain authorship and of pseudepigraphal papal authority (variously ascribed to Pope Gelasius I, Pope Damasus I, or Pope Hormisdas)[110][111][112] but reflecting the views of the Roman Church by that period,[113] the Council of Rome in 382 AD under Pope Damasus I (366–383) assembled a list of books of the Bible. Damasus commissioned Saint Jerome to produce a reliable and consistent text by translating the original Greek and Hebrew texts into Latin. This translation became known as the Latin Vulgate Bible, in the fourth century AD (although Jerome expressed in his prologues to most deuterocanonical books that they were non-canonical).[114][115] In 1546, at the Council of Trent, Jerome's Vulgate translation was declared by the Roman Catholic Church to be the only authentic and official Bible in the Latin Church. Since the Protestant Reformation, Bible translations for many languages have been made. The Bible continues to be translated to new languages, largely by Christian organizations such as Wycliffe Bible Translators, New Tribes Mission and Bible societies. Bible translations, worldwide (as of October 2020[update])[116] Number Statistic 7,360 Approximate number of languages spoken in the world today 2,731 Number of translations into new languages in progress 1,551 Number of languages with a translation of the New Testament 704 Number of languages with a translation of the Bible (Protestant Canon) Views[edit] John Riches, professor of Divinity and Biblical Criticism at the University of Glasgow, provides the following view of the diverse historical influences of the Bible: It has inspired some of the great monuments of human thought, literature, and art; it has equally fuelled some of the worst excesses of human savagery, self-interest, and narrow-mindedness. It has inspired men and women to acts of great service and courage, to fight for liberation and human development; and it has provided the ideological fuel for societies which have enslaved their fellow human beings and reduced them to abject poverty. ... It has, perhaps above all, provided a source of religious and moral norms which have enabled communities to hold together, to care for, and to protect one another; yet precisely this strong sense of belonging has in turn fuelled ethnic, racial, and international tension and conflict.[117] Other religions[edit] Main article: Islamic view of the Christian Bible In Islam, the Bible is held to reflect true unfolding revelation from God; but revelation which had been corrupted or distorted (in Arabic: tahrif); which necessitated the giving of the Qur'an to the Islamic prophet, Muhammad, to correct this deviation.[118] Members of other religions may also seek inspiration from the Bible. For example, Rastafaris view the Bible as essential to their religion[119] and Unitarian Universalists view it as "one of many important religious texts".[120] Biblical studies[edit] Main articles: Biblical studies and Biblical criticism Biblical criticism refers to the investigation of the Bible as a text, and addresses questions such as authorship, dates of composition, and authorial intention. It is not the same as criticism of the Bible, which is an assertion against the Bible being a source of information or ethical guidance, or observations that the Bible may have translation errors.[121] Higher criticism[edit] Main articles: Higher criticism and Lower criticism In the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes collected the current evidence to conclude outright that Moses could not have written the bulk of the Torah. Shortly afterwards the philosopher Baruch Spinoza published a unified critical analysis, arguing that the problematic passages were not isolated cases that could be explained away one by one, but pervasive throughout the five books, concluding that it was "clearer than the sun at noon that the Pentateuch was not written by Moses ..."[122] Archaeological and historical research[edit] Main articles: Biblical archaeology school, Historicity of the Bible, and Religiously motivated pseudoarchaeology Biblical archaeology is the archaeology that relates to and sheds light upon the Hebrew Scriptures and the Christian Greek Scriptures (or the New Testament). It is used to help determine the lifestyle and practices of people living in biblical times. There are a wide range of interpretations in the field of biblical archaeology. One broad division includes biblical maximalism which generally takes the view that most of the Old Testament or the Hebrew Bible is based on history although it is presented through the religious viewpoint of its time. It is considered to be the opposite of biblical minimalism which considers the Bible to be a purely post-exilic (5th century BCE and later) composition. Even among those scholars who adhere to biblical minimalism, the Bible is a historical document containing first-hand information on the Hellenistic and Roman eras, and there is universal scholarly consensus that the events of the 6th century BCE Babylonian captivity have a basis in history. The historicity of the biblical account of the history of ancient Israel and Judah of the 10th to 7th centuries BCE is disputed in scholarship. The biblical account of the 8th to 7th centuries BCE is widely, but not universally, accepted as historical, while the verdict on the earliest period of the United Monarchy (10th century BCE) and the historicity of David is unclear. Archaeological evidence providing information on this period, such as the Tel Dan Stele, can potentially be decisive. The biblical account of events of the Exodus from Egypt in the Torah, and the migration to the Promised Land and the period of Judges are not considered historical in scholarship.[123][124] Bible museums[edit] The Dunham Bible Museum is located in Houston, Texas. It is known for its collection of rare Bibles from around the world and for having many different Bibles of various languages.[125] The Museum of the Bible opened in Washington, D.C. in November 2017.[126] The museum states that its intent is to "share the historical relevance and significance of the sacred scriptures in a nonsectarian way", but this has been questioned.[127][128] The Bible Museum in St Arnaud, Victoria, Australia opened in 2009.[129] As of 2020, it is closed for relocation.[130] There is a Bible Museum at The Great Passion Play in Eureka Springs, Arkansas.[131][132] The Bible Museum on the Square in Collierville, Tennessee opened in 1997.[133][134] Biedenharn Museum and Gardens in Monroe, Louisiana includes a Bible Museum.[135] Gallery[edit] Bibles Old Bible from a Greek monastery Imperial Bible, or Vienna Coronation Gospels from Wien (Austria), c 1500. The Kennicott Bible, 1476 A Baroque Bible The Bible used by Abraham Lincoln for his oath of office during his first inauguration in 1861 American Civil War Era Illustrated Bible A miniature Bible 1866 Victorian Bible Shelves of the Bizzell Bible Collection at Bizzell Memorial Library Detail of Leonardo da Vinci's Annunciation (c. 1472-1475) shows the Virgin Mary reading the Bible. Illustrations[edit] The grandest medieval Bibles were illuminated manuscripts in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration, such as decorated initials, borders (marginalia) and miniature illustrations. Up to the twelfth century, most manuscripts were produced in monasteries in order to add to the library or after receiving a commission from a wealthy patron. Larger monasteries often contained separate areas for the monks who specialized in the production of manuscripts called a scriptorium, where "separate little rooms were assigned to book copying; they were situated in such a way that each scribe had to himself a window open to the cloister walk."[136] By the fourteenth century, the cloisters of monks writing in the scriptorium started to employ laybrothers from the urban scriptoria, especially in Paris, Rome and the Netherlands.[137] Demand for manuscripts grew to an extent that the Monastic libraries were unable to meet with the demand, and began employing secular scribes and illuminators.[138] These individuals often lived close to the monastery and, in certain instances, dressed as monks whenever they entered the monastery, but were allowed to leave at the end of the day.[139] The manuscript was "sent to the rubricator, who added (in red or other colours) the titles, headlines, the initials of chapters and sections, the notes and so on; and then – if the book was to be illustrated – it was sent to the illuminator."[136] In the case of manuscripts that were sold commercially, the writing would "undoubtedly have been discussed initially between the patron and the scribe (or the scribe's agent,) but by the time that the written gathering were sent off to the illuminator there was no longer any scope for innovation."[140] Bible illustrations Bible from 1150, from Scriptorium de Chartres, Christ with angels Blanche of Castile and Louis IX of France Bible, 13th century Maciejowski Bible, Leaf 37, the 3rd image, Abner (in the centre in green) sends Michal back to David. Jephthah's daughter laments – Maciejowski Bible (France, ca. 1250) Coloured version of the Whore of Babylon illustration from Martin Luther's 1534 translation of the Bible An Armenian Bible, illuminated by Malnazar Fleeing Sodom and Gomorrah, Foster Bible Jonah being swallowed by the fish, Kennicott Bible, 1476 See also[edit]  Bible portal Bible box Bible case Bible paper Biblical software Code of Hammurabi Family Bible (book) International Bible Contest List of major biblical figures List of nations mentioned in the Bible Outline of Bible-related topics Theodicy and the Bible Typology – incorporating approaches to Biblical symbolism Notes[edit] ^ The canon of the original Old Greek LXX is disputed. This table reflects the canon of the Old Testament as used currently in Orthodoxy. ^ Βασιλειῶν (Basileiōn) is the genitive plural of Βασιλεῖα (Basileia). ^ That is, Things set aside from Ἔσδρας Αʹ. ^ Also called Τωβείτ or Τωβίθ in some sources. ^ Obdiou is genitive from "The vision of Obdias", which opens the book. ^ Originally placed after 3 Maccabees and before Psalms, but placed in an appendix of the Orthodox Canon References[edit] ^ Riches 2000, pp. 7–8. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help) ^ a b "Methodist Beliefs: In what ways are Lutherans different from United Methodists?". Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod. 2014. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2014. The United Methodists see Scripture as the primary source and criterion for Christian doctrine. They emphasize the importance of tradition, experience, and reason for Christian doctrine. Lutherans teach that the Bible is the sole source for Christian doctrine. The truths of Scripture do not need to be authenticated by tradition, human experience, or reason. Scripture is self authenticating and is true in and of itself. ^ Humphrey, Edith M. (15 April 2013). Scripture and Tradition. Baker Books. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-4412-4048-4. historically Anglicans have adopted what could be called a prima Scriptura position. ^ a b c Biema, David (22 March 2007). "The Case For Teaching The Bible". Time Magazine. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Simply put, the Bible is the most influential book of all-time... The Bible has done more to shape literature, history, entertainment, and culture than any book ever written. Its influence on world history is unparalleled, and shows no signs of abating. Even pop culture is deeply influenced by the Bible. ^ "The Bible tops 'most influential' book survey". BBC. 13 November 2014. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. ^ "Best selling book of non-fiction". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on 8 May 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2015. ^ Ryken, Leland. "How We Got the Best-Selling Book of All Time". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 8 May 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2015. ^ "The battle of the books". The Economist. 22 December 2007. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2020. ^ Ash, Russell (2001). Top 10 of Everything 2002. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-7894-8043-9. ^ Bandstra 2009, p. 7 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, p. xv sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help). ^ Bible Hub Archived 16 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine – The NT generally uses 1124 (graphḗ) for the Hebrew Scriptures (the OT) – but see also 2 Tim 3:16 and 2 Pet 3:16. 1124 (graphḗ) was used for the Hebrew Scriptures as early as Aristeas (about 130 bc; so MM) ^ a b Stagg, Frank. New Testament Theology. Nashville: Broadman, 1962. ISBN 0-8054-1613-7. ^ "From Hebrew Bible to Christian Bible" by Mark Hamilton Archived 14 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine on PBS's site From Jesus to Christ: The First Christians Archived 21 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine. ^ Dictionary.com etymology of the word "Bible" Archived 15 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine. ^ Bruce 1988, p. 214. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBruce1988 (help) ^ "The Catholic Encyclopedia". Newadvent.org. 1907. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. ^ Biblion, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, at Perseus. ^ Lim 2017, pp. 40, 44, and 58–59 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Hayes 2012, ch. 1 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHayes2012 (help); Brown 2010, Intro. sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Carr 2010, p. 17 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, pp. 7-9 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, pp. xv and 41 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, pp. 21-22 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help); Riches 2000, pp. 9, 18 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help). ^ Riches 2000, p. 9. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help) ^ Lim 2017, pp. 40, 44-45, and 58–60 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Hayes 2012, ch. 1 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHayes2012 (help); Brown 2010, Intro. sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Carr 2010, pp. 3 and 17 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, pp. 7-9 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, p. 54 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, p. 3 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help); Riches 2000, chs. 2 and 3 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help). ^ Lim 2017, pp. 45-46, and 58 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Hayes 2012, ch. 1 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHayes2012 (help); Brown 2010, Intro. sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Carr 2010, p. 250 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, pp. 8 and 480 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, p. 47 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, p. 27 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help); Riches 2000, ch. 3 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help). ^ Lim 2017, pp. 45-46 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Brown 2010, Intro. and ch. 1 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Carr 2010, p. 17 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, pp. 7 and 484 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Riches 2000, chs. 2 and 3 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help). ^ Lim 2017, p. 40 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Hayes 2012, ch. 1 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHayes2012 (help); Brown 2010, Intro. sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Carr 2010, pp. 3-5 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, pp. 7-8 and 480-481 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, p. xv sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, pp. 3-4, 28, and 371 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help); Riches 2000, ch. 3 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help). ^ Lim 2017, pp. 40, 46, 49 and 58-59 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Hayes 2012, ch. 1 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHayes2012 (help); Brown 2010, Intro. sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Carr 2010, pp. 3-5 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, pp. 7-8 and 480-481 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, pp. xv and 49 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, pp. 3-4, 28, 31-32, and 371 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help); Riches 2000, ch. 3 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help). ^ Lim 2017, p. 47 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Ulrich 2013, pp. 103-104 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFUlrich2013 (help); VanderKam & Flint 2013, ch. 5 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFVanderKam_&_Flint2013 (help); Brown 2010, ch. 3(A) sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, p. 22 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help). ^ Lim 2017, pp. 46-49 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFLim2017 (help); Ulrich 2013, pp. 95-104 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFUlrich2013 (help); VanderKam & Flint 2013, ch. 5 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFVanderKam_&_Flint2013 (help); Carr 2010, p. 8 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFCarr2010 (help); Bandstra 2009, p. 482 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBandstra2009 (help); Gravett et al. 2008, pp. 47-49 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGravett_et_al.2008 (help); Harris & Platzner 2008, pp. 23-28 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHarris_&_Platzner2008 (help). ^ Parker 2013, pp. 412-420, 430-432 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFParker2013 (help); Brown 2010, ch. 3(A) sfnm error: no target: CITEREFBrown2010 (help). ^ A 7th-century fragment containing the Song of the Sea (Exodus 13:19–16:1) is one of the few surviving texts from the "silent era" of Hebrew biblical texts between the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Aleppo Codex. See "Rare scroll fragment to be unveiled," Jerusalem Post, May 21, 2007. ^ "The Damascus Keters". National Library of Israel. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. ^ [[iarchive:isbn 9780393064933/page/647|]] The Restored New Testament: A New Translation with Commentary, Including the Gnostic Gospels Thomas, Mary, and Judas by Willis Barnstone – W. W. Norton & Company. p. 647 ^ a b c "Pentateuch". Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 ^ Seymour Rossel (2007). Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine The Torah: Portion by Portion, p. 355. Torah Aura Productions, CA. Retrieved 31 August 2019. ^ 1Kings.18:24;1Kings.18:37–39 9 ^ George Savran "I and II Kings" in The Literary Guide to the Bible edited by Robert Alter and Frank Kermode. "Each king is judged either good or bad in black-and-white terms, according to whether or not he "did right" or "did evil" in the sight of the Lord. This evaluation is not reflective of the well-being of the nation, of the king's success or failure in war, or of the moral climate of the times, but rather the state of cultic worship during his reign. Those kings who shun idolatry and enact religious reforms are singled out for praise, and those who encourage pagan practices are denounced." 146 ^ Yehezkel Kaufmann "Israel In Canaan" in Great Ages and Ideas of the Jewish People edited by Leo Schwartz, The Modern Library. "The fight against Baal was initiated by the prophets" 54 ^ Yehezkel Kaufmann "The Age of Prophecy" in Great Ages and Ideas of the Jewish People edited by Leo Schwartz, The Modern Library. "The immediate occasion of the rise of the new prophecy was the political and social ruin caused by the wars with Israel's northerly neighbor, Aram, which continued for more than a century. They raged intensely during the reign of Ahab, and did not end until the time of Jeroboam II (784–744). While the nation as a whole was impoverished, a few – apparently of the royal officialdom – grew wealthy as a result of the national calamity. Many of the people were compelled to sell their houses and lands, with the result that a sharp social cleavage arose: on the one hand a mass of propertyless indigents, on the other a small circle of the rich. A series of disasters struck the nation – drought, famine, plagues, death and captivity (Amos 4: 6–11), but the greatest disaster of all was the social disintegration due to the cleavage between the poor masses and the wealthy, dissolute upper class. The decay affected both Judah and Israel ... High minded men were appalled at this development. Was this the people whom YHWH had brought out of Egypt, to whom He had given the land and a law of justice and right? it seemed as if the land was about to be inherited by the rich, who would squander its substance in drunken revelry. it was this dissolution that brought the prophetic denunciations to white heat." 57–58 ^ Abraham Joshua Heschel 1955 The Prophets Harper and Row: "What manner of man is the prophet? A student of philosophy who runs from the discourses of the great metaphysicians to the orations of the prophets may feel as if he were going from the realm of the sublime to an area of trivialities. Instead of dealing with the timeless issues of being and becoming, of matter and form, of definitions and demonstrations, he is thrown into orations about widows and orphans, about the corruption of judges and affairs of the market place. Instead of showing us a way through the elegant mansions of the mind, the prophets take us to the slums. The world is a proud place, full of beauty, but the prophets are scandalized, and rave as if the whole world were a slum. They make much ado about paltry things, lavishing excessive language upon trifling subjects. What if somewhere in ancient Palestine poor people have not been treated properly by the rich? .... Indeed, the sorts of crimes and even the amount of delinquency that fill the prophets of Israel with dismay do not go beyond that which we regard as normal, as typical ingredients of social dynamics. To us a single act of injustice – cheating in business, exploitation of the poor – is slight; to the prophets, a disaster. To us an injustice is injurious to the welfare of the people; to the prophets it is a deathblow to existence; to us an episode; to them, a catastrophe, a threat to the world." 3–4 ^ Joel Rosenberg "I and II Samuel" in The Literary Guide to the Bible edited by Robert Alter and Frank Kermode. "Samuel is thus a work of national self-criticism. It recognizes that Israel would not have survived, either politically or culturally, without the steadying presence of a dynastic royal house. But it makes both that house and its subjects answerable to firm standards of prophetic justice – not those of cult prophets or professional ecstatics, but of morally upright prophetic leaders in the tradition of Moses, Joshua, Deborah, Gideon, and others ..." 141 ^ Neusner, Jacob, The Talmud Law, Theology, Narrative: A Sourcebook. University Press of America, 2005 ^ a b Coogan, Michael D. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: the Hebrew Bible in its Context. Oxford University Press. 2009; p. 5 ^ [1] Archived 6 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine The Babylonian Talmud, Vol. 7 of 9: Tract Baba Bathra (Last Gate) translated by Michael L. Rodkinson, first published 1918 – published 2008 by Forgotten Books, p. 53 ^ [2] Archived 23 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine Ketuvim כְּתוּבִים 30 July 2008 ^ Henshaw 1963, pp. 16–17. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHenshaw1963 (help) ^ Lightfoot, Neil R. How We Got the Bible, 3rd edition, rev. and expanded. Baker Book House Company. 2003, pp. 154–55. ^ Henshaw 1963, p. 17. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHenshaw1963 (help) ^ Ezra 4:8–6:18 and 7:12–26, Jeremiah 10:11, Daniel 2:4–7:28 ^ Sir Godfrey Driver. "Introduction to the Old Testament of the New English Bible." Web: 30 November 2009 ^ Vanderkam 2002, p. 91 Archived 26 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. ^ Although a paucity of extant source material makes it impossible to be certain that the earliest Samaritans also rejected the other books of the Tanakh, the third-century church father Origen confirms that the Samaritans in his day "receive[d] the books of Moses alone." (Commentary on John 13:26 Archived 3 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine) ^ Gaster, M. (1908). "A Samaritan Book of Joshua". The Living Age. 258: 166. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2019. ^ Life after death: a history of the afterlife in the religions of the West (2004) Archived 6 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Anchor Bible Reference Library, Alan F. Segal, p. 363 ^ Gilles Dorival, Marguerite Harl, and Olivier Munnich, La Bible grecque des Septante: Du judaïsme hellénistique au christianisme ancien (Paris: Cerfs, 1988), p. 111 ^ a b "[...] die griechische Bibelübersetzung, die einem innerjüdischen Bedürfnis entsprang [...] [von den] Rabbinen zuerst gerühmt (.) Später jedoch, als manche ungenaue Übertragung des hebräischen Textes in der Septuaginta und Übersetzungsfehler die Grundlage für hellenistische Irrlehren abgaben, lehte man die Septuaginta ab." Verband der Deutschen Juden (Hrsg.), neu hrsg. von Walter Homolka, Walter Jacob, Tovia Ben Chorin: Die Lehren des Judentums nach den Quellen; München, Knesebeck, 1999, Bd.3, S. 43ff ^ a b Karen H. Jobes and Moises Silva (2001). Invitation to the Septuagint. Paternoster Press. ISBN 978-1-84227-061-5. Archived from the original on 12 March 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2015. ^ Joel Kalvesmaki, The Septuagint Archived 9 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ Rick Grant Jones, Various Religious Topics, "Books of the Septuagint", (Accessed 2006.9.5). ^ "The translation, which shows at times a peculiar ignorance of Hebrew usage, was evidently made from a codex which differed widely in places from the text crystallized by the Masorah." "Bible Translations – The Septuagint". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 10 February 2012. ^ "Two things, however, rendered the Septuagint unwelcome in the long run to the Jews. Its divergence from the accepted text (afterward called the Masoretic) was too evident; and it therefore could not serve as a basis for theological discussion or for homiletic interpretation. This distrust was accentuated by the fact that it had been adopted as Sacred Scripture by the new faith [Christianity] [...] In course of time it came to be the canonical Greek Bible [...] It became part of the Bible of the Christian Church." "Bible Translations – The Septuagint". JewishEncyclopedia.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 10 February 2012. ^ Mishnah Sotah (7:2–4 and 8:1), among many others, discusses the sacredness of Hebrew, as opposed to Aramaic or Greek. This is comparable to the authority claimed for the original Arabic Koran according to Islamic teaching. As a result of this teaching, translations of the Torah into Koine Greek by early Jewish Rabbis have survived as rare fragments only. ^ Ernst Würthwein, The Text of the Old Testament, trans. Errol F. Rhodes, Grand Rapids, Mich.: Wm. Eerdmans, 1995. ^ "NETS: Electronic Edition". Ccat.sas.upenn.edu. 11 February 2011. Archived from the original on 29 July 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2012. ^ a b This article incorporates text from the 1903 Encyclopaedia Biblica article "Text and Versions", a publication now in the public domain. ^ a b Jennifer M. Dines, The Septuagint, Michael A. Knibb, Ed., London: T&T Clark, 2004. ^ Timothy McLay, The Use of the Septuagint in New Testament Research ISBN 0-8028-6091-5. – The current standard introduction on the NT & LXX. ^ Not in Orthodox Canon, but originally included in the LXX. http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/nets/edition/ Archived 29 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Barton, John (1998). The Cambridge companion to biblical interpretation. Barton, John, 1948– (1st ed.). Cambridge. ISBN 978-0-521-48144-1. OCLC 37353764. ^ Eerdmans commentary on the Bible. Dunn, James D. G., 1939–, Rogerson, J. W. (John William), 1935–. Grand Rapids, MI: W.B. Eerdmans. 2003. ISBN 978-0-8028-3711-0. OCLC 53059839.CS1 maint: others (link) ^ Crenshaw, James L. (2010). Old Testament wisdom : an introduction (3rd ed.). Louisville, Ky.: Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-23459-1. OCLC 426147298. ^ The Masoretic Text and the Dead Sea Scrolls Archived 27 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine – biblicalarchaeology.org. Retrieved 26 December 2012. ^ "Dead Sea Scrolls" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 6 June 2013. ^ Council of Trent: Decretum de Canonicis Scripturis "Decree Concerning the Canonical Scriptures" Archived 5 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, from the Council's fourth session, of 4 April 1546: Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent, The Fourth Session, Celebrated on the eighth day of the month of April, in the year 1546, English translation by James Waterworth (London 1848). ^ The Council of Trent confirmed the identical list/canon of sacred scriptures already anciently approved by the Synod of Hippo (Synod of 393), Council of Carthage, 28 August 397, and Council of Florence (originally Council of Basel), Session 11, 4 February 1442 Archived 24 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine  – [Bull of union with the Copts] seventh paragraph down. ^ "Paragraph 120". Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition. Libreria Editrice Vaticana. 2012. Retrieved 6 August 2014. ^ Canon of Trent: List of the Canonical Scriptures. But if anyone receive not, as sacred and canonical, the said books entire with all their parts, as they have been used to be read in the Catholic Church, and as they are contained in the old Latin vulgate edition; and knowingly and deliberately contemn the traditions aforesaid; let him be anathema. — Decretum de Canonicis Scripturis, Council of Trent, 8 April 1546 ^ Bryan, Christopher. "The Canon of Holy Scripture: An Anglican Note". Christopher Bryan Online. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2020. ^ Harris, Stephen L., Understanding the Bible. Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985. ^ The Book of Enoch Archived 8 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine – The Reluctant Messenger. Retrieved 14 June 2014. ^ Fahlbusch E., Bromiley G.W. The Encyclopedia of Christianity: P–Sh p. 411, ISBN 0-8028-2416-1 (2004) ^ Wright 2005, p. 3. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWright2005 (help) ^ a b Wright 2005 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWright2005 (help) ^ [3] Inspiration and Inerrancy: A History and a Defense, Henry Preserved Smith – R. Clarke, 1893, p. 343 ^ Mears, Henrietta C. (2007) "A glossary of Bible words". Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine What the Bible is All About Visual Edition, pp. 438–439. Gospel Light Publications, CA. Retrieved 31 August 2019. ^ Kurt Aland, Barbara Aland The text of the New Testament: an introduction to the critical 1995 p. 52 "The New Testament was written in Koine Greek, the Greek of daily conversation. The fact that from the first all the New Testament writings were written in Greek is conclusively demonstrated by their citations from the Old Testament ..." ^ Archibald Macbride Hunter Introducing the New Testament 1972 p9 "How came the twenty-seven books of the New Testament to be gathered together and made authoritative Christian scripture? 1. All the New Testament books were originally written in Greek. On the face of it this may surprise us." ^ Wenham The elements of New Testament Greek p. xxv Jeremy Duff, John William Wenham – 2005 "This is the language of the New Testament. By the time of Jesus the Romans had become the dominant military and political force, but the Greek language remained the 'common language' of the eastern Mediterranean and beyond, and Greek ..." ^ Daniel B. Wallace Greek Grammar Beyond the Basics: An Exegetical Syntax of the New Testament 1997 ^ Henry St. John Thackeray Grammar of New Testament Greek ed. Friedrich Wilhelm Blass, 1911 "By far the most predominant element in the language of the New Testament is the Greek of common speech which was disseminated in the East by the Macedonian conquest, in the form which it had gradually assumed under the wider development ..." ^ David E. Aune The Blackwell companion to the New Testament 2009 p.61 Chapter 4 New Testament Greek Christophe Rico "In this short overview of the Greek language of the New Testament we will focus on those topics that are of greatest importance for the average reader, that is, those with important ..." ^ [4] Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Manuscripts and the Text of the New Testament: An Introduction for English Readers by Keith Elliott, Ian Moir – Continuum International Publishing Group, 2000, p. 9 ^ [5] Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopedia of Catholicism, Frank K. Flinn, Infobase Publishing, 1 January 2007, p. 103 ^ "The Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church". Ethiopianorthodox.org. Archived from the original on 5 November 2010. Retrieved 19 November 2010. ^ Sebastian P. Brock The Bible in the Syriac Tradition St. Ephrem Ecumenical Research Institute, 1988. Quote Page 13: "The Peshitta Old Testament was translated directly from the original Hebrew text, and the Peshitta New Testament directly from the original Greek" ^ Bromiley, Geoffrey W. (1995). The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia: Q-Z. p. 976. ISBN 0-8028-3784-0. Printed editions of the Peshitta frequently contain these books in order to fill the gaps. D. Harklean Version. The Harklean version is connected with the labors of Thomas of Harqel. When thousands were fleeing Khosrou's invading armies, ... ^ Kiraz, George Anton (2002) [1996]. Comparative Edition of the Syriac Gospels: Aligning the Old Syriac Sinaiticus, Curetonianus, Peshitta and Harklean Versions (2nd ed.). Piscataway, New Jersey: Gorgias Press. ^ Kiraz, George Anton (2004) [1996]. Comparative Edition of the Syriac Gospels: Aligning the Old Syriac Sinaiticus, Curetonianus, Peshitta and Harklean Versions (3rd ed.). Piscataway, New Jersey: Gorgias Press. ^ Grudem, Wayne (1994). Systematic Theology. Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press. pp. 49–50. ^ Rice, John R. – Our God-Breathed Book: The Bible – ISBN 0-87398-628-8, Sword of the Lord Publishers, 1969, pp 68–88. ^ "Beyond Biblical Literalism and Inerrancy: Conservative Protestants and the Hermeneutic Interpretation of Scripture", John Bartkowski, Sociology of Religion, 57, 1996. ^ Philo of Alexandria, De vita Moysis 3.23. ^ Josephus, Contra Apion 1.8. ^ "Basis for belief of Inspiration Biblegateway". Biblegateway.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010. ^ Norman L. Geisler, William E. Nix. A General Introduction to the Bible. Moody Publishers, 1986, p. 86. ISBN 0-8024-2916-5 ^ For example, see Leroy Zuck, Roy B. Zuck. Basic Bible Interpretation. Chariot Victor Pub, 1991, p. 68. ISBN 0-89693-819-0 ^ Roy B. Zuck, Donald Campbell. Basic Bible Interpretation. Victor, 2002. ISBN 0-7814-3877-2 ^ Norman L. Geisler. Inerrancy. Zondervan, 1980, p. 294. ISBN 0-310-39281-0 ^ International Council on Biblical Inerrancy (1978). "The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy" (PDF). International Council on Biblical Inerrancy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2008. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ "Ruckman's belief in advanced revelations in the KJV". Archived from the original on 27 October 2013. Retrieved 27 February 2014. ^ Clark, Francis (1987). The Pseudo-Gregorian dialogues. Leiden: E.J. Brill. pp. 601–02. ISBN 978-9004077737. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2017. ^ Bruce 1988, p. 234. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBruce1988 (help) ^ Frazier, Alison (2015). Essays in Renaissance Thought and Letters: In Honor of John Monfasani. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. p. 465. ISBN 978-9004294479. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2017. ^ Burkitt (1913). "The Decretum Geladianum". Journal of Theological Studies. 14: 469–71. Archived from the original on 21 May 2019. Retrieved 13 January 2017. ^ Ellis, E. Earle (2003). The Old Testament in early Christianity : canon and interpretation in the light of modern research. Eugene, Oregon: Wipf & Stock. p. 26. ISBN 978-1-59244-256-0. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2017. ^ "The Christian canon". Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 13 January 2017. ^ Kelly, J. N. D. (1960). Early Christian Doctrines. San Francisco: Harper. p. 55. ^ "The Bible". www.thelatinlibrary.com. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2017. ^ "2020 Scripture Access Statistics". Archived from the original on 13 October 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2020. ^ Riches 2000, p. 134. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRiches2000 (help) ^ "…they [from the Children of Israel] pervert words from their meanings, and have forgotten a part of what they were reminded …" Quran 5:18. ^ Becoming Rasta: Origins of Rastafari Identity in Jamaica. p. 171, Charles Price. 2009 ^ Unitarian Universalism. p. 42, Zondervan Publishing, 2009 ^ "Expondo Os Erros Da Sociedade Bíblica Internacional". Baptistlink.com. 2000. Archived from the original on 29 October 2002. Retrieved 13 January 2012. ^ Potter, George (September 2005). Ten More Amazing Discoveries. CFI. p. 121. ISBN 978-1-55517-805-5. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2015. ^ * Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (2001). The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Its Sacred Texts. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-2338-6. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2020. ^ Dever, William (2003). Who Were the Early Israelites and Where Did They Come from?. Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-0975-9. ^ Turner, Allan (31 August 2015). "Historic Bibles ?' even a naughty one ?' featured at Houston's Dunham Museum". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 10 February 2020. ^ "About Us". www.museumofthebible.org. Museum of the Bible. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ "Museum of the Bible opens in Washington, D.C., with celebration amid cynicism". NBC News. Archived from the original on 21 November 2020. Retrieved 3 December 2017. ^ "Questions swirl around Museum of the Bible before grand opening". NBC News. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ "St Arnaud gets it own holy grail". The Herald and Weekly Times. 21 April 2015. Archived from the original on 12 December 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ "Bible Museum Homepage | Features". www.thebiblemuseum.com.au. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. Australia's only Bible Museum has temporarily closed and is preparing to relocate. Our exciting new location will be announced on this website. ^ "Great Passion Play has some interesting new sights that don't cost anything to see (051519)". KSNF/KODE - FourStatesHomepage.com. 17 May 2019. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ The Christian travel planner. Thomas Nelson. 5 February 2008. p. 327. ISBN 9781401603748. Archived from the original on 11 December 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ Jordan, Leah. "Shelby County awards $15,000 grant for Bible Museum in Collierville". WHBQ-TV. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ "ABOUT". Bible Museum On The Square. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ Mary, Fonseca. Weekend Getaways in Louisiana. Pelican Publishing. p. 249. ISBN 978-1-4556-1398-4. Archived from the original on 11 December 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. ^ a b Putnam A.M., Geo. Haven. Books and Their Makers During The Middle Ages. Vol. 1. New York: Hillary House, 1962. Print. ^ De Hamel 1992, p. 45. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDe_Hamel1992 (help) ^ De Hamel 1992, p. 57. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDe_Hamel1992 (help) ^ De Hamel 1992, p. 65. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDe_Hamel1992 (help) ^ De Hamel 1992, p. 60. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDe_Hamel1992 (help) Works cited[edit] Bandstra, Barry L. (2009) [2004]. Reading the Old Testament: an introduction to the Hebrew Bible (4th ed.). Wadsworth Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-39105-0. OCLC 244017850. Brown, Raymond E. (2010) [1997]. An Introduction to the New Testament. The Anchor Yale Bible Reference Library. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-14016-3. OCLC 762279536. Bruce, Frederick (1988). The Canon of Scripture. Downers Grove, Illinois: IVP Academic. p. 214. ISBN 978-0-8308-1258-5. Carr, David McLain (2010). An introduction to the Old Testament: sacred texts and imperial contexts of the Hebrew Bible. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4443-1995-8. OCLC 593295689. De Hamel, Christopher (1992). Medieval Craftsmen: Scribes and Illuminations. Buffalo: University of Toronto. Gravett, Sandra L.; Bohmbach, Karla G.; Greifenhagen, F. V.; Polaski, Donald C. (2008). An introduction to the Hebrew Bible: a thematic approach. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-23030-2. OCLC 196303211. Harris, Stephen L.; Platzner, Robert Leonard (2008) [2003]. The Old Testament: an introduction to the Hebrew Bible (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill Higher Education. ISBN 978-0-07-299051-5. OCLC 166317501. Hayes, Christine Elizabeth (2012). Introduction to the Bible. Open Yale Courses. Yale University Press. ISBN 1-283-65655-8. OCLC 817828470. Henshaw, T. (1963). The Writings: The Third Division of the Old Testament Canon. George Allen & Unwin Ltd. Lim, Timothy H. (2017) [2005]. The Dead Sea Scrolls: a very short introduction (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-877952-0. LCCN 2016953719. OCLC 978451657. Parker, David C. (2013). "The New Testament text and versions". In Paget, James Carleton; Schaper, Joachim (eds.). Volume 1: From the Beginnings to 600. The New Cambridge History of the Bible. Cambridge University Press. pp. 412–454. ISBN 978-0-521-85938-7. OCLC 774213683. Riches, John (2000). The Bible: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285343-1. Ulrich, Eugene (2013). "The Old Testament text and its transmission". In Paget, James Carleton; Schaper, Joachim (eds.). Volume 1: From the Beginnings to 600. The New Cambridge History of the Bible. Cambridge University Press. pp. 83–104. ISBN 978-0-521-85938-7. OCLC 774213683. VanderKam, James C.; Flint, Peter W. (2013) [2002]. The meaning of the Dead Sea scrolls: their significance for understanding the Bible, Judaism, Jesus, and Christianity (E-book ed.). HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-224330-0. OCLC 856526599. Wright, N.T. (2005). The Last Word: Scripture and the Authority of God – Getting Beyond the Bible Wars. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-087261-8. Further reading[edit] Anderson, Bernhard W. Understanding the Old Testament. ISBN 0-13-948399-3. Asimov, Isaac. Asimov's Guide to the Bible. New York: Avenel Books, 1981. ISBN 0-517-34582-X. Berlin, Adele, Marc Zvi Brettler and Michael Fishbane. The Jewish Study Bible Archived 3 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-19-529751-2. Bible, Authorized Version. The New Cambridge Paragraph Bible, with the Apocrypha, King James Version, ed. by David Norton. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 2005. N.B.: This is a critically reconstructed text of the Authorized "King James" Bible with its entire contents (including all of its marginalia, fore-matter, the Apocrypha, etc.), as close to the original translators' intentions and wording as possible at the time of this edition, with spelling modernized according to current Commonwealth usage. ISBN 978-0-521-84386-7 Brown, Raymond E., Joseph A. Fitzmyer, and Roland E. Murphy, eds. (1990). The New Jerome Biblical Commentary. New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-614934-0. Dunn, James D. G. and John W. Rogerson, eds. (2021). Eerdmans Commentary on the Bible. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-7978-3. Finkelstein, Israel; Silberman, Neil Asher (August 2002). "Review: "The Bible Unearthed": A Rejoinder". Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research. 327 (1): 63–73. doi:10.2307/1357859. JSTOR 1357859. S2CID 161668327. Herzog, Ze'ev (29 October 1999). "Deconstructing the walls of Jericho". Ha'aretz. Archived from the original on 21 December 2008. Dever, William G. (March–April 2007). "Losing Faith: Who Did and Who Didn't, How Scholarship Affects Scholars" (PDF). Biblical Archaeology Review. 33 (2): 54. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 25 July 2008. Ehrman, Bart D. Misquoting Jesus: The Story Behind Who Changed the Bible and Why New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005. ISBN 0-06-073817-0. Head, Tom. The Absolute Beginner's Guide to the Bible. Indianapolis: Que Publishing, 2005. ISBN 0-7897-3419-2 Hoffman, Joel M. In the Beginning: A Short History of the Hebrew Language Archived 3 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. New York University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-8147-3690-4 Hotchkiss, Gregory K. The Middle Way: Reflections on Scripture and Tradition, in series, Reformed Episcopal Pamphlets, no. 3. Media, Penn.: Reformed Episcopal Publication Society, 1985. 27 p. N.B.: Place of publication also given as Philadelphia, Penn.; the approach to the issue is from an evangelical Anglican (Reformed Episcopal Church) orientation. Without ISBN Kingstone Media. The Epic Bible: God's Story from Eden to Eternity. Wander (6 October 2020). 840p. ISBN 1-414-39667-8 ISBN 978-1414396675 Lienhard, Joseph T. The Bible, The Church, and Authority. Collegeville, Minnesota: Liturgical Press, 1995. Lindsell, Harold. The Battle for the Bible. Zondervan Publishing House, 1978. ISBN 0-310-27681-0 Masalha, Nur, The Bible and Zionism: Invented Traditions, Archaeology and Post-Colonialism in Palestine-Israel. London, Zed Books, 2007. McDonald, Lee M. and Sanders, James A., eds. The Canon Debate. Hendrickson Publishers (1 January 2002). 662p. ISBN 1-56563-517-5 ISBN 978-1565635173 Miller, John W. The Origins of the Bible: Rethinking Canon History Mahwah, New Jersey: Paulist Press, 1994. ISBN 0-8091-3522-1. Newsom, Carol A.; Ringe, Sharon H.; Lapsley, Jacqueline E., eds. (2012) [1992]. Women's Bible Commentary (Revised and updated ed.). Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-23707-3. Roper, J.C., Bp., et al.. The Bible. Toronto: Musson Book Co., 1924. In series, "The Layman's Library of Practical Religion, Church of England in Canada", vol. 4. N.B.: Series statement given here in the more extended form of it on the book's front cover. Siku. The Manga Bible: From Genesis to Revelation. Galilee Trade (15 January 2008). 224p. ISBN 0-385-52431-5 ISBN 978-0385524315 Taylor, Hawley O. "Mathematics and Prophecy." Modern Science and Christian Faith. Wheaton: Van Kampen, 1948, pp. 175–83. Wycliffe Bible Encyclopedia, s.vv. "Book of Ezekiel", p. 580 and "prophecy", p. 1410. Chicago: Moody Bible Press, 1986. External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bible. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikiquote has quotations related to: The Bible Wikiquote has quotations related to: Bible quotes about love Wikisource has original text related to this article: Bible Trinity College Digital Collections images of complete manuscript of the Book of Kells. "The Bible collected news and commentary" The New York Times. "The Bible collected news and commentary" The Guardian. The British Library: Discovering Sacred Texts – Christianity The National Library of Israel – Over 15,000 scanned manuscripts of the Old Testament v t e The Bible Hebrew Bible/Old Testament - New Testament Overview Biblical criticism Biblical studies Biblical canon Historicity of the Bible Chronology of the Bible Topics Allegorical interpretation of the Bible The Bible and ethics The Bible and homosexuality The Bible and violence The Bible and slavery The Bible and humor Alcohol in the Bible Muhammad and the Bible Criticism of the Bible Internal consistency of the Bible Biblical hermeneutics Hebrew Bible Hebrew Bible Jewish commentaries on the Bible List of Hebrew Bible events Rape in the Hebrew Bible Sex in the Hebrew Bible Witchcraft and divination in the Hebrew Bible Prayer in the Hebrew Bible Homosexuality in the Hebrew Bible List of capital crimes in the Torah Crime and punishment in the Torah Christian Bible Catholic Bible Protestant Bible Christian biblical canons Development of the Christian biblical canon Outline • Category • Portal • WikiProject • Book v t e Books of the Bible Principal divisions Hebrew Bible Torah Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Nevi'im Joshua Judges Samuel Kings Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel Minor Prophets Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Ketuvim Psalms Proverbs Job Song Ruth Lamentations Ecclesiastes Esther Daniel Ezra-Nehemiah Ezra Nehemiah Chronicles Deuterocanon and apocrypha Catholic Eastern Orthodox Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Susanna Song of the Three Children Bel and the Dragon Eastern Orthodox only 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Odes Orthodox Tewahedo Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Syriac Letter of Baruch Psalms 152–155 New Testament Matthew Mark Luke John Acts Romans 1 Corinthians 2 Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1 Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians 1 Timothy 2 Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James 1 Peter 2 Peter 1 John 2 John 3 John Jude Revelation Subdivisions Chapters and verses Pentateuch Historical books Wisdom books Prophetic books Major prophets Minor prophets Gospels Synoptic Epistles Pauline Johannine Pastoral Catholic Apocalyptic literature Development Old Testament canon New Testament canon Antilegomena Jewish canon Christian canon Dating the Bible Manuscripts Dead Sea Scrolls Samaritan Pentateuch Septuagint Targum Diatessaron Muratorian fragment Peshitta Vetus Latina Vulgate Masoretic Text New Testament manuscript categories New Testament papyri New Testament uncials Related Authorship Bible version debate English Bible translations Other books referenced in the Bible Pseudepigrapha list New Testament apocrypha Studies Biblical and Quranic narratives Synod of Hippo Textual criticism Category Portal WikiProject Book New Testament articles v t e Gospel of Matthew Bible (New Testament) Chapter Matthew 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 Verse Matthew 1:1–25 2:1–23 3:1–17 4:1–25 5:1–48 6:1–34 7:1–29 8:1–34 9:1–29 16:2b–3,19 27:1–12; 52–66 28:1–20 Events and phrases Jesus' Birth Star of Bethlehem Magi Flight into Egypt Massacre of the Innocents Return to Nazareth Baptism Temptation Galilean ministry Fishers of men Behold the bridegroom Sermon on the Mount Lord's Prayer Golden rule Calming the storm Feeding the multitude Walking on water Transfiguration Great Commandment Olivet Discourse Ten Virgins Anointing Passion of Jesus Last Supper Crucifixion of Jesus Burial Empty tomb Resurrection Great Commission People Andrew Caiaphas Herod James Jeremiah Jesus Christ John John the Baptist Joseph Judas Iscariot Mary Mary Magdalene Matthew Philip Pontius Pilate Rachel Simon Peter Thomas Zebedee Groups Angels Pharisees Sadducees Sanhedrin Places Bethany Bethlehem Bethsaida Capernaum Egypt Galilee Jerusalem Jordan River Judea Samaria Sea of Galilee Related Q source M Source Gospel of Mark Textual variants Augustinian hypothesis Two-gospel hypothesis Genealogy of Jesus Five Discourses of Matthew Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version In popular culture The Gospel According to St. Matthew (1964 film) Godspell (1971 musical) Godspell (1973 film) The Visual Bible: Matthew (1993 film) ← Book of Malachi (chapter 4) Bible portal Gospel of Mark (chapter 1) → v t e Gospel of Mark Bible (New Testament) Mark 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Events Jesus's Baptism Temptation Galilean ministry Calming the storm Feeding the 5000 Walking on water Transfiguration Great Commandment Olivet Discourse Anointing Passion of Jesus Last Supper Pilate's court Crucifixion Entombment/Burial Empty tomb Resurrection Phrases Naked fugitive Sayings of Jesus on the cross People Andrew Caiaphas Herod Antipas Jesus Christ John the Baptist Joseph of Arimathea Judas Iscariot Mary, mother of James Mary, mother of Jesus Mary Magdalene Philip Pontius Pilate Rufus Salome Simon of Cyrene Simon Peter Thomas Zebedee Groups Pharisees Sadducees Samaritans Sanhedrin Places Bethany Bethsaida Capernaum Dalmanutha Galilee Jerusalem Jordan River Judea Nazareth Samaria Sea of Galilee Related Mark the Evangelist John Mark Textual variants Marcan priority Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version ← Gospel of Matthew (chapter 28) Bible portal Gospel of Luke (chapter 1) → v t e Gospel of Luke Bible (New Testament) Chapter Luke 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Verse Luke 22:43–44 Events Annunciation to Mary, Elizabeth, and the shepherds Adoration of shepherds John the Baptist's Birth Census of Quirinius Jesus' Birth Circumcision and Presentation at the Temple Finding in the Temple Genealogy Baptism Temptation Calling of Matthew Counting the cost Sermon on the Plain Calming the storm Feeding the 5000 Transfiguration Great Commandment Lord's Prayer Prodigal son Olivet Discourse Passion of Jesus Last Supper Pilate's court Crucifixion Burial Empty tomb Resurrection Ascension Phrases Benedictus Fishers of men Magnificat New Wine into Old Wineskins Nunc dimittis (Song of Simeon) People Abijah Andrew Anna Annas Augustus Caiaphas David Elizabeth Gabriel Herod Antipas Herod the Great Jesus Christ John the Baptist Joseph Joseph of Arimathea Judas Iscariot Lazarus Lysanias Martha Mary, mother of Jesus Mary Magdalene Mary, sister of Martha Philip (apostle) Philip (tetrarch) Pontius Pilate Quirinius Simeon Simon Peter Theophilus Thomas Tiberius Caesar Zebedee Zechariah Groups Angels Pharisees Sadducees Samaritans Sanhedrin Seventy disciples Places Abilene Bethany Bethsaida Capernaum Decapolis Emmaus Galilee Iturea Jerusalem Jordan River Judea Nain Samaria Sea of Galilee Trachonitis Related Luke the Evangelist Authorship of Luke–Acts Gospel of Mark Q source L source Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version ← Gospel of Mark (chapter 16) Bible portal Gospel of John (chapter 1) → v t e Gospel of John Bible (New Testament) Chapter John 1 Book of Signs 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Book of Glory 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Epilogue: 21 Verse John 1:1–20; 23; 25–33; 35–42 3:16 14:6 18:38 20:1–31 Events (chronological) Marriage at Cana Bread of Life Discourse Feeding the 5000 Healing a blind man Healing a paralytic Healing a sick son Jesus and the woman taken in adultery Walking on water Raising of Lazarus Anointing Foot washing Passion of Jesus Last Supper Farewell Discourse Crucifixion Burial Empty tomb Resurrection of Jesus Phrases In the beginning Logos Disciple whom Jesus loved Doubting Thomas Ecce homo Feast of Dedication "Love one another" Jesus wept Noli me tangere Quod scripsi, scripsi That they all may be one Via et veritas et vita The truth will set you free People Andrew Annas Caiaphas Herod Antipas Jesus Christ John the Baptist Joseph of Arimathea Judas Iscariot Mother of Jesus Lazarus Malchus Martha Mary Magdalene Mary, sister of Martha Nathanael Nicodemus Philip Pontius Pilate Simon of Cyrene Simon Peter Simon the Leper Thomas Zebedee Groups Angels Pharisees Sadducees Samaritans Sanhedrin Places Ænon Bethabara Bethany Bethsaida Cana Capernaum Galilee Jacob's Well Jerusalem Jordan River Judea Kidron Samaria Sea of Galilee Solomon's Porch Sychar "I AM" sayings I am (biblical term) Bread of Life Light of the World Gate for the Sheep Good Shepherd Resurrectio et Vita Via et veritas et vita True Vine Related Authorship John the Apostle John the Evangelist Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version In popular culture The Gospel of John (2003 film) The Gospel of John (2014 film) ← Gospel of Luke (chapter 24) Bible portal Acts of the Apostles (chapter 1) → v t e Acts of the Apostles Bible (New Testament) Acts 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 Events Ascension Pentecost Conversion of Paul Peter's vision Peter's liberation Council of Jerusalem Areopagus sermon Book burning at Ephesus People Aeneas Agabus Agrippa Agrippa II Ananias (Damascus) Ananias (High Priest) Ananias (Judea) Apollos Aquila Aristarchus Bar-jesus Barnabas Berenice Blastus Cornelius Demetrius Dionysius Dorcas Drusilla Ethiopian eunuch Eutychus Felix Festus Gallio Gamaliel James the Just Jason Jesus Joseph Barsabbas Judas Barsabbas Judas of Galilee Lucius Luke Lydia Lysias Manaen (John) Mark Mary mother of John Mark Matthias Nicanor Nicholas Parmenas Paul Paullus Peter Philip Priscilla Prochorus Publius Rhoda Sapphira Sceva Seven Deacons Silas/Silvanus Simeon Niger Simon the Sorcerer Sopater Stephen Theophilus Theudas Timothy Titus Trophimus Tychicus Places Achaea Alexandria Amphipolis Antioch of Pisidia Antioch of Syria Antipatris Asia Assos Atalia Athens Berea Bithynia Caesarea Cenchrea Chios Cilicia Corinth Cos Creta Cyprus Derbe Ephesus Forum Appii Galatia Iconium Italy Jerusalem Lycaonia Lystra Macedonia Malta Mytilene Miletus Mysia Neapolis Paphos Pamphilia Patara Perga Philippi Phrygia Pisidia Pontus Ptolemais Puteoli Regium Rodos Rome Salamis Samos Samothrace Seleucia Syracuse Syria Thessalonica Thyatira Tyre Three Taverns Troas Phrases Christians Synagogue of the Libertines Related Apostolic Age Luke–Acts Authorship Luke the Evangelist Historical reliability Holy Spirit Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version In popular culture The Visual Bible: Acts (1994 film) ← Gospel of John (chapter 21) Bible portal Epistle to the Romans (chapter 1) → v t e Book of Revelation Bible (New Testament) Revelation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Places Armageddon Asia Babylon Egypt Ephesus Euphrates Jerusalem Laodicea Patmos Pergamum Philadelphia Sardis Smyrna Sodom Thyatira Persons Asher Balak Balaam Benjamin David Gad Issachar Jesus Christ Jezebel John Joseph Judah Levi Manasseh Michael Naphtali Reuben Simeon Zebulun Events/ Terms/ Phrases Abaddon/Apollyon Alpha and Omega Beast Book of Life Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Four Living Creatures Lake of Fire Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Revelation 12 sign prophecy Seven bowls Seven churches of Asia Seven seals Seven trumpets Son of Man Three Angels' Messages Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse Wormwood Related Authorship John of Patmos Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version ← Epistle of Jude Bible portal v t e New Testament people Jesus Christ In Christianity Historical Life of Jesus in the New Testament Gospels Individuals Alphaeus Anna the Prophetess Annas Barabbas Bartimaeus Blind man (Bethsaida) Caiaphas Celidonius Cleopas Clopas Devil Penitent thief ("Dismas") Elizabeth Gabriel Impenitent thief ("Gestas") Jairus' daughter Joanna John the Baptist Joseph Joseph of Arimathea Joses Jude Lazarus Legion Luke Lysanias Malchus Martha Mary, mother of Jesus Mary Magdalene Mary, mother of James Mary of Bethany Mary of Clopas Naked fugitive Son of Nain's widow Nicodemus (Nicodemus ben Gurion) Salome Samaritan woman Satan Simeon Simon, brother of Jesus Simon of Cyrene Simon the Leper Simon the Pharisee Susanna Syrophoenician woman Theophilus Zacchaeus Zebedee Zechariah Multiple people named James people named John people named Judas or Jude people named Mary people named Simon Groups Angels Jesus's brothers Demons Disciples Evangelists Female disciples of Jesus God-fearers Herodians Magi Myrrhbearers Nameless Pharisees Proselytes Sadducees Samaritans Sanhedrin Scribes Seventy disciples Shepherds Women at the crucifixion Zealots Apostles Andrew Bartholomew Nathanael James, son of Alphaeus Less James, son of Zebedee John Evangelist Patmos "Disciple whom Jesus loved" Judas Iscariot Judas Thaddaeus Matthew Philip Simon Peter Simon the Zealot Thomas Acts Aeneas Agabus Ananias (Damascus) Ananias (Judaea) Ananias son of Nedebeus Apollos Aquila Aristarchus Barnabas Blastus Cornelius Damaris Demetrius Dionysius Dorcas Elymas Egyptian Ethiopian eunuch Eutychus Gamaliel James, brother of Jesus Jason Joseph Barsabbas Judas Barsabbas Judas of Galilee Lucius Luke Lydia Manaen (John) Mark Evangelist cousin of Barnabas Mary, mother of (John) Mark Matthias Mnason Nicanor Nicholas Parmenas Paul Philip Priscilla Prochorus Publius Rhoda Sapphira Sceva Seven Deacons Silas / Silvanus Simeon Niger Simon Magus Sopater Sosthenes Stephen Theudas Timothy Titus Trophimus Tychicus Zenas Romans Herod's family Gospels Antipas Archelaus Herod the Great Herodias Longinus Philip Pilate Pilate's wife Quirinius Salome Tiberius Acts Agrippa Agrippa II Berenice Cornelius Drusilla Felix Festus Gallio Lysias Paullus Epistles Achaicus Alexander of Ephesus Alexander the Coppersmith Andronicus Archippus Aretas IV Artemas Carpus Claudia Crescens Demas Diotrephes Epaphras Epaphroditus Erastus Eunice Euodia and Syntyche Herodion Hymenaeus Jesus Justus John the Presbyter Junia Linus Lois Mary Michael Nymphas Olympas Onesimus Onesiphorus Pudens Philemon Philetus Phoebe Quartus Sosipater Tertius Tryphena and Tryphosa Revelation Antipas Four Horsemen Apollyon Two witnesses Woman Beast Three Angels Whore of Babylon v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Haskalah Zionism Population Assimilation Diaspora Ashkenazi Italkim Mizrahi Romaniote Sephardi Languages Hebrew Judaeo-Aramaic Judaeo-Greek Judaeo-Occitan Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Italian Judeo-Persian Yiddish Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics God Halakha Kabbalah Land of Israel Who is a Jew? Divisions Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Karaite relations Samaritanism Secularism Literature Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Marriage Music Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other Abrahamic religions Christianity Anabaptism Catholic Church Mormonism Islam Book Category  Judaism portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Lists of Christians By country Bible Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History (timeline) Early Christianity Jesus Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Church fathers Apostolic fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Persecution: Communism Islam Denominations (list) Western Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Calvinist Catholic Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Protestant Quakers Eastern Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Christology Nicene Creed Tradition Original sin Salvation Born again Worship Mariology Theotokos Saints Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Sacraments Baptism Lord's Supper Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Mission Ablution Hygiene Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Views on poverty and wealth Other Features Culture Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Literature Music Mythology Church buildings Cathedrals Role in civilization See also: Other religions Cultural Christians Criticism Persecution Movements Asceticism Charismatic Christian democracy Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left/Right Pacifism Prosperity Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism  Christianity portal Book Category v t e Latter Day Saint movement Fundamental ideas Mormonism Mormonism and Christianity Mormon fundamentalism List of denominations List of Reorganized Restorationist churches Mormon studies Bibliography History History of the Latter Day Saint movement Church of Christ Extermination Order Succession crisis History of the LDS Church Mormon handcart pioneers Mormon Battalion Mormon Reformation Mountain Meadows massacre Community of Christ history Amboy Conference Restoration Branches Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite) history Rigdonite William Bickerton Sacred texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Book of Mormon outline Doctrine and Covenants (Book of Commandments) Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible Pearl of Great Price Lectures on Faith (In canon of Fundamentalists and some Prarie Saints) Book of the Law of the Lord (Strangites only) The Word of the Lord ( Fettingites and offshoots) Founders and leaders Joseph Smith outline Oliver Cowdery Sidney Rigdon Brigham Young Joseph Smith III James Strang William Bickerton Granville Hedrick Alpheus Cutler LDS denominations The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints outline Community of Christ Restoration Branches Bickertonite Strangite Hedrickite Fellowships of the Remnant Mormon fundamentalism FLDS Church Apostolic United Brethren Doctrines and practices Articles of Faith Confirmation Early views on death Gifts of the Spirit Views on God Islam and Mormonism Judaism and Mormonism Priesthood Restoration Revelation Temples Tithing Women and Mormonism Word of Wisdom Controversies Criticism Polygamy origin Black people and Mormonism Violence Historicity of the Book of Mormon origin archaeology List of prophecies of Joseph Smith Books List of denominations LDS Church Community of Christ Book of Mormon Books of the Book of Mormon Joseph Smith Mormonism and polygamy Latter Day Saints Portal v t e Bible lists In general Animals Artifacts in biblical archaeology Burial places of figures Commentaries English translations Figures identified in extra-biblical sources Films based on the Bible Major figures Minor figures, A–K Minor figures, L–Z Minor tribes Modern names for place names Nations Names A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V Y Z Names for the nameless People in the Bible and the Qu'ran Places Place names in North America Plants Precious stones Stories Translations by language Translations into Celtic languages Translations into Native American languages Verses not included in modern translations Women Old Testament Capital crimes in the Torah Events Manuscriptes Non-canonical books Pseudepigrapha Tithes New Testament Church Fathers Events in the Canonical Gospels Gospels Jesus Names and titles of Jesus Latin manuscripts Lectionaries Major textual variants Minuscules (1–1000) Minuscules (1001–2000) Minuscules (2001–) Non-canonical books Papyri Uncials Portal:Bible v t e Religious texts Antiquity Pyramid Texts (Egyptian religion) Vedas (Hinduism) Agamas (Jainism) Avesta (Zoroastrian) Tao Te Ching (Taoist) Tripiṭaka (Buddhist) Hebrew Bible (Judaism, Christianity) Samaritan Torah (Samaritanism) Deuterocanon (Roman Catholicism, Eastern Christianity) Metamorphoses (Roman polytheism) New Testament (Christianity) Nag Hammadi library (Gnosticism) Talmud (Judaism) Theogony (Greek polytheism) Upanishads (Hinduism) Enneads (Neoplatonism) Divine Liturgy (Eastern Christianity) Medieval Puranas (Hinduism) Puya (Sanamahism) Quran (Islam) Kojiki (Shinto) Ambrosian Hymnal (Roman Catholicism) Hadith (Islam) Summa Theologica (Roman Catholicism) Early modern Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh) Luther's Large Catechism (Lutheranism) Augsburg Confession (Protestantism) Heidelberg Catechism (Protestantism) Book of Common Prayer (Anglicanism) Roman Missal (Roman Catholicism) Roman Catechism (Roman Catholicism) Modern Book of Mormon (Mormonism, 1830) Ofudesaki (Tenrikyo, 1869) Kitáb-i-Aqdas (Baha'i, 1873) Liber AL vel Legis (Thelemite, 1904) Book of Shadows (Wiccan, 1950) Dianetics (Scientologist, 1950) The Satanic Bible (Satanist, 1969) Geniocracy (Raelian, 1977) Catechism (Roman Catholicism) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125