This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The coat of arms of the House of Visconti showing the biscione. The biscione[a] ("grass snake"), also less commonly known as the vipera[b] ("viper"), is a heraldic charge showing on argent an azure serpent in the act of consuming a human (usually a child and sometimes described as a Moor or an Ottoman Turk). It is a historic symbol of the city of Milan. Contents 1 History 2 Contemporary use 3 Similar symbols 4 Coats of arms, flags and symbols bearing the biscione 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links History[edit] The bronzed serpent brought to Milan from Constantinople in the 11th century, today in the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio, is thought to have inspired the biscione. The word biscione is a masculine augmentative of Italian feminine biscia "grass snake" (corrupted from bistia, ultimately from Latin bestia "beast"). The charge became associated with the city after the Visconti family gained control over Milan 1277; Bonvesin da la Riva records it in his De magnalibus urbis Mediolani (On the Marvels of the City of Milan) as a Visconti symbol no later than the end of the 13th century.[1] The symbol may in turn have been derived from a bronzed serpent brought to Milan from Constantinople by Arnolf II of Arsago (Archbishop of Milan 998-1018) in the 11th century.[2] The biscione remained associated with the Duchy of Milan even after the Visconti line died out in the 15th century.[3] The House of Sforza incorporated the symbol into their armorial after taking the duchy. Contemporary use[edit] As a symbol of Milan, the biscione is used by multiple organizations associated with or based in the city. Football club Inter Milan is commonly represented by a biscione, and the team's 2010–11 away shirt prominently featured the symbol. Milan-based auto manufacturer Alfa Romeo (also known as the Casa del Biscione, Italian for "House of the Biscione" or "Biscione['s] marque") includes a biscione in its logo impaled with a red cross on white (derived from the flag of Milan), as does espresso machine manufacturer Bezzera. Silvio Berlusconi, who was born and remains based in Milan, uses stylized biscione symbols in the logos for his companies Mediaset and Fininvest (with the child replaced by a flower); his residential zones Milano Due and Milano Tre and the Mediaset-owned television channel Canale 5 all also use biscione-inspired imagery. Outside Milan, a similar design is found in the seals of the Hungarian nobleman Nicholas I Garai, palatine to the King of Hungary (1375–1385). Here the crowned snake devours a sovereign's orb, rather than a human.[4] The arms of the towns of Sanok in Poland and Pruzhany in Belarus also feature the symbol, honoring the marriage of Bona Sforza to Sigismund I of Poland while both towns were part of Poland–Lithuania. The band Lacuna Coil used a biscione for the Black Anima album cover artwork[5] and limited edition tarot cards. Similar symbols[edit] Comparable to the biscione are some depictions of the Hindu deity Matsya. While his form is referred to as anthropomorphically having a humanoid upper half, and his lower half as that of a fish, some depictions show him with his upper body emerging from the mouth of a fish. In early Christian art of the catacombs, the Old Testament prophet Jonah is depicted as a man being swallowed by a serpent-like Leviathan, a sea creature of Hebrew myth. Coats of arms, flags and symbols bearing the biscione[edit] The early arms of the Duchy of Milan under the House of Visconti. The coronet on the snake distinguishes this variant from the plain arms of the Visconti family. The coat of arms of the House of Sforza, featuring two biscioni and two Reichsadlers (Imperial Eagles symbolizing the German and Austrian domination over Lombardy). The flag of the Duchy of Milan, also featuring two biscioni and two Imperial Eagles. A variation of the previous: the arms of Galeazzo Maria Sforza, as inside the Sforza Castle. Bona Sforza's seal, bearing similarities to the other Sforza symbols. Coat of arms of the Sforza and Caravaggio houses, as in the German-language book Wernigeroder (Schaffhausensches) Wappenbuch. The blason of the Duchy of Montbazon. The arms of Ortensio Visconti, Bishop of Lodi. The coat of arms of Napoleon's Kingdom of Italy, including many symbols of Italian cities and the Imperial Eagle. The coat of arms of the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia (an Austrian crown land) quartered the biscione with the Venetian Lion of Saint Mark. The biscione as a symbol of Milan, seen here at the Milano Centrale railway station. The coat of arms (the flag is very similar) of Sanok, bearing the biscione due to Bona Sforza. The official seal of Pruzany (also featured in its flag), also bearing the biscione due to Bona. Depiction of the biscione swallowing a child, the coat of arms of the House of Visconti, on the Archbishop's palace in Piazza Duomo in Milan, Italy. The city of Bellinzona in the Swiss canton of Ticino. See also[edit] Flag of Milan Guivre History of Milan Basilisk Leviathan Ouroboros Notes[edit] ^ Italian: [biʃˈʃoːne], plural: biscioni; Milanese: bissa [ˈbisa] or bisson [biˈsũː]. ^ Italian: [ˈviːpera], plural: vipere. References[edit] ^ Reina (2018), p. 68 harvp error: no target: CITEREFReina2018 (help) ^ Reina (2018), p. 69 harvp error: no target: CITEREFReina2018 (help) ^ Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1909). A Complete Guide to Heraldry: Illustrated by Nine Plates and Nearly 800 Other Designs. London: T.C. & E.C. Jack. ISBN 0-517-26643-1. LCCN 09023803. Page 257 ^ Csaba, Veress D. (2007). István, Hermann (ed.). Ugod. Száz magyar falu könyvesháza (One Hundred Hungarian Villages) (in Hungarian). Budapest.: magyar állam millenniumára. Elektronikus megjelenítés: NKÖEOK Szerkesztőség. ^ Tilkin, Laureline (2019). "Interview with Lacuna Coil – "It's important to know who you are and where you come from" – Tuonela Magazine". Tuonela Magazine – Finnish Metal Magazine Based in Helsinki. Retrieved 2020-05-24. Bibliography[edit] Reina, Gabriele (2018). Le imprese araldiche dei Visconti e degli Sforza (1277-1535): Storia, storia dell'arte, repertorio [The heraldic achievements of the Visconti and the Sforza (1277-1535): History, artistic change, and inventory] (PDF) (in Italian). Lausanne: Université de Lausanne, Faculté des lettres, Section d'histoire de l'art. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coats of arms of the House of Visconti. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) v t e Visconti of Milan Lords and dukes of Milan Ottone, archbishop (1277–1294) Matteo I (1294–1302; 1311–1322) Galeazzo I (1322–1327) Azzone (1329–1339) Luchino I (1339–1349) Giovanni, archbishop (1349–1354) Bernabò (1354–1385) Galeazzo II (1354–1378) Matteo II (1354–1355) Gian Galeazzo (1378–1402) Giovanni Maria (1402–1412) Filippo Maria (1412–1447) Bianca Maria, daughter of Filippo Maria and wife of Francesco I Sforza Valentina, daughter of Gian Galeazzo and grandmother of Louis XII of France Archbishops of Milan Ottone (1262–1295) Giovanni II (1342–1354) Roberto (1354–1361) Giovanni III (1450–1453) Gaspare (1584–1595) Federico II (1681–1693) Filippo Maria (1784–1801) Castles Abbiategrasso Angera Bereguardo Binasco Cassano d'Adda Castelletto sopra Ticino Cherasco Cislago Crenna Cusago Fagnano Olona Galliate Invorio Jerago Legnano Locarno Lodi Massino Milan Mirabello Novara Oleggio Castello Pagazzano Pandino Pavia Somma Lombardo Trezzo sull'Adda Vercelli Vigevano Voghera Vogogna Related topics Biscione Hours of Gian Galeazzo Visconti Trezzo sull'Adda Bridge Visconti Park Visconti-Sforza tarot deck v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources This heraldry-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a legendary creature is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e