This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (November 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Blood Ransom Film poster Directed by Francis dela Torre Produced by Albert Chang Barclay DeVeau Francis dela Torre Kim Coleman Ted Manotoc Derrick Santos Screenplay by Francis dela Torre Based on Original Material Starring Anne Curtis Alexander Dreymon Music by Albert Chang Cinematography Francis dela Torre Jasmin Kuhn Edited by Thomas Apolonio Production company Tectonic Films Distributed by Tectonic Films VIVA Films Release date October 29, 2014 (2014-10-29) (Philippines) October 31, 2014 (2014-10-31) (United States) Country United States Language English Box office P80 million Blood Ransom is a 2014 independent American thriller vampire romance film directed by Francis dela Torre and starring Anne Curtis and Alexander Dreymon. The film was produced by Tectonic Films. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] Crystal is a beautiful yet fragile girl in her early twenties. But something dark and brooding burns inside her and she fights to hold it back. She falls for the charms of the equally beautiful bad boy and criminal, Roman. He lures her into a life of “sin.” And she follows him. But when that life turns deadly, she regrets her choice. One day she wakes up and realizes that Roman has turned her into a monster. She is now trapped in a life she cannot escape. Until she inadvertently finds a way out through a young nobody named Jeremiah, who works for Roman as a driver. She manages to “escape” from Roman through a foolish kidnapping plot that goes wrong. Jeremiah and Crystal subsequently begin a dangerous love affair and devise a crazy plan that can make her human again. But Roman sends his cold-blooded henchman, Bill, to hunt them down. Crystal is now faced with a deadly choice: she can kill Jeremiah to live, or follow an impossible plan that can turn her soul human again, so that she can be with the man with whom she has fallen in love. Cast[edit] Anne Curtis as Crystal[1] Alexander Dreymon as Jeremiah Caleb Hunt as Roman Jamie Harris as Bill Darion Basco as Daniel Clifton Powell as Detective Hobbs Vanessa Evigan as Anna Emily Skinner as Emily Hudson Suzette Ranillo as Tita Paz Kevin Meaney as Mr. Manningham Jon Jon Briones as Father Mena Dion Basco as Oliver Sam J. Warner as Arnie Natalina Maggio as Ianne Clayton Rohner as Rich White Guy Melody Butiu as Angel Carol Jones as Nora Alli Cripe as Sasha Faleolo Alailima as Bouncer Adam Gifford as Max Barclay DeVeau as Detective Kuber Reception[edit] The film received a mixed response from critics, but garnered praises from audiences, citing the film's dark and gritty take on the vampire mythology as one of the factors that made this film stand up from the rest of the genre. References[edit] ^ "'Blood Ransom' holds star-studded premiere". Abs-cbnnews.com. Retrieved 4 November 2014. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes This article about a 2010s thriller film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e