American horror website and film company This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (October 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Bloody Disgusting Screenshot Screenshot of Bloody Disgusting 10 April 2019 Type of site Online horror genre-related database and reviewer Available in English Country of origin United States Owner The Collective Created by Brad Miska Tom Owen URL bloody-disgusting.com Commercial Yes Launched 2001 Current status Active Bloody Disgusting is an American horror genre website covering horror films, television, video games, comics, and music. It is also known for producing the V/H/S trilogy of anthology horror films. Contents 1 History 2 Film production 3 Bloody Disgusting Selects 4 References 5 External links History[edit] Bloody Disgusting was founded in 2001 by Brad Miska (under the pseudonym "Mr. Disgusting") and Tom Owen,[1] who run the site along with current managing editor John Squires. By 2007, the site had 1.5 million unique visitors and 20 million page views each month.[2] In September 2007 a minority stake was purchased by The Collective, a Beverly Hills–based management company.[3] In 2011 Bloody Disgusting began distributing and producing films[4] that have gone on to win awards and spawned the successful V/H/S franchise. In 2017 Bloody Disgusting bought out The Collective and is currently operating as an independently owned company.[citation needed] Bloody Disgusting has worked on projects with genre writers, directors, and actors including Adam Wingard, Simon Barrett, David Bruckner, Roxanne Benjamin, Joe Swanberg, AJ Bowen, Amy Seimetz, TI West, Radio Silence, Glenn McQuaid, Steven C Miller, Jonny Weston, Jason Eisner, Eduardo Sanchez, Greg Hale, Gareth Evans, Timo Tjahjanto, Marcel Sarmiento, Nacho Vigalondo, Patrick Horvath, Sion Sono, and Trent Haaga.[citation needed] Film production[edit] As Bloody Disgusting grew, it evolved into a film production company, releasing horror genre favorites and award-winning films. V/H/S – premiered at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival V/H/S/2 – premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival V/H/S: Viral – premiered at the 2014 Fantastic Fest film festival Under The Bed – premiered at the 2012 Fantasia International Film Festival A Horrible Way to Die – premiered at the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival. It also played at Fantastic Fest where it received three major awards: Best Screenplay for Simon Barrett, Best Actor for AJ Bowen and Best Actress for Amy Seimetz. Southbound – premiered at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival Honeydew – premiered at the 2020 Nightstream Film Festival Bloody Disgusting Selects[edit] In 2011, Bloody Disgusting partnered with AMC Networks and The Collective to create a distribution company named Bloody Disgusting Selects, releasing genre films in AMC theaters and on DVD, Blu-ray and VOD platforms. Films distributed via Bloody Disgusting Selects films are:[5] Alyce Kills Atrocious Blood Runs Cold Chop Cold Fish Crawl Delivery Exit Humanity Faust: Love of the Damned Fever Night aka Band of Satanic Outsiders The Haunting of Helena Hellacious Acres Macabre Outcast The Pack Phase 7 Rammbock Truth or Dare The Woman YellowBrickRoad References[edit] ^ "Site of the Week: Bloody-Disgusting". AMC. ^ Hefflinger, Mark (13 September 2007). "The Collective Buys Horror Film Site Bloody-Disgusting.com". DMW Daily. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 2007-11-09. ^ Graser, Marc (12 September 2007). "Collective nabs Bloody-Disgusting". Variety. Retrieved 2007-11-09. ^ Zeitchik, Steve (2011-10-14). "Horror site Bloody Disgusting now a movie producer, distributor". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Retrieved 2018-07-11. ^ Donato, Matt (2012). "Bloody Disgusting Selects: This Is Only The Beginning". We Got This Covered. External links[edit] Official website