Not to be confused with Am Bodach. A bodach (Scottish Gaelic pronunciation: [ˈpɔt̪əx]; plural bodaich "old man; rustic, churl, lout"; Old Irish botach) is a trickster or bogeyman figure in Gaelic folklore and mythology. The bodach "old man" is paired with the cailleach "hag, old woman" in Irish legend. Contents 1 Name 2 In Gaelic folklore 3 References in popular culture 4 See also 5 References Name[edit] Bodach (Old Irish also botach) is the Irish word for a tenant, a serf or peasant. It is derived from bod (Old Irish bod) "tail, penis".[1] The word has alternatively been derived from both "cottage, hut" (probably a borrowing from Old Norse, as is English booth). The term botach "tenant farmer" is thus equivalent to a cotter (the cotarius of the Domesday Book); a daer botach was a half-free peasant of a lower class.[2] In either case, the name is formed by the addition of nominal suffix -ach ("connected or involved with, belonging to, having"). In modern Gaelic, bodach simply means "old man", often used affectionately.[3] In the Echtra Condla, one "Boadach the Eternal" is king of Mag Mell. This name is derived from buadhach "victorious" and unrelated to botach in origin. However, the two names may have become associated by the early modern period, as Manannan is also named king of Mag Mell, and the bodach figure in Eachtra Bhodaigh an Chóta Lachtna (17th century) is in turn identified with Manannan. *Buzdākos is the reconstructed Proto-Celtic form of Old Irish Botach and an element in the name of the Badacsony wine region in Hungary. The name dates back to at least 1000BC but is likely much older. In Gaelic folklore[edit] In modern Gaelic (Scottish and Irish) folklore, the bodach or "old man" becomes a type of bugbear, to the point of being identified with the devil. In the early modern (16th or 17th century) tale Eachtra Bhodaigh an Chóta Lachtna, the bodach is identified with the Manannán mac Lir. This identification inspired Lady Gregory's tale "Manannan at Play" (Gods and Fighting Men, 1904), where Manannan makes an appearance in disguise as "a clown ... old striped clothes he had, and puddle water splashing in his shoes, and his sword sticking out naked behind him, and his ears through the old cloak that was over his head, and in his hand he had three spears of hollywood scorched and blackened." In Scottish folklore the bodach comes down the chimney to kidnap naughty children, used as a cautionary tale or bogeyman figure to frighten children into good behaviour.[4][5] A related being known as the Bodach Glas ("Dark Grey Man") is considered an omen of death.[5][6] In Walter Scott's novel, Waverley, Fergus Mac-Ivor sees a Bodach Glas, which foretells his death. In W. B. Yeats's 1903 prose version of The Hour-Glass, the character of the Fool remarks at one point during the play that a bodach he met upon the roadside attempted to trick him with a riddle into letting the creature near his coin. References in popular culture[edit] Bodachs are seen at the beginning of Moonshine by Rob Thurman. Bodachs occasionally appear in Charles de Lint's books of mythic fiction. The term Bodach is used to describe shadow-like or "ink like" creatures—invisible to most people—that appear at locations before disasters in the books Odd Thomas, Forever Odd, Brother Odd, Odd Hours, Odd Apocalypse, Odd Interlude, Deeply Odd, and Saint Odd by Dean Koontz. These can be seen only by Odd. Bodachs appear as evil goblin spearmen, in Alan Garner's fantasy novel The Moon of Gomrath, in which they have shining bald heads, bodies covered in flat locks of hair and the legs of birds. See also[edit] Bodak, an undead creature in the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game Brownie (folklore), a domestic spirit in British folklore Cailleach, a divine hag, a creator deity, a weather deity, and an ancestor deity in Gaelic mythology Wirry-cow, a bugbear or demon in Scottish folklore References[edit] ^ [edil.qub.ac.uk/dictionary/index.php?letter=B&column=148 DIL B 148.77]: "botach o, m. (1 bot [='tail, penis') bodach m., IGT Decl. § 11 (54.10)'serf; rustic, peasant': S. ... do marbad do b.¤ ina tig fein, Ann. Conn. 1388.4 (= churle, Annals of Clonmacnoise, 80 FM iv 712.2 note). echtra ... bhodaig in chóta lachtna 'Carle of the Drab Coat', SG 296.7. fomhór boduigh a churlish giant (?), IGT Decl. ex. 1277. síol an bhodaig peasant offspring , ZCP v 221.6 (Midn. Court)." MacBain, A. An Etymological Dictionary of the Gaelic Language (1896), p. 42: "bodach, an old man, a carle, Ir. bodach, a rustic, carle; bodd-aco- 'penitus,' [= having a tail], from bod, mentula [=penis], M[iddle] G[aelic] bod (D. of Lismore passim), M[iddle] Ir[ish] bod, bot, *boddo-, bozdo-; Gr[eek] πόσθη, 'mentula'. Stoke suggests the alternative form butto-s, Gr[eek] βύττος, vulva, but the G[aelic] d is against this. He also suggests that bodach is formed on the O[ld] Fr[ench] botte 'a clod'." ^ Charles McLean Andrews, The Old English Manor (1892), p. 72 Archived October 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ Dunkling, Leslie (June 27, 1990). A dictionary of epithets and terms of address. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-00761-0. ^ Wright, Elizabeth Mary (1913). Rustic Speech and Folklore. Oxford University Press. p. 198. ^ a b Briggs, Katharine (1976). An Encyclopedia of Fairies. Pantheon Books. p. 29. ISBN 0394409183. ^ Henderson, William (1879). Folklore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders (2nd ed.). W. Satchell, Peyton & Co. p. 344. v t e Celtic mythology series Creatures in Scottish mythology and folklore Beasts Beithir Gigelorum Birds Boobrie Deities Beira Cailleach Fairies/spirits Aos Sí Baobhan sith Bean nighe Biasd Bheulach Blue men of the Minch Bodach Caoineag Cat sìth Changeling Cù Sìth Each-uisge Fuath Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Kelpie Meg Mullach Nuggle Sea Mither Seonaidh Water bull Giants Fachan Gnomes Pech Goblins/hobgoblins Bauchan Mermaids Ceasg Selkie v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Changeling Fairy godmother Fairy-locks Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale Familiar Household deity Hungry grass Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Notable royal fairies Aibell Clíodhna Fairy Queen Finvarra Gwyn ap Nudd Joan the Wad Morgan le Fay Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Oberon Queen of Elphame Sebile Titania Attested fairies A-E Adhene Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clurichaun Coblynau Cyhyraeth Dames blanches Drow Duende Duergar Dullahan Each-uisge Elf Enchanted Moura F-L Fachan Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Hulder Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Korrigan Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Ly Erg M-Z Mare Meg Mullach Melusine Mermaid Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Nain Rouge Nicnevin Nuckelavee Peg Powler Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Radande Redcap Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Tomte Tooth fairy Troll Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Little people Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Canotila Chaneque Curupira Encantado Ishigaq Jogah Menehune Nawao Nimerigar Nûñnë'hï Pukwudgie Saci Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Irshi Jinn Kijimuna Kodama Korpokkur Oni Orang bunian Peri Tengu Tennin Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Mimis Muldjewangk Patupaiarehe Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Celtic Tuatha Dé Danann Germanic Alberich Dwarf Elegast Erlking Hodekin Hinzelmann Imp King Goldemar Weiße Frauen Greek Dryad Hamadryad Kallikantzaros Lampad Naiad Nereid Nymph Oceanid Oread Potamides Romanic Căpcăun Doñas de fuera Iele Sânziană Spiriduș Squasc Vâlvă Vântoase Xana Zână Slavic Bagiennik & Bannik Berehynia Domovoi Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Likho Polevik Psotnik Rusalka Vila Vodyanoy Cross-cultural Goblin Early & late modern Gnome Gremlin See also Category List of beings referred to as fairies