This article is about the legendary hero. For the Icelandic football player, see Viktor Bjarki Arnarsson. Bödvar Bjarki fights in bear form in his last battle, depicted by Louis Moe. Bödvar Bjarki (Old Norse: Bǫðvarr Bjarki), meaning 'Warlike Little-Bear',[1] is the hero appearing in tales of Hrólf Kraki in the Saga of Hrólf Kraki, in the Latin epitome to the lost Skjöldunga saga, and as Biarco in Saxo Grammaticus' Gesta Danorum.[2] Contents 1 Links with Beowulf 2 Bear-form 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Links with Beowulf[edit] Hrólf Kraki Tradition Hrólf Kraki's saga Ynglinga saga Lejre Chronicle Gesta Danorum Beowulf People Hrólfr Kraki Halfdan Helgi Yrsa Adils Áli Bödvar Bjarki Hjörvard Roar Locations Lejre Uppsala Fyrisvellir Some think Bjarki and the hero Beowulf in the Old English poem Beowulf were originally the same personage, while others instead accept some kinship between the two,[3] perhaps pointing to the same distant source.[4] Unlike Beowulf, Bödvar is a shapeshifter,[5] and he is also said to have been Norwegian, which may be explained by the fact that his story was written by Icelandic authors who were mostly of Norwegian descent. However, his brother was the king of Gautland (Geatland) and, like Beowulf, it was from Geatland that Bödvar arrived in Denmark. Moreover, upon arriving at the court of Denmark, he kills a monstrous beast that has been terrorizing the court at Yule for two years (comparable to Grendel's role in Beowulf). Bear-form[edit] The Old Norse poem Bjarkamál (of which only a few stanzas are preserved but which Saxo Grammaticus presents in the form of a florid Latin paraphrase) is understood as a dialogue between Bödvar Bjarki and his younger companion Hjalti which begins with Hjalti again and again urging Bödvar to awake from his sleep and fight for King Hrólf in this last battle in which they are doomed to be defeated. In the Saga of Hrólf Kraki, it is explained that this rousing was ill-done, as Bjarki was in a trance and his spirit in the form of a monstrous bear was already aiding Hrólf far more than Bjarki could do with only his human strength: as Bjarki puts it on awakening, "You have not been so helpful to the king by this action of yours as you think".[6] See also[edit] Bear's Son Tale Beorn Kvedulf Bjalfason Origins for Beowulf and Hrólf Kraki References[edit] ^ Jesse Byock (1999), The Saga of King Hrolf Kraki, Penguin Classics, ISBN 014043593X, p. 83. ^ J. D. Rateliff, Mr Baggins (London 2007) p. 281 ^ Tom Shippey, J. R. R. Tolkien (London 2001) p. 31 ^ C. R. Fee, Gods, Heroes & Kings (OUP 2004) P. 155 ^ T. A. Shippey, The Road to Middle-Earth (London 1992) p. 73 ^ "King Hrolf and His Champions" (Saga of Hrólf Kraki), trans. Gwyn Jones, Eirik the Red and Other Icelandic Sagas, The World's Classics 582, London: Oxford University Press, 1961, OCLC 1140302366, p. 314 Further reading[edit] F. Klauber ed., Beowulf and the Fight at Finnsburg (Boston 1950) p. xiiiff. v t e Norse paganism and mythology Deities and other figures Æsir Baldr Bragi Dellingr Forseti Heimdallr Hermóðr Höðr Hœnir Ítreksjóð Lóðurr Loki Máni Meili Mímir Móði and Magni Odin Óðr Thor Týr Ullr Váli Víðarr Vili and Vé Ásynjur Bil Eir (valkyrie) Frigg Fulla Gefjon Gerðr Gná Hlín Iðunn Ilmr Irpa Lofn Nanna Njörun Rán Rindr Sága Sif Sigyn Sjöfn Skaði Snotra Sól Syn Þorgerðr Hölgabrúðr Þrúðr Vár Vör Vanir Freyja Freyr Ingunar-Freyr Yngvi Gersemi Gullveig Hnoss Kvasir Njörðr Sister-wife of Njörðr Jötnar Ægir Alvaldi Angrboða Aurboða Baugi Beli Bergelmir Bestla Bölþorn Býleistr Eggþér Fárbauti Fjölvar Fornjót Gangr Geirröðr Gillingr Gjálp and Greip Gríðr Gunnlöð Gymir Harðgreipr Helblindi Helreginn Hljod Hræsvelgr Hrímgerðr Hrímgrímnir Hrímnir Hroðr Hrungnir Hrymr Hymir Hyrrokkin Iði Ím Járnsaxa Laufey Leikn Litr Logi Mögþrasir Narfi Sökkmímir Surtr Suttungr Þjazi Þökk Þrívaldi Þrúðgelmir Þrymr Útgarða-Loki Vafþrúðnir Váli Víðblindi Vosud Vörnir Ymir Dwarfs Alvíss Andvari Billingr Brokkr Dáinn Durinn Dúrnir Dvalinn Eitri Fafnir Fjalar and Galar Gandalf Hreiðmarr Litr Mótsognir Norðri, Suðri, Austri and Vestri Ótr Regin Sons of Ivaldi Heroes Egil Arngrim Áslaug Björn Járnsíða Böðvarr Bjarki Brynhildr Fjölnir Guðmundr Hagbarðr Haki Heiðrekr Helgi Haddingjaskati Helgi Hjörvarðsson Helgi Hundingsbane Hervör Hjalmar and Ingeborg Hlöðr Höðbroddr Hrólfr Kraki Ingjald Jónakr's sons Lagertha Örvar-Oddr Palnatoke Ragnarr Loðbrók Rerir Sigmund Sigurðr Svafrlami Sinfjötli Starkaðr Styrbjörn the Strong Svipdagr Völsung Vésteinn Others Ask and Embla Auðumbla Aurvandill Beyla Borr Búri Byggvir Dísir (Landdísir) Einherjar Eldir Elves Dark elves (Dökkálfar) Light elves (Ljósálfar) Black elves (Svartálfar) Fimafeng Fjalar (rooster) Fenrir Fjörgyn and Fjörgynn Fylgja Garmr Gullinbursti Hati Hróðvitnisson Hel Hildisvíni Hjúki Horses of the Æsir Árvakr and Alsviðr Blóðughófi Falhófnir Gísl Glaðr Glær Glenr Grani Gullfaxi Gulltoppr Gyllir Hamskerpir and Garðrofa Hófvarpnir Skinfaxi and Hrímfaxi Sleipnir Svaðilfari Jafnhárr Jörð Jörmungandr Móðguðr Nine Daughters of Ægir and Rán Nine Mothers of Heimdallr Narfi and Nari Níðhöggr Norns Personifications Dagr Elli Nótt Sumarr and Vetr Skírnir Sköll Shield-maiden Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr Þjálfi and Röskva Vættir (Landvættir) Valkyries Völundr Vörðr Locations Underworld Hel (heimr) Éljúðnir Gjallarbrú Náströnd Niflhel Niðafjöll Rivers Élivágar Gjöll Ífingr Kerlaugar Körmt and Örmt Slidr River Vadgelmir Vimur River Other locations Asgard Amsvartnir Andlang Barri Bifröst Bilskirnir Brávellir Brimir Fensalir Fólkvangr Fornsigtuna Fyrisvellir Gálgviðr Gandvik Gastropnir Gimlé Ginnungagap Glaðsheimr Glæsisvellir Glitnir Gnipahellir Grove of fetters Heiðr Himinbjörg Hindarfjall Hlidskjalf Hnitbjorg Hoddmímis holt Iðavöllr Járnviðr Mímameiðr Myrkviðr Munarvágr Nóatún Okolnir Sessrúmnir Sindri Singasteinn Þrúðheimr Þrúðvangr Þrymheimr Uppsala Útgarðar Valaskjálf Valhalla Vanaheimr Víðbláinn Vígríðr Vingólf Wells Hvergelmir Mímisbrunnr Urðarbrunnr Ýdalir Yggdrasil Events Æsir–Vanir War Fimbulvetr Ragnarök Hjaðningavíg Sources Gesta Danorum Poetic Edda Prose Edda Runestones Sagas Tyrfing Cycle Völsung Cycle Old Norse language Orthography Later influence Society Blót Ergi Félag Galdr Germanic calendar Goði Hamingja Heiti Hörgr Kenning Mead hall Nīþ Norse cosmology Norse pagan worship Numbers Philosophy Runes Sacred trees and groves in Germanic paganism and mythology Seiðr Skald Viking Age Völva See also Norse gods Norse giants Norse dwarfs Mythological Norse people, items and places Germanic paganism Heathenry (new religious movement)