Member of the Scouting movement "Boy Scout" redirects here. For other uses, see Boy Scout (disambiguation). For other uses, see Scout (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Scouts coming from various nations sing at the European Jamboree 2005. A Scout (in some countries a Boy Scout, Girl Scout, or Pathfinder) is a child, usually 10–18 years of age, participating in the worldwide Scouting movement. Because of the large age and development span, many Scouting associations have split this age group into a junior and a senior section. Scouts are organized into troops averaging 20–30 Scouts under the guidance of one or more Scout Leaders. Troops subdivide into patrols of about 6–8 Scouts and engage in outdoor and special interest activities. Troops may affiliate with local, national, and international organizations. Some national Scouting associations have special interest programs such as Air Scouts, Sea Scouts, outdoor high adventure, Scouting bands, and rider Scouts. Contents 1 Foundation 1.1 Age groups and sections 2 Activities 2.1 Fellowship 2.2 Personal progression 3 Unit affiliation 3.1 Troop 3.2 Patrol 3.3 Group 4 Uniforms 5 See also 6 References Foundation[edit] Main article: Scouting After the Second Boer War boys showed considerable interest in Aids to Scouting, a book about military scouting and wilderness survival written by a hero from that war, Robert Baden-Powell.[1] The book was also used by teachers and youth organizations for instruction and play. Inspired by that interest Baden-Powell wrote Scouting for Boys for boy readership, which describes the Scout method of outdoor activities aiming at developing character, citizenship training, and personal fitness qualities among youth.[2] At the time, Baden-Powell intended that the scheme would be used by established organizations, in particular the Boys' Brigade.[3] However, because of the popularity of his person and the adventurous outdoor games he wrote about, boys spontaneously formed Scout patrols. Over time, the Scout programme has been reviewed and updated in many of the countries where it is run, and special interest programmes developed such as Air Scouts, Sea Scouts, outdoor high adventure, Scouting bands and rider Scouts, but the same core values and principles as Baden-Powell originally envisaged still apply. Age groups and sections[edit] Main article: Age Groups in Scouting and Guiding Originally, the Scout program was aimed at 11- to 16-year-old boys. However, the younger brothers of Scouts started to attend Troop meetings, and so the Wolf Cub section was started. It was also evident that young girls wanted to participate in similar activities, but the Edwardian values at the time would not allow young boys and girls to "rough and tumble" together, causing the Guide Movement to be created. While most Scouts may join a troop after finishing Cub Scouts, this is not required. As Scouts get older, they often seek more challenging and diverse activities. He may later join another affiliated program for older children, such as Exploring, Venturing, or Rovering. Activities[edit] Main article: Scout method Scouts at a campfire ring at summer camp. A Scout learns the cornerstones of the Scout method, Scout Promise, and Scout Law. These are designed to instill character, citizenship, personal fitness, and leadership in boys through a structured program of outdoor activities.[4][5] Common ways to implement the Scout method include spending time together in small groups with shared experiences, rituals, and activities, as well as emphasizing good citizenship and decision-making that are age-level appropriate. Cultivating a love and appreciation of the outdoors and outdoor activities are key elements. Primary activities include camping, woodcraft, first aid, aquatics, hiking, backpacking, and sports. Fellowship[edit] Camping most often occurs on a unit level, such as in the troop, but there are periodic camporees and jamborees. Camporees are events where units from a local area camp together for a weekend. These often occur a couple times a year and usually have a theme, such as pioneering. Jamborees are large events on a national or international level held every four years where thousands of Scouts camp together for one to two weeks. Activities at these events include games, Scoutcraft competitions, patch trading, aquatics, woodcarving, archery, and rifle and shotgun shooting. For many Scouts, the highlight of the year is spending at least a week in the summer as part of an outdoor activity. This can be a long event such as camping, hiking, sailing, canoeing, or kayaking with the unit or a summer camp operated on a council, state, or provincial level. Scouts attending a summer camp, generally one week during the summer, work on merit badges, advancement, and perfecting Scoutcraft skills. Some summer camps operate specialty programs, such as sailing, backpacking, canoeing and whitewater, caving, and fishing. Personal progression[edit] A large part, compared to younger and older sections, of the activities are related to personal progression. All Scouting organizations have an advancement program, whereby the Scout learns Scoutcraft, community service, leadership, and explores areas of interest to him. This Badge system or Personal Progressive Scheme is based on two complementary elements: Proficiency (Merit) badges, which are intended to encourage the Scout to learn a subject which could be his work or hobby, so cover many different types of activities, not always related to Scouting. Class badges or Progress system, which symbolize increasingly difficult levels or successive stages. Most Scouting associations have a highest badge that require mastering Scoutcraft, leadership, and performing community service. Only a small percentage of Scouts attain them. Unit affiliation[edit] Troop[edit] Main article: Scout troop A group of Australian Scouts hike along a fire trail in a national park. The troop is the fundamental unit of the Scouts. This is the group a Scout joins and via which he participates in Scouting activities, such as camping, backpacking, and canoeing. The troop leadership, youth and adult, organizes and provides support for these activities. It may include as few as a half-dozen Scouts, or as many as seventy or more. Troops usually meet weekly. Patrol[edit] Each troop is divided into patrols of around five to ten Scouts. A patrol's independence from the troop varies among troops and between activities. For instance, a troop typically holds ordinary meetings as a unit. Patrols' autonomy becomes more visible at campouts, where each patrol may set up its own area for cooking and camping. However, on a high adventure trip which only a small part of the troop attends, divisions between patrols may disappear entirely. Patrols may hold meetings and even excursions separately from the rest of the troop, but this is more common in some troops than in others.[6] Each patrol has a Patrol Leader (PL) and Patrol Second (PS), or Assistant Patrol Leader (APL). Some troops mix older and younger Scouts in the same patrols, so that the older Scouts can teach the younger ones more effectively, other troops group Scouts by age, so that the members of one patrol have more in common. Group[edit] Main article: Scout Group In most countries a local organisation, a "Scout Group", combines different sections together into a single body. Scout Groups can consist of any number of sections of the different Age Groups in Scouting and Guiding. Scout Groups can be single sex or have boys and girls in separate and/or mixed-sex sections depending on the group and the national organization. In some countries, the different sections are independent of each other, although they might be sponsored or chartered by the same organisation, such as a church. Uniforms[edit] Alfonso XIII wearing a boy scout uniform, c. 1920 The Scout uniform is a specific characteristic of Scouting, and is worn at most events. The original uniform, which has created a familiar image in the public eye and had a very military appearance, consisted of a khaki button-up shirt, shorts, and a broad-brimmed campaign hat. Uniforms have become much more functional and colorful since the beginning and are now frequently blue, orange, red, or green, and shorts are replaced by long trousers in areas where the culture calls for modesty, and in colder weather. T-shirts and other more casual wear have also replaced the more formal button-up uniforms in many Scouting regions. In some countries Scouts can display their various proficiency (merit) badges on their uniform, while in other countries they can display them on a green sash. To show the unity of all Scouts, the World Membership Badge (World Crest) or another badge with a fleur-de-lis is a part of all uniforms. Neckerchiefs and Woggles (slides) are still quite common, but some Scouting associations do not use them. Patches for leadership positions, ranks, special achievements, patrol- animals, colors or names, troop- or group- numbers or names, and country or regional affiliation are standard. See also[edit] Scouting portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scouting. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) References[edit] ^ "First Scouting Handbook". Order of the Arrow, Boy Scouts of America. Retrieved April 24, 2014. ^ Boehmer, Elleke (2004). Notes to 2004 edition of Scouting for Boys. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ^ Peterson, Robert (Oct 2003). "Another youth organization, the Boys' Brigade, was flourishing when the first official troops of the Boy Scouts of America appeared in 1910". Scouting Magazine. Boy Scouts of America. Retrieved May 22, 2006. ^ "Constitution and By-Laws of the World Organization of the Scout Movement". World Organization of the Scout Movement. January 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 5 April 2012., p. 3-7 ^ "Scouting: An Educational System". World Organization of the Scout Movement. 1998. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 10 July 2006., p. 9 ^ "Troop Organization". US Scouts.org. April 2000. Retrieved 26 July 2006., p. 2-15 v t e Scouting and Guiding topics Movement Scouting Scouting for Boys Scouting Round the World Scout method Scout Law Scout Promise Scout Motto Wood Badge Girl Guides Jamboree World Scout Jamboree Scout Leader Non-aligned organisations Scouting controversy and conflict Traditional Scouting Scouting in popular culture List of Scouts List of highest awards in Scouting Sections Age groups in Scouting and Guiding Beavers Cub Scout Scout Venture Scout Rover Scout Rainbow Guides Brownie Guides Girl Guides Ranger Guides Air Scouts Extension Scouting Lone Scouts Lone Guides Sea Scout Pioneers Robert Baden-Powell Olave Baden-Powell Agnes Baden-Powell Daniel Carter Beard Frederick Russell Burnham Lawrie Dring Bear Grylls William Hillcourt László Nagy Ernest Thompson Seton Jacques Sevin Francis Vane J. S. Wilson Places Baden-Powell House Brownsea Island Edith Macy Conference Center Foxlease Gilwell Park Kandersteg Our Cabaña Our Chalet Pax Hill Pax Lodge Philmont Sangam Scouting memorials Baden-Powell grave Scouting museums International organisations Confederation of European Scouts International Catholic Conference of Scouting International Union of Guides and Scouts of Europe International Scout and Guide Fellowship Order of World Scouts World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts World Federation of Independent Scouts World Organization of Independent Scouts World Organization of the Scout Movement Other B-P's footprint Ging Gang Goolie International Scouting Collectors Association Oldest Scout groups Outdoor education Leave No Trace (outdoor ethics) Tread Lightly! (outdoor ethics) Religion in Scouting Scout handshake Scout prayers Scout sign and salute Scout Spirit Scouting memorabilia collecting The Handbook for Girl Guides The Hackney Scout Song Book The Jungle Book and Scouting The Wolf Cub's Handbook World Scout Emblem World Scout Moot  Scouting portal