This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Bruceploitation (a portmanteau of "Bruce Lee" and "exploitation") is an exploitation film subgenre that emerged after the death of martial arts film star Bruce Lee in 1973, where filmmakers from Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea cast Bruce Lee look-alike actors ("Lee-alikes") to star in imitation martial arts films, in order to exploit Lee's sudden international popularity.[1] Bruce Lee look-alike characters also commonly appear in other media, including anime, comic books, manga and video games. Contents 1 History 2 Actors 3 Film and television 3.1 End of a trend 4 Comics and animation 4.1 Manga and anime 5 Video games 6 Rebirth 7 Partial list of films 8 See also 9 References 10 External links History[edit] When martial arts film star Bruce Lee died on July 20, 1973, he was Hong Kong's most famous martial arts actor. When Enter the Dragon became a box office success worldwide, many Hong Kong studios feared that a movie without their most famous star in it would not be financially successful, and decided to play on Lee's sudden international fame by making movies that vaguely sounded like Bruce Lee starring vehicles, with actors who looked like Lee—changing their screen names to variations of Lee's name, such as Bruce Li and Bruce Le.[2] Actors[edit] After Bruce Lee's death, many actors assumed Lee-like stage names. Bruce Li (黎(Lí)小龍 from his real name Ho Chung Tao (何宗道)), Bruce Chen, Bruce Lai (real name Chang Yi-Tao), Bruce Le (呂(Lǔ)小龍 from his real name Wong Kin Lung), (黃建龍)), Bruce Lie, Bruce Liang (also known as Bruce Leung), Saro Lee, Bruce Ly , Bruce Thai, Brute Lee, Myron Bruce Lee, Lee Bruce, and Bruce Lei/Dragon Lee (real name Moon Kyoung-seok) were hired by studios to play Lee-styled roles.[3] Bruce Li appeared in Bruce Lee Against Supermen, in which he stars as Kato, assistant of the Green Hornet, a role originally played by the real Bruce Lee.[4] Additionally, when some Japanese karate and Korean taekwondo films were dubbed into English for U.S. release, the protagonists were given new Lee-like stage names. Such was the case with Jun Chong (credited as Bruce K. L. Lea in the altered and English-dubbed Bruce Lee Fights Back from the Grave) and Tadashi Yamashita (credited as Bronson Lee in the altered English-dubbed Bronson Lee, Champion). Jackie Chan, who started his movie career as an extra and stunt artist in some of Bruce Lee's movies, was also given roles where he was promoted as the next Bruce Lee as Chan Yuen Lung (with Yuen Lung's stage name borrowed from his fellow Fortunes brother Sammo Hung), such as New Fist of Fury (1976). It was only when he made some comedy-themed movies for another studio that he was able to attain box-office success.[citation needed] In 2001, actor Danny Chan Kwok-kwan sported Lee's look in the Cantonese comedy film Shaolin Soccer. The role landed him to play Lee in the biographical television series The Legend of Bruce Lee. Film and television[edit] Some of the films, such as Re-Enter the Dragon, Enter Three Dragons, Return of Bruce, Enter Another Dragon, Return of the Fists of Fury or Enter the Game of Death, were rehashes of Bruce Lee's classics. Others told Lee's life story and explored his mysteries, such as Bruce Lee’s Secret (a farcical rehash starring Bruce-clone Bruce Li in San Francisco defending Chinese immigrants from thugs), Exit the Dragon, Enter the Tiger (where Bruce Li is asked by Bruce Lee to replace him after his death), and Bruce’s Fist of Vengeance. Other films used his death as a plot element such as The Clones of Bruce Lee (where clones of Bruce Lee portrayed by some of the above actors are created by scientists) or The Dragon Lives Again (where Bruce Lee fights a plethora of fictional characters in Hell such as James Bond and Dracula and finds allies amongst others such as Popeye and Kwai Chang Caine). Others, such as Bruce Lee Fights Back from the Grave, featured Lee imitators but with a plot having nothing to do with Bruce Lee. One of Lee's fight choreographers, actor-director Sammo Hung, famously satirized the phenomenon of Bruceploitation in his 1978 film, Enter the Fat Dragon. Elliott Hong's They Call Me Bruce? satirized the tendency for all male Asian actors (and by extension, male Asians in general) to have to sell themselves as Bruce Lee-types to succeed. One notable film is Fist of Fear, Touch of Death released in 1980. While the real Lee does appear in the movie, it is only through dubbed stock footage.[5] The movie passes itself off as non-fiction, but is indeed fictional. The plot involves a martial arts tournament where the prize is recognition as Lee's successor. This in intertwined with what the movie passes off as the life story of Bruce Lee. The film says that Lee's parents did not want him be an martial artist and he ran away from home to become an actor (In real life, they encouraged his careers).[5] The film conflates China and Japan by stating Lee's martial art was Karate (a Japanese art) instead of Kung Fu (a Chinese art) and that his great-grandfather was a samurai (impossible as samurai are found in Japan, not China).[6] End of a trend[edit] Bruceploitation ended when Jackie Chan made a name for himself with the success of the kung fu comedies Snake in the Eagle’s Shadow and Drunken Master. These films established him as the "new king" of Hong Kong martial arts cinema. Another factor in the end of Bruceploitation was the beginning of the Shaw Brothers film era in the late 1970s, which started with movies such as Five Deadly Venoms. Since the end of the trend, Bruce Lee's influence on Hong Kong action cinema remained strong, but the actors began establishing their own personalities, and the films began to take on a more comedic approach.[7][8] Comics and animation[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The comic book medium also gave birth to several characters inspired by Bruce Lee, most notably in Japanese comics or manga. Paul Gulacy was inspired by Bruce Lee when he drew Marvel Comics's Shang-Chi.[9] Manga and anime[edit] In Tetsuo Hara and Buronson’s influential shōnen manga and anime series Hokuto no Ken, known to Western audiences as Fist of the North Star, the main character Kenshiro was deliberately created by them based on Bruce Lee, combined with influences from the film Mad Max.[10] Kenshiro’s appearance resembles that of Lee, as well as mannerisms inspired by Lee, such as his fighting style and battle cries. Additionally, in Hokuto no Ken’s prequel Souten no Ken, the main character is Kenshiro’s uncle, named Kenshiro Kasumi, who is also modeled after Lee’s physique and mannerisms in the same way as his nephew. Akira Toriyama's influential shonen manga and anime series Dragon Ball was also inspired by Bruce Lee films, such as Enter the Dragon (1973).[11][12] The title Dragon Ball was inspired by Enter the Dragon as well as later Bruceploitation knockoff kung fu movies which frequently had the word "Dragon" in the title.[11] Later, when Toriyama created the Super Saiyan transformation during the Freeza arc, he gave Goku piercing eyes based on Bruce Lee's paralyzing glare.[13] In Masashi Kishimoto’s Naruto manga, the characters Might Guy and Rock Lee were modeled by him after Bruce Lee. Video games[edit] Bruce Lee films such as Game of Death and Enter the Dragon were the foundation for video game genres such as beat 'em up action games and fighting games.[14][15][16] Kung-Fu Master (1984), considered the first beat 'em up game, is based on Lee's Game of Death, with the five-level Devil's Temple reflecting the movie's setting of a five-level pagoda with a martial arts master in each level.[17] Kung-Fu Master in turn served as the prototype for most subsequent martial arts action games in the late 1980s.[18] Datasoft Inc. also released the game Bruce Lee in 1984. The fighting game Yie Ar Kung-Fu (1985) was also inspired by Bruce Lee films, with the main player character Oolong modelled after Lee (like Bruceploitation films). In turn, Yie Ar Kung-Fu established the template for subsequent fighting games.[19] The Street Fighter video game franchise (1987 debut) was inspired by Enter the Dragon, with the gameplay centered around an international fighting tournament, and each character having a unique combination of ethnicity, nationality and fighting style; Street Fighter went on to set the template for all fighting games that followed.[20] Since then, numerous fighting games have featured Bruce Lee look-alike characters, starting with World Heroes which introduced Kim Dragon in 1992.[14] Super Street Fighter II character Fei Long was designed as a homage to Bruce Lee as well. The character Liu Kang in the Mortal Kombat franchise was also modeled after Bruce Lee.[21] The Tekken franchise followed suit with Marshall Law, and just once had him substituted by introducing his son Forest Law. EA Sports UFC includes Bruce Lee as an unlockable character, though it came with the approval of his daughter Shannon. Another notable game that features Bruce Lee is The Dragon, released in 1995 by Ramar International (also called Rinco) and Tony Tech in Taiwan.[22] The game is for the Famicom (better known as the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) in the west) but is not licensed by Nintendo or the Bruce Lee estate. The game's plot is loosely based on the plots of Lee's films and most levels are given titles from them.[23] The game mixes fighting parts with platforming parts and is also noted for stealing graphics from Mortal Kombat (including using Liu Kang to represent Lee), being one of the few Famicom/NES games to have two languages (English and Arabic) available in game and one of the few in Arabic at all.[24] The game's official Arabic title as shown on the title screen is التنين ("Al-Tinneen") and the box also gives the game the Chinese title of 李小龍 ("Lǐ Xiǎolóng", Bruce Lee's name in Chinese) and the alternate title of Lee Dragon.[25] Many other video games have characters based on Lee, although he is rarely credited. Video game characters synonymous with Lee are usually spotted by fighting techniques and signature “jumping stance", physical appearances, clothing, and iconic battle cries and yells similar to those of Lee. Examples include fighting game characters such as Maxi in the Soulcalibur series and Jann Lee in the Dead or Alive series. Rebirth[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (June 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Bruceploitation has continued in the United States in a muted form since the 1970s. Films such as Force: Five, No Retreat, No Surrender, and The Last Dragon used Bruce Lee as a marketing hook, and the genre continues to be a source of exploration for fans of the late Little Dragon and his doppelgangers. Fist of Fear, Touch of Death told a fictional life story of the star. Michael Worth in 2017 began an effort to shine more light on the subject, beginning with helping to produce the first official documentary on the subject with Severin Films. His decade-long writing is set to be the first book on the subject, set for release in 2018 and featuring interviews with many key players. A series of new scanned film prints are also in the works for 2018 and 2019. In May 2010, Carl Jones published the book Here Come the Kung Fu Clones. It focuses on a particular Lee-a-like, Ho Chung Tao, but it also explores the best and worst actors and films that the genre has to offer.[26] In the third season of the 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles animated series, the character of Hun (originally a muscle-bound Caucasian from the 2003 cartoon series) makes his debut, with his appearance and behaviour closely patterned after Bruce Lee.[27] The first Spanish book on the genre by Ivan E. Fernandez Fojón, Bruceploitation. Los clones de Bruce Lee, will be published by Applehead Team Creaciones in November 2017. Stewart Home’s book Re-Enter The Dragon: Genre Theory, Brucesploitation & the Sleazy Joys of Lowbrow Cinema (Ledatape Organisation, Melbourne 2018) “is cleaning up the territory and sharpening the contours of the category of Bruceploitation which as he sees it has not been worked out rigorously enough by early pioneers.”[28] This book appeared after Home made and exhibited an art film meditation on the subject of Bruceploitation for Glasgow International in 2016.[29] Partial list of films[edit] The Pig Boss (Philippines, 1972), starring Ramon Zamora Shadow of the Dragon (Philippines, 1973), starring Ramon Zamora The Game of Death! (Philippines, 1974), starring Ramon Zamora Bruce Lee: A Dragon Story (Hong Kong, 1974), starring Bruce Li Goodbye Bruce Lee: His Last Game of Death (Taiwan, 1975), starring Bruce Li Exit the Dragon, Enter the Tiger (Taiwan/Hong Kong, 1976), starring Bruce Li Bruce Lee Fights Back from the Grave (South Korea, 1976), starring Jun Chong New Fist of Fury (Hong Kong, 1976), a sequel to Fist of Fury starring Jackie Chan The Dragon Lives (Taiwan/Hong Kong, 1976), starring Bruce Li Bruce Lee: The Man, The Myth (Hong Kong, 1976), starring Bruce Li The Dragon Lives Again (Hong Kong, 1977), starring Bruce Leung Fist of Fury II (Hong Kong, 1977), a sequel to Fist of Fury starring Bruce Li; unrelated to New Fist of Fury Return of the Tiger (Hong Kong, 1978), starring Bruce Li Enter the Game of Death (South Korea/Hong Kong, 1978), starring Bruce Le Fist of Fury III (Hong Kong, 1979), starring Bruce Li They Call Him Bruce Lee (Philippines, 1979), starring Jack Lee and Rey Malonzo Kungfu Fever (South Korea/Taiwan, 1979), starring Dragon Lee Fist of Fear, Touch of Death (United States, 1980), starring Bruce Lee (archival footage) and Fred Williamson The Clones of Bruce Lee (South Korea/Hong Kong, 1980), starring Bruce Le, Dragon Lee, Bruce Lai, and Bruce Thai Bruce's Fist of Vengeance (Philippines, 1980), starring Bruce Le Jackie and Bruce to the Rescue (Hong King, 1982), starring Tong Lung Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (United States, 2019), featuring Mike Moh as Bruce Lee See also[edit] Enter the Dragon Bruce Lee filmography List of awards and honors received by Bruce Lee References[edit] ^ "True Game of Death". DVD Talk. Retrieved 2010-12-17. ^ "Bruce Lee Lives On". Wired News. 2007-03-23. Retrieved 2010-12-17. ^ "Lee remembered for more than movies". Business World Online. Archived from the original on 2015-09-23. Retrieved 2010-12-17. ^ Spinegrinder: The Movies Most Critics Won't Write about at Google Books ^ a b SykoGrafix -Fist of Fear, Touch of Death ^ http://www.sykografix.com/articles/article39/index.html ^ David Everitt (August 16, 1996). "Kicking and Screening: Wheels on Meals, Armour of God, Police Story, and more are graded with an eye for action". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 2011-04-12. ^ Bright Lights Film Journal, An Evening with Jackie Chan by Dr. Craig Reid, issue 13, 1994 . Retrieved 1 April 2006. ^ Cooke, Jon B. (February 2000). "A Master of Comics Art - Artist Paul Gulacy and His Early Days at Marvel". Comic Book Artist (7). Archived from the original on 2007-10-21. Retrieved 2018-05-31. ^ "Interview with Buronson". ADV Films Presents: New Fist of the North Star. Archived from the original on 2007-02-18. Retrieved 2010-05-05. ^ a b Dragon Ball Z 孫悟空伝説 [Son Goku Densetsu] (in Japanese). Shueisha. 2003. pp. 90–102. ISBN 978-4-08-873546-7. ^ The Dragon Ball Z Legend: The Quest Continues. DH Publishing Inc. 2004. p. 7. ISBN 9780972312493. ^ "Comic Legends: Why Did Goku's Hair Turn Blonde?". Comic Book Resources. January 1, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2019. ^ a b Gill, Patrick (24 September 2020). "Street Fighter and basically every fighting game exist because of Bruce Lee". Polygon. Retrieved 24 March 2021. ^ Stuart, Keith (April 9, 2014). "Bruce Lee, UFC and why the martial arts star is a video game hero". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2020. ^ Kapell, Matthew Wilhelm (2015). The Play Versus Story Divide in Game Studies: Critical Essays. McFarland & Company. p. 166. ISBN 978-1-4766-2309-2. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved June 10, 2020. ^ Spencer, Spanner (6 February 2008). "The Tao of Beat-'em-ups". Eurogamer. p. 2. Retrieved 20 July 2020. ^ Kunkel, Bill; Worley, Joyce; Katz, Arnie, "The Furious Fists of Sega!", Computer Gaming World, Oct 1988, pp. 48-49 ^ Carroll, Martyn (16 May 2019). "The History Of: Yie Ar Kung-fu". Retro Gamer. Retrieved 10 April 2021. ^ Thrasher, Christopher David (2015). Fight Sports and American Masculinity: Salvation in Violence from 1607 to the Present. McFarland. p. 208. ISBN 978-1-4766-1823-4. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved June 10, 2020. ^ Goldman, Michael & Aaron, Richard E. (1995). "Ed Boon & John Tobias Interview". Official MK3 Kollector's Book. Electronic Gaming Monthly. ^ http://fuji.drillspirits.net/dragon ^ http://fuji.drillspirits.net/dragon ^ http://fuji.drillspirits.net/dragon ^ http://fuji.drillspirits.net/dragon ^ "Here Come The Kung Fu Clones by Carl Jones (Woowums Books) « Mister Trippy". Stewarthomesociety.org. 2012-03-03. Retrieved 2013-02-25. ^ "Every Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Villain, Ranked Worst to Best". ScreenRant. 2016-08-15. Retrieved 2020-07-15. ^ "Stewart Home's Bruceploitation Groove -". 3:AM Magazine. 2018-10-13. Retrieved 2019-06-16. ^ "Stewart Home interview - Glasgow International - The Skinny". www.theskinny.co.uk. Retrieved 2019-06-16. External links[edit] Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Bruceploitation by Keith Dixon Brucesploitation @ The Deuce: Grindhouse Cinema Database Clones of Bruce Lee Here Come the Kung Fu Clones by Carl Jones v t e Bruce Lee Filmography Awards and honors Media about Films As film director The Way of the Dragon (1972) Game of Death (1978) Game of Death Redux (2019) As writer Circle of Iron (1978) Books written Chinese Gung Fu: The Philosophical Art of Self-Defense Tao of Jeet Kune Do Bruce Lee's Fighting Method Bruce Lee Library Techniques Jeet Kune Do One-inch punch Straight blast Works about Films Hong Kong Bruce Lee, the Man and the Legend (1973) Bruce Lee: A Dragon Story (1974) Bruce Lee and I (1976) The Dragon Lives (1976) Bruce Lee: The Man, The Myth (1976) The Real Bruce Lee (1977) Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey (2000) Bruce Lee, My Brother (2010) United States Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story (1993) Bruce Lee: The Curse of the Dragon (1993) Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey (2000) The Legend of Bruce Lee (video; 2010) I Am Bruce Lee (2012) Birth of the Dragon (2016) Television Spirit of the Dragon (1992) Bruce Lee: The Lost Interview (1994) The Legend of Bruce Lee (2008) Books Bruce Lee: The Man Only I Knew (1975) Comics The Deadly Hands of Kung Fu (1976) The Legend of Bruce Lee (1982–83) Bruce Lee (1994) Bruce Lee: The Dragon Rises (2016) Video games Bruce Lee Kung-Fu Master Bruce Lee Lives Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story Bruce Lee: Quest of the Dragon Bruce Lee: Return of the Legend Family Lee Hoi-chuen (father) Peter Lee (brother) Robert Lee (brother) Linda Emery Lee (wife) Brandon Lee (son) Shannon Lee (daughter) Related 41 Cumberland Road Bruceploitation Bruce Li Bruce Le Bruce Lai Bruce Liang Dragon Lee Kato Graves of Bruce and Brandon Lee Long Beach International Karate Championships Statues Hong Kong Los Angeles Mostar Betty Ting Chen Zhen Ip Man Warrior Wong Shun Leung Wong Jack Man Category v t e Exploitation film Blaxploitation Bruceploitation Cannibal Eurospy Euro War / Macaroni Combat Giallo Hippie Martial arts Mexploitation Mockbuster Mondo Nazi exploitation Nunsploitation Outlaw biker Ozploitation Poliziotteschi Pornochanchada Rape and revenge Rumberas film Sexploitation Slasher Spaghetti Western Splatter Sword-and-sandal Turksploitation Vansploitation Women in prison v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie