This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article or section should specify the language of its non-English content, using {{lang}} or {{transl}} (or {{IPA}} or similar for phoenetic transcriptions), with an appropriate ISO 639 code. See why. (August 2019) For the tool used for making batik, see Canting. A common simple example of canting arms: the castle representing the Kingdom of Castile and the lion representing the Kingdom of León.[1] Canting arms are heraldic bearings that represent the bearer's name (or, less often, some attribute or function) in a visual pun or rebus. French heralds used the term armes parlantes (English: "talking arms"), as they would sound out the name of the armiger. Many armorial allusions require research for elucidation because of changes in language and dialect that have occurred over the past millennium. Canting arms – some in the form of rebuses – are quite common in German civic heraldry. They have also been increasingly used in the 20th century among the British royal family.[citation needed] When the visual representation is not straightforward but as complex as a rebus, this is sometimes called a rebus coat of arms.[citation needed] An in-joke among the Society for Creative Anachronism heralds is the pun, "Heralds don't pun; they cant."[2] Contents 1 Examples of canting arms 1.1 Personal coats of arms 1.2 Municipal coats of arms 1.3 Ecclesiastical coats of arms 2 Notes 3 Books 4 External links 5 References Examples of canting arms[edit] Personal coats of arms[edit] A famous example of canting arms are those of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother's paternal family, the Bowes-Lyon family. The arms (pictured below) contain the bows and blue lions that make up the arms of the Bowes and Lyon families. Bowes-Lyon family: bows and lions Princess Beatrice of York: Beatrice = bee thrice = three bees Rosetti family: three roses Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone: three hog's heads Cockburn: three red cocks Crowninshield family: crown on the shield De Barry family: three bars gemelles Coat of arms of the head of the Portuguese Costa family: costa means "rib" in Latin and Portuguese President Eisenhower: a blacksmith's anvil, as Eisenhauer is German for "iron-hewer" Flag of Maryland, originally the arms of George Calvert, 1st Lord Baltimore, whose mother's maiden name was Crossland; the latter's arms shows a cross.[3] Theodore Roosevelt: roses-fields Maus family: a mouse in the first and fourth quarters. Municipal coats of arms[edit] Municipal coats of arms which interpret the town's name in rebus form are also called canting. Here are a few examples. The arms of Berwickshire, Scotland: Bear and Wych Elm Elmbridge, Surrey (1974): elm tree on bridge. (The toponym is related to bridges but not to elms; the prefix refers to Emel, a former name for the river Mole.[4]) Châteaurenard: Château = castle; Renard = fox Eberbach (1976): Eber = boar; Bach = brook (wavy blue fess) The coat of arms of the village of Hensbroek in North Holland interprets the toponym as "hen-breeches" (the toponym is unrelated to either "hen" or "breeches", deriving from the personal name Hein and the Dutch cognate of "brook", i.e. "Henry's brook".) Freixo de Espada à Cinta (1926): Freixo = ash; de Espada = with sword; à Cinta = at the waist, in Portuguese Falkenberg (1948): Falken = falcon; Berg = hill, in Swedish Seinäjoki (1951): seinä = wall, joki = river, in Finnish Berlin (1954): Bär = bear Manacor: man = hand, a = at, cor = heart, in Catalan[5] Torrevieja (1829): Torre = tower, vieja = old Kryvyi Rih: Kryvyi = crooked, Rih = horn, in Ukrainian Rueda (1986): rueda = wheel in Spanish Łódź: Łódź = boat Wolfsburg: Wolf's Castle Arms of Magenta, France, feature a bend sinister in magenta, an extremely rare tincture in heraldry Örnsköldsvik (1894): Örn = Eagle, Sköld = Shield and Vik = Bay. Füssen: Füssen = feet Schaffhausen: Schaf = sheep, Haus = house Steinhaus: Stein = stone, Haus = house Schattendorf: Schatten = shadow, Dorf = village Hadersdorf-Kammern: Hader = quarrel, Dorf = village Ecclesiastical coats of arms[edit] The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Lansing: The lances crossed per saltire are a play on the name of the see, the city of Lansing, Michigan.[6] The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre: The mounds in the circle at the center of the arms are a play on the name of city in which the diocese is based, Rockville Centre, New York.[7] The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Baton Rouge: The shield features a red baton, referencing the city name, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, and its literal French meaning. The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Buffalo: The arms feature an American bison, colloquially called a buffalo, carrying a banner of the Cross of St. George (analogous to the heraldic Lamb of God), referencing the name of city in which the see is based, Buffalo, New York. The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brownsville: The tincture of the field, tenné, is depicted as brown, referencing the seat of the diocese, Brownsville, Texas. The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Phoenix: The arms feature a phoenix, the namesake of the diocesan seat, Phoenix, Arizona. The arms of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Worth: The arms feature a castle, referencing the fort for which the city, Fort Worth, Texas, was named. The arms of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Anchorage: The anchor references the namesake of the see, Anchorage, Alaska. The arms of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Hartford: The arms feature a hart, a male deer, in the midst of flowing water, i.e., fording a body of water, referencing the name of the see, Hartford, Connecticut. The arms of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles: The arms feature three pairs of wings, denoting three angels, and referencing the namesake of the see, Los Angeles, California, which translates to "the angels." Notes[edit] ^ "Tinctures". ^ Neznanich, Modar. "Heraldry for Those Who Cant" (PDF). Retrieved 2 July 2012. Cites 72 historical examples of canting arms, as well as SCA usage. ^ Englefield, Eric (1979). Flags. Ward Lock. p. 104. ^ Room, Adrian (1988). Dictionary Of Place Names In The British Isles. Bloomsbury. p. 128. ^ Schneider, Klaus-Michael. "Municipality of Manacor". Flags of the World. CRW Flags. Retrieved 16 October 2013. ^ "Bishop Boyea arms". Diocese of Lansing. Roman Catholic Diocese of Lansing. Retrieved 9 May 2017. ^ "Bishop Barres arms". Diocese of Rockville Centre. Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Books[edit] Winifred Hall: Canting and Allusive Arms of England and Wales. 1966. ISBN 9780900023019 External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Canting arms. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Canting arms (Britannica) Canting arms – 100 armes parlantes (YouTube) References[edit] "Meaning of Arms". Heraldica.org. 2001-06-20. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources