Heraldic tincture Coat of arms of Limoges, France: De gueules, au chef de Saint Martial de carnation, orné à l'antique d'or, ombré de sable, entre deux lettres gothiques d'or S et M; au chef d'azur, chargé de trois fleurs de lis d'or. (Gules, the head of Saint Martial carnation ...) In heraldry, carnation is a tincture, the name for skin colour,[1][2] more exactly the colour of pale or white human skin[3] (i.e., pale pinkish peach). It is rare in coats of arms in Anglophone countries but quite frequent on the European continent, in France in particular, derived from widespread use in German heraldry.[citation needed] In its rare appearances in the Anglophone heraldries, it is not only used for European flesh tones as in a crown rayonny or supported by two cubit arms, dexter carnation, sinister skeletal proper (crest of The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists)[4] but also as a general pink colouring as in a horse passant argent bridled saddled and trappings or, on its head a plume of three feathers carnation (crest of The Worshipful Company of Saddlers, England).[5] References[edit] ^ Friar, Stephen, ed. (1987). A New Dictionary of Heraldry. London: Alphabooks/A&C Black. p. 81. ISBN 0-906670-44-6. ^ Cadogan Rothery, Guy (1915) [1994]. Concise Encyclopedia of Heraldry. London: Senate, an imprint of Studio Editions Ltd. p. xvii. ISBN 1-85958-049-1. ^ Mike Oettle. "Colours of dye". Armoria. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 30 January 2014. ^ "Coat of Arms: History and meaning of the College's Coat of Arms". The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists. Retrieved 28 January 2014. ^ "Arms of the Saddlers Company". The Worshipful Company of Saddlers. Retrieved 28 January 2014. v t e Tinctures in heraldry Rule of tincture Tricking system Hatching system "Proper" Fimbriation Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermine Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné (tawny) Non-traditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste (sky blue)   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation (flesh-coloured)   Cendrée (ash grey)   Ochre   Orange   Rose (pink) 1 Rarely used – mostly only in some regional traditions or as relatively modern innovations – and considered unheraldic by some. This heraldry-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e