Carnosaur 3: Primal Species U.K. DVD cover Directed by Jonathan Winfrey Produced by Roger Corman Screenplay by Scott Sandin Story by Rob Kerchner Starring Scott Valentine Janet Gunn Rick Dean Rodger Halston Anthony Peck Music by Kevin Kiner Cinematography Andrea V. Rossotto Edited by Louis Cioffi Production company New Horizons Release date November 1996 (1996-11) Running time 85 minutes Country United States Language English Carnosaur 3: Primal Species is a 1996 direct-to-video science fiction horror film.[1] It is the sequel to the 1995 film Carnosaur 2, and the final installation of the Carnosaur series. It stars Scott Valentine, Janet Gunn, Rick Dean, Rodger Halston, and Anthony Peck. The film follows a military team as they try to capture several genetically reconstructed dinosaurs. It received negative reviews. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production and release 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] In the opening sequence, an army convoy is attacked by terrorists who soon discover they have stolen a truck of living frozen biological material instead of uranium. Once at a dockside warehouse, two frozen Velociraptors and a T. rex escape and kill many of the terrorists before the police arrive, who expect to find drug smugglers. After finding the sole survivor, the police are killed inside the warehouse by the Velociraptors. An anti-terrorist special force led by Colonel Rance Higgins is called in by General Mercer where they find pieces of bodies and a refrigeration truck rather than uranium. They maneuver through warehouse boxes until two get slashed to death. The survivors learn from Dr. Hodges that these dinosaurs were genetically reconstructed and are now the last three "carnosaurs" left in existence. The dinosaurs had been en route to a government research facility, and it is made clear that they need to be caught alive, relating to the potential for curing major diseases. A massive meat shipment resides at the dock, so the three remaining soldiers hunt in that area, meeting up with a unit of Marines who have come as backup. Soldier Polchek is given drugs to shoot into the carnosaurs as the group set up a lure and net trap with meat. One of the Velociraptors attacks and almost succeeds in dragging off Polchek, but is shot down. The raptor is taken to the base for examination. Hodges soon theorizes that the asexual T. rex is breeding since Polchek was being dragged off, perhaps to hatchlings. The injured Velociraptor awakens and begins to attack. The T. rex also appears and bites off a soldier's head before escaping with the Velociraptor to an agricultural transport ship. With Marine member Rossi as captain, the team decides to move the ship out to sea and to use its refrigeration coolant to freeze the dinosaurs. When time comes to explore the lower decks of the ship, the carnosaurs knock out the lights and kill a couple more soldiers. The survivors get to an elevator, but a Velociraptor chews the cable through and they crash on the bottom level. There, the team discover the nest of eggs and begin shooting it, angering the T. rex, who soon bites off Polchek's arm and then eats him. The survivors decide to kill the dinosaurs, by blowing up the ship with dynamite. The T. rex bursts through the ceiling and drags Rossi through it before eating him. The two Velociraptors are shot to death after one of them kills Marine member Proudfoot. Hodges senses the T. rex is close. She and Rance hide behind lockers which the T. rex head-butts. Rance throws an explosive in the mouth of the dinosaur, killing it. The two race against time to jump in the ocean before the ship explodes. Back in a police car at the port, the sole surviving terrorist is still bound and gagged in the back seat when a Velociraptor soon appears outside the vehicle and eats him, foreshadowing that the prehistoric terror is not over yet. Cast[edit] Scott Valentine as Colonel Rance Higgins Janet Gunn as Dr. Hodges Rick Dean as Polchek Rodger Halston as Sanders Anthony Peck as General Pete Mercer Terri J. Vaughn as B.T. Coolidge Billy Burnette as Furguson Morgan Englund as Rossi Stephen Lee as Sergeant David Roberson as Johnson Justina Vail as Proudfoot Cyril O'Reilly as Dolan Abraham Gordon as Billings Michael James McDonald as Officer Wilson Jonathan Winfrey as Bob Production and release[edit] Carnosaur 3: Primal Species was made on a smaller budget than its predecessors.[2][3] A 60-pound rubber creature suit was utilized to portray some of the dinosaurs.[4] Cast member Justina Vail said about the production, "A lot of it made me laugh. It looked like there was a guy in a dinosaur costume running across the room. So it was a challenge to get to the real reality part of it, but ultimately it was a blast."[5] The cast includes actor Rick Dean, who had previously played a different character in Carnosaur 2.[6] The film premiered on video in November 1996.[7] It was released on DVD on April 18, 2000.[6] Reception[edit] Fangoria was critical of the film and stated that it was lacking in "originality, taste, logic" and realism, but wrote about the dinosaurs: "Seen in quick cuts or by the light of flickering bulbs, the Carnosaurs themselves are still somewhat effective; in fact, they're the only good thing in Carnosaur 3."[8] Randy Myers, writing for Knight-Ridder Newspapers, was critical of the dinosaur effects and the casting of Valentine in the lead role.[9][10] J.R. Taylor of Entertainment Weekly rated it a "D" and wrote that "the rambling story doesn't show half the wit of the closing credits, in which a disclaimer assures that no dinosaurs were harmed during the making of this film."[11] TV Guide wrote that director Jonathan Winfrey "does demonstrate some aptitude for creative camerawork and editing transitions", but still called the film a "slack, unscary exercise", rating it one star out of four. TV Guide was critical of the script, the dinosaur effects, and the "one-dimensional" characters and acting.[12] Brian J. Dillard of AllMovie found the film to be boring and repetitive, rating it one and a half stars out of five. Dillard wrote that the film reduced the Carnosaur series to "its most basic elements -- interchangeable soldiers being chased by interchangeable rubber dinosaurs."[1] Riley Black, writing for Smithsonian in 2009, included Carnosaur 3 on her list of the five worst dinosaur films ever made. Regarding the premise of dinosaurs against the military, Black wrote that the filmmakers "somehow managed to make it boring."[13] Critic Mike Mayo wrote in 2013, "Even though the setting is your basic empty-warehouse industrial park, the whole film is arguably no sillier or more poorly plotted than Jurassic Park: The Lost World, but with much less impressive effects."[14] References[edit] ^ a b Dillard, Brian J. "Carnosaur 3: Primal Species (1996)". AllMovie. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Berry, Mark F. (2015). The Dinosaur Filmography. McFarland. pp. 52–54. ISBN 978-1-4766-0674-3. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Hogan, Ron (January 16, 2008). "Den of Geek dartboard: Roger Corman". Den of Geek. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Looseleaf, Victoria (October 25, 1999). "A Horror Movie, Dismembered". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Murray, Will (January 1999). "Clock Watcher". Starlog. p. 21. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ a b Gross, G. Noel (August 15, 2001). "Carnosaur 3: Primal Species". DVD Talk. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "'The Arrival' arrives on cassette with many other sci-fi thrillers". The Washington Times. November 7, 1996. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "The Video Eye". Fangoria. April 1997. p. 27. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Myers, Randy (December 27, 1996). "Latest 'Land Before Time' is best one yet; Jurassic cute beats phony carnage". Knight-Ridder Newspapers. Retrieved November 19, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Myers, Randy (May 23, 1997). "Godzilla's Revenge – Not all dinosaur flicks are created equal". Knight-Ridder Newspapers. Retrieved November 19, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Taylor, J.R. (December 20, 1996). "Carnosaur 3: Primal Species". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Carnosaur 3: Primal Species". TV Guide. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Black, Riley (July 28, 2009). "The Five Worst Dinosaur Movies of All Time". Smithsonian. Retrieved November 19, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Mayo, Mike (2013). The Horror Show Guide: The Ultimate Frightfest of Movies. Visible Ink Press. pp. 59–60. ISBN 978-1-57859-460-3. Retrieved November 18, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at IMDb API at AllMovie API at Rotten Tomatoes