This is a tracking category.It is used to build and maintain lists of pages—primarily for the sake of the lists themselves and their use in article and category maintenance. It is not part of the encyclopedia's categorization scheme. More information: This category is hidden on its member pages—unless the corresponding user preference is set. These categories are used to track, build and organize lists of pages needing "attention en masse" (for example, pages using deprecated syntax), or that may need to be edited at someone's earliest convenience. These categories also serve to aggregate members of several lists or sub-categories into a larger, more efficient list (discriminated by classifications). This template should only be transcluded in the category namespace(s). Administrators: Please do not delete this category even if it is empty! This category may be empty occasionally or even most of the time. This template should only be transcluded in the category namespace(s). The CS1 maint: ref=harv message is not an error message. There is no need for regular editors to take action with respect to this message. The message and this category are being used to track instances of certain citation templates that use |ref= with a value of harv. This is a tracking category for CS1 citations that use |ref=harv. That parameter is now supplied by default by CS1 templates, so |ref=harv can safely be removed from CS1 citation templates without affecting functionality. Pages in this category should only be added by Module:Citation/CS1. By default, Citation Style 1 and Citation Style 2 error messages are visible to all readers and maintenance category messages are hidden from all readers. To display maintenance messages, include the following text in your common CSS page or your specific skin's CSS page (common.css and skin.css respectively): .mw-parser-output span.cs1-maint {display: inline;} /* display Citation Style 1 maintenance messages */
 To display hidden-by-default error messages: .mw-parser-output span.cs1-hidden-error {display: inline;} /* display hidden Citation Style 1 error messages */
 Even with this CSS installed, older pages in Wikipedia's cache may not have been updated to show these error messages even though the page is listed in one of the tracking categories. A null edit will resolve that issue. To hide normally-displayed error messages: .mw-parser-output span.cs1-visible-error {display: none;} /* hide Citation Style 1 error messages */
 You can personalize the display of these messages (such as changing the color), but you will need to ask someone who knows CSS or at the technical village pump if you do not understand how.