Common name of Homo troglodytes This article is about the stock character. For real-life instances of humans living in caves, see Cave dweller. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Le Moustier Neanderthals (Charles R. Knight, 1920) The caveman is a stock character representative of primitive man in the Paleolithic. The popularization of the type dates to the early 20th century, when Neanderthal Man was influentially described as "simian" or ape-like by Marcellin Boule[1] and Arthur Keith.[2] The term "caveman" has its taxonomic equivalent in the now-obsolete Homo troglodytes, (Linnaeus, 1758).[3] Contents 1 Characteristics 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Characteristics[edit] Caveman hunting a brown bear. Book illustration by unknown artist for The Cave Boy of the Age of Stone (1907) Cavemen are typically portrayed as wearing shaggy animal hides, and capable of cave painting like behaviorally modern humans of the last glacial period. They are often shown armed with rocks or cattle bone clubs that are also adorned with rocks, and are portrayed as unintelligent and aggressive. Popular culture also frequently represents cavemen as living with or alongside dinosaurs, even though non-avian dinosaurs became extinct at the end of the Cretaceous period, 66 million years before the emergence of the Homo sapiens species. The image of them living in caves arises from the fact that caves are where the preponderance of artifacts have been found from European Stone Age cultures, although this most likely reflects the degree of preservation that caves provide over the millennia rather than an indication of their typical form of shelter. Until the last glacial period, the great majority of humans did not live in caves, being nomadic hunter-gatherer tribes living in a variety of temporary structures, such as tents[4] and wooden huts (e.g., at Ohalo). A few genuine cave dwellings did exist, however, such as at Mount Carmel in Israel.[5] Stereotypical cavemen have traditionally been depicted wearing smock-like garments made of animal skin and held up by a shoulder strap on one side, and carrying large clubs approximately conical in shape. They often have grunt-like names, such as Ugg and Zog.[6] History[edit] Caveman-like heraldic "wild men" were found in European and African iconography for hundreds of years. During the Middle Ages, these creatures were generally depicted in art and literature as bearded and covered in hair, and often wielding clubs and dwelling in caves. While wild men were always depicted as living outside of civilization, there was an ongoing debate as to whether they were human or animal. In Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's The Lost World (1912), ape-men are depicted in a fight with modern humans. Edgar Rice Burroughs adapted this idea for The Land That Time Forgot (1918). A genre of cavemen films emerged, typified by D. W. Griffith's Man's Genesis (1912); they inspired Charles Chaplin's satiric take,[7] in His Prehistoric Past (1914) as well as Brute Force (1914), The Cave Man (1912), and later Cave Man (1934). From the descriptions, Griffith's characters cannot talk, and use sticks and stones for weapons, while the hero of Cave Man is a Tarzanesque figure who fights dinosaurs. Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels is a classic animated comedy depicting cavemen as totally hairy with a club. D. W. Griffith's Brute Force, a silent film released in 1914, represents one of the earliest portrayals of cavemen and dinosaurs together, with its depiction of a Ceratosaurus.[8][9] The film reinforced the incorrect notion that non-avian dinosaurs co-existed with prehistoric man.[9] Cavemen fighting a dinosaur on the cover of a 1940 edition of Action Stories The anachronistic combination of cavemen with dinosaurs eventually became a cliché, and has often been intentionally invoked for comedic effect. The comic strips B.C., Alley Oop, the Spanish comic franchise Mortadelo y Filemón, and occasionally The Far Side and Gogs portray "cavemen" with dinosaurs. Gary Larson, in his The Prehistory of the Far Side, stated he once felt that he needed to confess his cartooning sins in this regard: "O Father, I Have Portrayed Primitive Man and Dinosaurs In The Same Cartoon".[10] The animated series The Flintstones, a spoof on family sitcoms, portrays the Flintstones even using dinosaurs, pterosaurs and prehistoric mammals as tools, household appliances, vehicles, and construction machines.[11] Stereotypical cavemen are also often featured in advertising, including advertisements for Minute Maid.[year needed] In early 2004, GEICO launched a series of television commercials and attempts at viral marketing, collectively known as the GEICO Cavemen advertising campaign, where GEICO announcers are repeatedly denounced by modern cavemen for perpetuating a stereotype of unintelligent, backward cavemen. The GEICO advertisements spawned a short-lived TV series called Cavemen. In 2020, Mattel unleashed a doll series called Cave Club that detailed the tales of five young cavepeople. See also[edit] Neanderthals in popular culture Prehistoric fiction Dawn of Humanity (2015 PBS film) References[edit] ^ "Ape-like or human? Disagreement erupts over Neanderthal posture". Cosmos. Retrieved 2020-04-13. ^ "Early Man in Palestine". Nature. 129 (3268): 898. 1932-06-01. doi:10.1038/129898b0. ISSN 1476-4687. ^ Isabella, Jude (2013-12-05). "The Caveman's Home Was Not a Cave". Nautilus. Retrieved 2020-04-13. ^ Jerry D. Moore, "The Prehistory of Home", University of California Press, 2012 ^ "Carmel Caves - How to meet a caveman - Israel Guide - Jerusalem Post". www.jpost.com. Retrieved 2019-10-18. ^ "Contents Page: 82". www.depauw.edu. Retrieved 2019-05-08. ^ Stills from Man's Genesis Archived 2008-07-20 at the Wayback Machine and His Prehistoric Past show that Chaplin still has his bowler hat. ^ Rebecca Hawkes (24 November 2015). "Costumed pigs, iguanas and Raquel Welch: the evolution of movie dinosaurs". The Telegraph. Retrieved 15 May 2020. ^ a b Glut, Donald F.; Brett-Surman, Michael K. (1997). "Dinosaurs and the media". The Complete Dinosaur. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. pp. 675–706. ISBN 978-0-253-33349-0. ^ Larson, Gary (1989). The Prehistory of The Far Side. Andrews McMeel. ISBN 0-8362-1851-5. ^ Blake, Heidi (30 September 2010). "The Flintstones' 50th anniversary: 10 wackiest Bedrock inventions". Daily Telegraph. External links[edit] Origin of Man at The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Apes a Man at The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Cavemen at Comic Vine v t e Stock characters By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Supersoldier Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Harlequin Zanni Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Social Darwinist Dark Lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer toy Skeleton Swamp monster Vampires Zombies Other Alazon Archenemy Igor Masked Mystery Villain Miser By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Magical Negro Young Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Himbo Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Moleman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent cliques Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Pop icon Redshirt Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Village idiot White savior Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125