In Greek mythology, Celaeno (/sɪˈliːnoʊ/; Ancient Greek: Κελαινώ Kelaino, lit. 'the dark one', also Celeno or Kelaino, sometimes [misspelled] Calaeno) referred to several different figures. Celaeno, one of the Harpies,[1] whom Aeneas encountered at Strophades. She gave him prophecies of his coming journeys.[2] Celaeno, one of the Pleiades. She was said to be mother of Lycus and Nycteus by Poseidon;[3] of Eurypylus (or Eurytus), King of Cyrene, and Lycaon, also by Poseidon;[4] and of Lycus and Chimaereus by Prometheus.[5] Celaeno, one of the Danaïdes, the daughters of Danaus. Her mother was Crino. She married and killed Hyperbius, son of Aegyptus and Hephaestine.[6] She was also believed to have had a son Celaenus by Poseidon.[7] Celaeno, an Amazon. She was killed by Heracles whilst he was undertaking the ninth labour.[8] Celaeno, daughter of Hyamus and granddaughter of Lycorus. She was the mother of Delphus by Apollo.[9] Celaeno, daughter of Ergea by Poseidon.[10] Contents 1 Astronomical objects 2 In popular culture 3 Notes 4 References Astronomical objects[edit] Celaeno, a star in the constellation of Taurus. In popular culture[edit] The harpy Celaeno appears as a captive of a traveling witch's Midnight Carnival, in the Peter S. Beagle classic fantasy novel The Last Unicorn and the 1982 film based on the book. Captain Celaeno is the name of the leader of a pirate crew of parrot-like creatures who help the ponies in My Little Pony: The Movie. Celaena Sardothien, the main character of the Throne of Glass series. Sarah J Maas, the author has cited Celaeno as her inspiration for the name Notes[edit] Ancient Greece portal Myths portal ^ Hyginus, Fabulae Preface & 14 ^ Virgil, Aeneid 3.209-211, with the commentary by Servius ^ Apollodorus, 3.10.1 ^ Scholia on Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica, 4. 1561 ^ Tzetzes on Lycophron, Alexandra 132 ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 2.1.5 ^ Strabo, Geographica 12.8.18 ^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca historica 4.16.3 ^ Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio 10.6.3 ^ Murray, John (1833). A Classical Manual, being a Mythological, Historical and Geographical Commentary on Pope's Homer, and Dryden's Aeneid of Virgil with a Copious Index. Albemarle Street, London. p. 78. References[edit] Diodorus Siculus, The Library of History translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer's Web Site Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888–1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Gaius Julius Hyginus, Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Maurus Servius Honoratus, In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio. 3 vols. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pseudo-Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Strabo, The Geography of Strabo. Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Strabo, Geographica edited by A. Meineke. Leipzig: Teubner. 1877. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. This article includes a list of Greek mythological figures with the same or similar names. If an internal link for a specific Greek mythology article referred you to this page, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended Greek mythology article, if one exists.