For other uses, see Ceto (disambiguation). Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e In Greek mythology, Ceto (/ˈsiːtoʊ/; Ancient Greek: Κητώ, romanized: Kētṓ, lit. 'sea monster') may refer to three divine women: Ceto, a primordial sea goddess and daughter of Pontus (Sea) and Gaia (Earth).[1] She was the mother of the Phorcydes by her brother Phorcys.[2] Ceto, an Indian "naiad daughter of Oceanos" and thus one of the Oceanids. Her mother was probably the Titaness Tethys. Ceto bore Helios a daughter, Astris.[3] Ceto, one of the 50 Nereids, sea nymph daughters of the "Old Man of the Sea" Nereus and the Oceanid Doris.[4] Notes[edit] ^ Hesiod, Theogony 238 ^ Apollodorus, 1.10 ^ Nonnus, Dionysiaca 26.355; Parada, p. 44 ^ Apollodorus, 1.2.7 References[edit] Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Hesiod, Theogony from The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Nonnus, Dionysiaca; translated by Rouse, W H D, II Books XVI–XXXV. Loeb Classical Library No. 345, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940. Internet Archive Parada, Carlos, Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology, Jonsered, Paul Åströms Förlag, 1993. ISBN 978-91-7081-062-6. This article includes a list of Greek mythological figures with the same or similar names. If an internal link for a specific Greek mythology article referred you to this page, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended Greek mythology article, if one exists.