'V'-shaped mark, often inverted For other uses, see Chevron. "Argent a chevron gules" Part of a series on Heraldic achievement External devices in addition to the central coat of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto  Heraldry portal v t e A chevron (also spelled cheveron, especially in older documents) is a V-shaped mark, often inverted. The word is usually used in reference to a kind of fret in architecture, or to a badge or insignia used in military or police uniforms to indicate rank or length of service, or in heraldry and the designs of flags (see flag terminology). Contents 1 Ancient history 2 Heraldry 3 Rank insignia 3.1 Examples 4 Vexillology 5 Other uses as insignia 6 References 7 External links Ancient history[edit] Appearing on pottery and petrographs throughout the ancient world, the chevron can be considered as one of the oldest symbols in human history, with V-shaped markings occurring as early as the Neolithic era (6th to 5th millennia BC) as part of the Vinča symbols inventory. The Vinča culture responsible for the symbols appear to have used the chevron as part of a larger proto-writing system rather than any sort of heraldic or decorative use, and are not known to have passed the symbol on to any subsequent cultures.[1] Many comparatively recent examples appear from approximately 1800 BC onward, beginning as part of an archaeological recovery of pottery designs from the palace of Knossos on Crete in the modern day country of Greece.[2] Furthermore the Nubian Kingdom of Kerma produced pottery with decorative repertoire confined to geometric designs such as Chevrons,[3] and Sparta (Lacedaemonia (Λακεδαιμονία)) iconically used a capital lambda (Λ) on their shields. Heraldry[edit] A chevron is one of the ordinaries in heraldry, one of the simple geometrical figures which are the chief images in many coat of arms. A chevron is constructed by choosing a visually appealing angle such as the Golden Angle or any other angle the artist prefers. It can be subject to a number of modifications including inversion. When the ends are cut off in a way that looks like the splintered ends of a broken piece of wood, with an irregular zig-zag pattern, it is called éclaté.[4] When shown as a smaller size than standard, it is a diminutive called a chevronel. Chevrons appeared early in the history of heraldry, especially in Normandy. In Scandinavia the chevron is known as sparre; an early example appears in the arms of Armand desmondly. Trans, Hinterrhein, Graubünden, Switzerland Chevron wavy: Bioley-Magnoux, Yverdon district, Vaud, Switzerland Chevron inverted: Newport, Wales. Chevron inverted: The flag of the North American Vexillological Association. Chevron inverted: The flag of the Votes. Chevron and chevron inverted, interlaced: Bolligen, Bern district, Canton of Bern, Switzerland House of Grysperre, Flanders. Vaumarcus, Boudry district, Canton of Neuchâtel, Switzerland The Arms of John FitzRobert, signatory to Magna Carta, 1215 Two chevronels: Echandens, Morges district, Vaud, Switzerland Three chevronels: The arms of Cardinal Richelieu Chevronny: Avry, Sarine district, Canton of Fribourg, Switzerland Chevrons are commonly found among the insignias and heraldries of many of the earliest higher education institutions in the United States and the United Kingdom. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States Trinity College, University of Cambridge Trinity College, University of Oxford Rank insignia[edit] In areas observing Commonwealth of Nations or United States doctrine, chevrons are used as an insignia of enlisted or NCO rank by military forces and by police. One chevron usually designates a private or lance corporal, two a corporal, and three a sergeant. One to four "rockers" may also be incorporated to indicate various grades of sergeant. In the U.S. Army and Marine Corps, chevrons typically point towards the neck (though prior to the 20th Century this was not true); in the U.S. Air Force, Navy, and Coast Guard, and in Commonwealth usage, they usually point away from the neck. In the Commonwealth, the correct terminology for rank chevrons includes the number of stripes, called "bars", therefore, the sergeants' insignia is properly termed a "3-bar chevron".[citation needed] Canadian and Australian Forces often refer to chevrons as "hooks". In the Dutch armed forces they are nicknamed "bananas".[5] In the British Army, Royal Marines and Royal Air Force, chevrons are worn point down to denote NCO rank, with one for lance corporal, two for corporal, three for sergeant, and three with a crown for Staff Sergeant (known as Colour Sergeant in infantry regiments and the Royal Marines) or Flight Sergeant (RAF). Branch and tradition results in variations in rank titles (Corporal of Horse being the equivalent of Sergeant in the Household Cavalry) and spellings (Serjeant in The Rifles). Large chevrons are also worn on the sleeves of Royal Navy sailors to denote good conduct rather than rank. Although usually associated with Non-Commissioned Officers, the chevron was originally used as an insignia to denote General Officer ranks in the British Army. It was adopted from the insignia worn by cavalry during the 18th Century, in particular the Household Cavalry. It was worn on the cuffs, forearms and tails of their coats, embroidered in gold bullion for the guards and silver for Dragoons Regiments. George III favoured the uniform of the Horse Guards, and his Windsor Uniform followed a similar pattern. After 1768, a similar pattern uniform as worn the King was introduced to General Officers, with the number and spacing of the chevrons denoting rank. For example, a Major General would wear his chevrons in pairs: two on the sleeves, and two on the tails. A Lieutenant General would wear them in groups of three, and a full General's would be equidistant. This practice continued into the early Victorian Era. Examples[edit] Single Chevron-Rank: Lance corporal, US Marine Corps. Double Chevron Corporal insignia, Royal Air Force Lance Naik rank insignia, Indian Army NATO Code OR-4 Specialist/Petty Officer Grenadier of the Old Guard wearing on his left shoulder two veteran chevrons representing 15 to 20 years of service Sleeve chevron Matrosen- oberstabsgefreiter Kriegsmarine Vexillology[edit] For a more comprehensive list, see List of national flags by design § Triangle(s) on hoist. In vexillology, a chevron is the term used for a triangle on the hoist of a flag. It is used in several national flags, including the flag of Cuba, the flag of the Czech Republic, and the flag of Jordan, as a few examples.[citation needed] Other uses as insignia[edit] In some armies, small chevrons are worn on the lower left sleeve to indicate length of service, akin to service stripes in the U.S. military. The Israel Defense Forces use chevrons in various orientations as organizational designators on their vehicles, specifically which company within a battalion they belong to.[6] French car maker, Citroën uses a double chevron as its logo. Chevrons on their side are also used as road signs to denote bends. From the early 1950s until the early 2000s, Simplex, Faraday and many other companies manufactured the chevron series fire alarm manual pull station. The handle was shaped in a way where the handle looked like an inverted chevron.[7] References[edit] ^ Mäder, Michael: Ist die Donauschrift Schrift? Budapest: Archaeolingua. ISBN 978-615-5766-29-9, (2019), ^ C.Michael Hogan (2007) Knossos Fieldnotes The Modern Antiquarian ^ Bianchi, Robert Steven (2004). Daily Life of the Nubians. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-313-32501-4. ^ An example is said to appear in the arms of Blanluz, in Dauphiné. "Frédéric Luz: Grand Armorial Universel". Archived from the original on 2008-07-03. Retrieved 2008-06-29. ^ See Infanterist 1939-1940: rangen - Het Nederlandsche Leger 1939-1940 Archived 2012-04-12 at the Wayback Machine, 2012 ^ Gelbart, Marsh (2004). Modern Israeli Tanks and Infantry Carriers 1985–2004. Osprey Publishing. p. 44. ISBN 978-1-84176-579-2. ^ Admin (2019-07-13). "*Vintage* *Rare* Simplex 4251-1 Fire Alarm Pull Station Chevron". Simplex 2001 Parts For Sale. Retrieved 2019-08-10. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chevron (insignia). Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources v t e Vexillology Basic topics Vexillography Glossary of vexillology Heraldry Tincture Vexilloid Design features British ensign Canadian pale Canton Chevron Heraldic flag Nordic cross Pride flag Saltire Southern cross Spanish fess Triband Tricolour Color schemes Pan-African Pan-Arab Pan-Slavic Tinctures in heraldry Organizations Argentina Vexillology Association Australian National Flag Association Croatian Heraldic and Vexillological Association Flag Institute Flags of the World Genealogical Society of Ireland Great Waters Association of Vexillology International Federation of Vexillological Associations Italian Centre of Vexillological Studies Macedonian Heraldry Society Nordic Flag Society North American Vexillological Association Southern African Vexillological Association Spanish Society of Vexillology State Council of Heraldry Ukrainian Heraldry Society William Crampton Library v t e Lists of flags Master list Reference list State-related Arab states Civil flag Country Date of Adoption Formerly independent Heads of state Historical flags State flag State flags and ensigns Sovereign Special and fictional Unrecognized Mobile military Armed Forces Army & Ground Forces Air Forces Air Forces Roundels Air Forces Fin Flashes Border & Coast Guard Forces Maritime Ministry of Defense Naval Ensigns Naval Jack Police Flag Mobile civilian Civil air Civil and Merchant Navy Civil ensign Pilot boat flags and ensigns Yacht flags and ensigns Other entities Active autonomist and secessionist movements Cities Country subdivisions Cultural Dependent territories Ethnic Gay pride and Lesbian Bisexual Transgender flags Micronations Political Religious By design By elements Animals Astronomical Bicolor Borders British ensigns Buildings Canton Circles Color by number by combination Crescents Crosses (Nordic) Devices Diamonds Geographical Headgear Inscriptions Arabic English Latin Russian Spanish Nautical Plants Solids Stars Triangles Tribands Two-sided Weapons By shape Non-quadrilateral Proportions By nations Argentina Armenia Australia state governors Austria states Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada lieutenant governors Chile China Hong Kong Macau Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Dem. Rep. Congo Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France regions Brittany Île-de-France Occitanie French Empire Germany states districts municipalities Georgia Greece Haiti Hungary Iceland India states Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan prefectures municipalities Kazakhstan Kenya Korea North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malaysia Mauritius Mexico Malta Moldova Morocco Montenegro Myanmar Netherlands provinces municipalities New Zealand Nepal North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines provinces Poland naval and maritime voivodeships Portugal Romania Russia federal subjects Sakha Russian Navy Serbia Kosovo Singapore South Africa Soviet Union republics Soviet Navy Spain autonomous communities provinces Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Cornwall Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands British Empire United States states and territories Puerto Rico CSA Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) By continent Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries. v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories  Heraldry portal