Anime and manga for children This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs attention from an expert in anime and manga. Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article. WikiProject Anime and manga may be able to help recruit an expert. (November 2008) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese. (February 2009) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:子供向けアニメ]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|子供向けアニメ}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series on Anime and manga Anime History Voice acting Companies Original video animation Original net animation Fansub Fandub Lists Longest series Longest franchises Manga History Publishers International market Mangaka Doujinshi Alternative Gekiga Yonkoma Iconography Scanlation Lists Best-selling series Longest series Demographic groups Children Shōnen Shōjo Seinen Josei Genres Bara Cooking Harem Isekai Magical girl Mecha Ryona Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri People Mitsuru Adachi Fujio Akatsuka George Akiyama Hideaki Anno Hideo Azuma Clamp Osamu Dezaki Tetsuo Hara Mamoru Hosoda Yukinobu Hoshino Ryoichi Ikegami Kunihiko Ikuhara Ken Ishikawa Shotaro Ishinomori Ikki Kajiwara Tomoharu Katsumata Yoshiaki Kawajiri Shōji Kawamori Kitazawa Rakuten Kazuo Koike Satoshi Kon Masami Kurumada Kōichi Mashimo Katsuji Matsumoto Leiji Matsumoto Hayao Miyazaki Shigeru Mizuki Hideko Mizuno Shinji Mizushima Daijiro Morohoshi Tadao Nagahama Go Nagai Shinji Nagashima Daisuke Nishio Eiichiro Oda Kyoko Okazaki Mamoru Oshii Rintaro Takao Saito Hiroshi Sasagawa Junichi Sato Sanpei Shirato Masamune Shirow Gisaburō Sugii Isao Takahata Osamu Tezuka Akira Toriyama Year 24 Group Tatsuo Yoshida Tsutomu Nihei Fandom Conventions Clubs Cosplay Anime music video Otaku Yaoi fandom General Glossary Ecchi Hentai Lolicon Moe Anime-influenced animation 2.5D musical  Anime and manga portal v t e Children's manga (子供向け漫画, kodomo-muke manga) and children's anime (子供向けアニメ, kodomo-muke anime) refer to manga and anime directed towards children 10 years and under.[1] These series are usually moralistic, often educating children about staying in the right path in life. Each chapter is usually a self-contained story. Notable examples include Doraemon and Hello Kitty. Contents 1 History 2 Awards 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History[edit] Kodomo manga started in the late 19th century with the production of short manga, approximately 15 pages long, printed in magazines. These short manga were created as a part of the Meiji era's attempt to encourage literacy among Japanese youth. A major milestone in the popularity of anime was the creation of Astro Boy by Osamu Tezuka, who is often considered the father of anime.[2] Kodomo anime and manga can be divided into four categories. The first category consists of anime and manga adaptations of Western stories, such as World Masterpiece Theater. Most of them are TV series. Despite being popular, they are less representative of traditional Japanese anime. Instead, they are modeled after classical American or Soviet cartoons. The second category consists of adaptations of Japanese media and original works. They use linguistic gags, contain references to Japanese society, and may be harder to understand for non-Japanese audiences. They are in some ways similar to American animation. An example is Doraemon. The third category, known as joji-muke (女児向け)[3] consists of manga and anime aimed towards young girls, such as Hello Kitty. The fourth category, which is closer to shōnen, has connections with popular video game and toy franchises, and has the greatest commercial success.[4] Kodomo manga magazines such as CoroCoro Comic and Comic BomBom primarily target young boys, especially those in elementary school, though some, such as Pucchigumi, target young girls. Popular kodomo manga is often adapted into anime and accompanied by a plethora of merchandise. Awards[edit] The annual Shogakukan Manga Award and Kodansha Manga Award each include a category for children's manga.[5][6] The former first included a category for children's manga in 1981. See also[edit] Shōnen manga: Manga intended for teenage boys Shōjo manga: Manga intended for teenage girls Seinen manga: Manga intended for adult men Josei manga: Manga intended for adult women Myungrang manhwa: Korean comics intended for children References[edit] ^ "Kodomo". Anime News Network. Retrieved September 2, 2012. ^ Zagzoug, Marwah. "The History of Anime & Manga". nova online. C.T. Evans. Retrieved March 2, 2015. ^ 女児向け特撮「ミラちゅー」心つかむ　三池崇史監督起用. Asahi Shimbun (in Japanese). 2018-03-22. Retrieved 2018-11-15. ^ "10.3 — Кодомо-аниме" (in Russian). Archived from the original on September 10, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2013. ^ "57th Shogakukan Manga Awards". Shogakukan. Retrieved September 2, 2012. ^ "36th Kodansha Manga Award". Kodansha. Archived from the original on January 2, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2012. External links[edit] Anime and manga portal