For the Jack McDevitt novel, see Chindi (novel). In Navajo religious belief, a chindi (Navajo: chʼį́įdii) is the ghost left behind after a person dies, believed to leave the body with the deceased's last breath. It is everything that was bad about the person; the "residue that man has been unable to bring into universal harmony".[1] Traditional Navajo believe that contact with a chindi can cause illness ("ghost sickness") and death. Chindi are believed to linger around the deceased's bones or possessions, so possessions are often destroyed after death and contact with bodies is avoided. After death, the deceased's name is never spoken, for fear that the chindi will hear and come and make one ill. Traditional Navajo practice is to allow death to occur outdoors, to allow the chindi to disperse. If a person dies in a house or hogan, that building is believed to be inhabited by the chindi and is abandoned.[2] See also[edit] Look up chindi in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Enemy Way Footnotes[edit] ^ Furst, Jill Leslie (1997). The Natural History of the Soul in Ancient Mexico. US: Yale Univ. Press. p. 151. ISBN 0-300-07260-0. ^ Waldram, James Burgess (2004). Revenge of the Windigo: The Construction of the Mind and Mental Health of North American Aboriginal Peoples. University of Toronto Press. p. 200. doi:10.3138/9781442683815. ISBN 0802086004. LCCN 2004301995. OCLC 53396855. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) v t e  Navajo Nation Politics and institutions Council Council Chamber President Vice President Flag Supreme Court Chapter houses Police Rangers Miss Navajo Culture and education People Language Music Weaving Navajo-Churro sheep Navajo Preparatory School Diné College Press Navajo Nation Zoological and Botanical Park Media Ádahooníłígíí Navajo Times KTNN Radio History The Emergence Dinétah Navajo pueblitos (1600s–1700s) Navajo Wars (1800s) Long Walk of the Navajo (1864) Treaty of Bosque Redondo (1868) Navajo Scouts (1873–1895) Livestock Reduction (1930s) Code talkers (1940s) Communities List of Communities v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category This article relating to the Indigenous peoples of North America is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e