This article is about the festival observed on the traditional Chinese calendar. For the first day of the year observed on other lunar or lunisolar calendars, see Lunar New Year. Traditional Chinese holiday This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) API Fireworks over the Victoria Harbour in Hong Kong; fireworks and firecrackers are a traditional element of Chinese New Year celebrations. Also called Spring Festival, Lunar New Year Observed by Chinese people, Sinophone communities within the Sinosphere and non-Chinese people worldwide[1] Type Cultural Religious (Chinese folk religion, Buddhist, Confucian, Daoist, some Christian communities) Celebrations Lion dances, dragon dances, fireworks, family gathering, family meal, visiting friends and relatives, giving red envelopes, decorating with chunlian couplets Date First day of the first month of the Chinese calendar (between 21 January and 20 February) 2021 date Friday, 12 February, Ox 2022 date Tuesday , 1 February, Tiger 2023 date Sunday, 22 January , Rabbit Frequency Annual Related to Lantern Festival, which concludes the celebration of the Chinese New Year. Mongolian New Year (Tsagaan Sar), Tibetan New Year (Losar), Japanese New Year (Shōgatsu), Korean New Year (Seollal), Vietnamese New Year (Tết), Indigenous Assamese New Year (Rongali Bihu) API "Chinese New Year" in Traditional (top) and Simplified (bottom) Chinese characters Traditional Chinese 春節 Simplified Chinese 春节 Literal meaning "Spring Festival" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Chūn jié Bopomofo ㄔㄨㄣ   ㄐㄧㄝˊ Wade–Giles Ch'un1 chieh2 IPA [ʈʂʰwə́n tɕjě] Wu Suzhounese Tshen tsìh Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Chēun jit Jyutping Ceon1 zit3 IPA [tsʰɵ́n tsīːt̚] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Chhun cheh Tâi-lô Tshun tseh "Agricultural Calendar New Year" Traditional Chinese 農曆新年 Simplified Chinese 农历新年 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin nónglì xīnnián "Traditional Chinese New Year" Traditional Chinese 中國傳統新年 Simplified Chinese 中国传统新年 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōngguó chuántǒng xīnnián Chinese New Year (traditional Chinese: 新年, 中國傳統新年; simplified Chinese: 新年, 中国传统新年; pinyin: nónglì xīn nián[pronunciation?]), Spring Festival or the Lunar New Year, is the festival that celebrates the beginning of a new year on the traditional lunisolar Chinese calendar. In Chinese culture and Asian countries within Sinosphere, the festival is also commonly referred to as Spring Festival (traditional Chinese: 春節; simplified Chinese: 春节; pinyin: Chūn Jié) as the spring season in the lunisolar calendar traditionally starts with lichun, the first of the twenty-four solar terms which the festival celebrates around the time of the Lunar New Year.[2] Marking the end of winter and the beginning of the spring season, observances traditionally take place from New Year’s Eve, the evening preceding the first day of the year to the Lantern Festival, held on the 15th day of the year. The first day of Chinese New Year begins on the new moon that appears between 21 January and 20 February.[3] Chinese New Year is one of the most important holidays in China, and has strongly influenced Lunar New Year celebrations such as the Losar of Tibet (Tibetan: ལོ་གསར་), and of China's neighbouring cultures, including the Korean New Year (Korean: 설날, seollal), and the Tết of Vietnam.[4] It is also celebrated worldwide in regions and countries that house significant Overseas Chinese or Sinophone populations, including Taiwan, Singapore,[5] Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar,[6] Thailand, Cambodia, the Philippines,[7] Mauritius,[8] and Canada as well as in North America and Europe.[9][10][11] The Chinese New Year is associated with several myths and customs. The festival was traditionally a time to honour deities as well as ancestors.[12] Within China, regional customs and traditions concerning the celebration of the New Year vary widely,[13] and the evening preceding the New Year's Day is frequently regarded as an occasion for Chinese families to gather for the annual reunion dinner. It is also traditional for every family to thoroughly clean their house, in order to sweep away any ill-fortune and to make way for incoming good luck. Another custom is the decoration of windows and doors with red paper-cuts and couplets. Popular themes among these paper-cuts and couplets include that of good fortune or happiness, wealth, and longevity. Other activities include lighting firecrackers and giving money in red paper envelopes. Contents 1 Dates in Chinese lunisolar calendar 2 Mythology 2.1 Origin Theory 3 History 4 Naming 5 Public holiday 6 Festivities 6.1 Preceding days 6.2 Chinese New Year's Eve 6.3 First day 6.4 Second day 6.5 Third day 6.6 Fourth day 6.7 Fifth day 6.8 Sixth day 6.9 Seventh day 6.10 Eighth day 6.11 Ninth day 6.12 Tenth day 6.13 Fifteenth day 7 Traditional food 8 Practices 8.1 Red envelopes 8.2 Gift exchange 8.3 Markets 8.4 Fireworks 8.5 Spring Festival Gala 8.6 Music 8.7 Movies 8.8 Clothing 8.9 Family portrait 8.10 Symbolism 8.11 Nianhua 8.12 Flowers 8.13 Icons and ornaments 8.14 Spring travel 9 Festivities outside Greater China 9.1 Southeast Asia 9.1.1 Indonesia 9.1.2 Thailand 9.2 Australia and New Zealand 9.3 North America 9.3.1 New York 9.3.2 California 9.4 Europe 9.5 India and Pakistan 10 Greetings 11 See also 12 Notes and references 13 Further reading 14 External links Dates in Chinese lunisolar calendar[edit] See also: Chinese calendar Chinese New Year decorations along New Bridge Road in Singapore. Chinese New Year eve in Meizhou on 8 February 2005. Chinese New Year in Kobe, Japan Southeast Asia's largest temple – Kek Lok Si near George Town in Penang, Malaysia – illuminated in preparation for the Chinese New Year. The lunisolar Chinese calendar determines the date of Chinese New Year. The calendar is also used in countries that have been influenced by, or have relations with, China – such as Korea, Japan, Taiwan, and Vietnam, though occasionally the date celebrated may differ by one day or even one moon cycle due to using a meridian based on a different capital city in a different time zone or different placements of intercalary months.[14] The Chinese calendar defines the lunar month containing the winter solstice as the eleventh month, which means that Chinese New Year usually falls on the second new moon after the winter solstice (rarely the third if an intercalary month intervenes).[15] In more than 96 percent of the years, Chinese New Year's Day is the closest date to a new moon to lichun (Chinese: 立春; "start of spring") on 4 or 5 February, and the first new moon after dahan (Chinese: 大寒; "major cold"). In the Gregorian calendar, the Chinese New Year begins at the new moon that falls between 21 January and 20 February.[16] The Gregorian Calendar dates for Chinese New Year from 1912 to 2101 are below, along with the year's presiding animal zodiac and its Stem-branch. The traditional Chinese calendar follows a Metonic cycle, a system used by the modern Jewish Calendar, and returns to the same date in Gregorian calendar roughly. The names of the Earthly Branches have no English counterparts and are not the Chinese translations of the animals. Alongside the 12-year cycle of the animal zodiac, there is a 10-year cycle of heavenly stems. Each of the ten heavenly stems is associated with one of the five elements of Chinese astrology, namely: Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal, and Water. The elements are rotated every two years while a yin and yang association alternates every year. The elements are thus distinguished: Yang Wood, Yin Wood, Yang Fire, Yin Fire, etc. These produce a combined cycle that repeats every 60 years. For example, the year of the Yang Fire Rat occurred in 1936 and in 1996, 60 years apart. Also, Chinese New Year dates repeat (or almost repeat) every 19 years.[16] Many people inaccurately calculate their Chinese birth-year by converting it from their Gregorian birth-year. In general, the Chinese zodiac sign changes on lichun. Many online Chinese Sign calculators do not account for the non-alignment of the two calendars, using Gregorian-calendar years rather than official Chinese New Year dates.[17] One scheme of continuously-numbered Chinese calendar years assigns 4709 to the year beginning in 2011, but this is not universally accepted; the calendar is traditionally cyclical, not continuously numbered. Although the Chinese calendar traditionally does not use continuously numbered years, outside China its years are sometimes numbered from the purported reign of the mythical Yellow Emperor in the 3rd millennium BC. But at least three different years numbered 1 are now used by various scholars, making the year beginning in early CE 2021 the "Chinese year" 4718, 4719, or 4658.[18] Gregorian Date Animal Day of the week Gregorian Date Animal Day of the week 2001 24 Jan Snake Wednesday 2026 17 Feb Horse Tuesday 2002 12 Feb Horse Tuesday 2027 6 Feb Goat Saturday 2003 1 Feb Goat Saturday 2028 26 Jan Monkey Wednesday 2004 22 Jan Monkey Thursday 2029 13 Feb Rooster Tuesday 2005 9 Feb Rooster Wednesday 2030 3 Feb Dog Sunday 2006 29 Jan Dog Sunday 2031 23 Jan Pig Thursday 2007 18 Feb Pig Sunday 2032 11 Feb Rat Wednesday 2008 7 Feb Rat Thursday 2033 31 Jan Ox Monday 2009 26 Jan Ox Monday 2034 19 Feb Tiger Sunday 2010 14 Feb Tiger Sunday 2035 8 Feb Rabbit Thursday 2011 3 Feb Rabbit Thursday 2036 28 Jan Dragon Monday 2012 23 Jan Dragon Monday 2037 15 Feb Snake Sunday 2013 10 Feb Snake Sunday 2038 4 Feb Horse Thursday 2014 31 Jan Horse Friday 2039 24 Jan Goat Monday 2015 19 Feb Goat Thursday 2040 12 Feb Monkey Sunday 2016 8 Feb Monkey Monday 2041 1 Feb Rooster Friday 2017 28 Jan Rooster Saturday 2042 22 Jan Dog Wednesday 2018 16 Feb Dog Friday 2043 10 Feb Pig Tuesday 2019 5 Feb Pig Tuesday 2044 30 Jan Rat Saturday 2020 25 Jan Rat Saturday 2045 17 Feb Ox Friday 2021 12 Feb Ox Friday 2046 6 Feb Tiger Tuesday 2022 1 Feb Tiger Tuesday 2047 26 Jan Rabbit Saturday 2023 22 Jan Rabbit Sunday 2048 14 Feb Dragon Friday 2024 10 Feb Dragon Saturday 2049 2 Feb Snake Tuesday 2025 29 Jan Snake Wednesday 2050 23 Jan Horse Sunday Gregorian Date Animal Day of the week Gregorian Date Animal Day of the week 2051 11 Feb Goat Saturday 2076 5 Feb Monkey Wednesday 2052 1 Feb Monkey Thursday 2077 24 Jan Rooster Sunday 2053 19 Feb Rooster Wednesday 2078 12 Feb Dog Saturday 2054 8 Feb Dog Sunday 2079 2 Feb Pig Thursday 2055 28 Jan Pig Thursday 2080 22 Jan Rat Monday 2056 15 Feb Rat Tuesday 2081 9 Feb Ox Sunday 2057 4 Feb Ox Sunday 2082 29 Jan Tiger Thursday 2058 24 Jan Tiger Thursday 2083 17 Feb Rabbit Wednesday 2059 12 Feb Rabbit Wednesday 2084 6 Feb Dragon Sunday 2060 2 Feb Dragon Monday 2085 26 Jan Snake Friday 2061 21 Jan Snake Friday 2086 14 Feb Horse Thursday 2062 9 Feb Horse Thursday 2087 3 Feb Goat Monday 2063 29 Jan Goat Monday 2088 24 Jan Monkey Saturday 2064 17 Feb Monkey Sunday 2089 10 Feb Rooster Thursday 2065 5 Feb Rooster Thursday 2090 30 Jan Dog Monday 2066 26 Jan Dog Tuesday 2091 18 Feb Pig Sunday 2067 14 Feb Pig Monday 2092 7 Feb Rat Thursday 2068 3 Feb Rat Friday 2093 27 Jan Ox Tuesday 2069 23 Jan Ox Wednesday 2094 15 Feb Tiger Monday 2070 11 Feb Tiger Tuesday 2095 5 Feb Rabbit Saturday 2071 31 Jan Rabbit Saturday 2096 25 Jan Dragon Wednesday 2072 19 Feb Dragon Friday 2097 12 Feb Snake Tuesday 2073 7 Feb Snake Tuesday 2098 1 Feb Horse Saturday 2074 27 Jan Horse Saturday 2099 21 Jan Goat Wednesday 2075 15 Feb Goat Friday 2100 9 Feb Monkey Tuesday The date of Chinese New Year's Day (1912–2120) with Chinese year name and zodiac Year Date 1–19AM# 20–38AM 39–57AM 58–76AM 77–95AM 96–114AM 115–133AM 134–152AM 153–171AM 172–190AM 191–209AM 1912–1930 1931–1949 1950–1968 1969–1987 1988–2006 2007–2025 2026–2044 2045–2063 2064–2082 2083–2101 2102–2120 18 Feb Rat Rénzǐ Goat Xīnwèi − Tiger Gēngyín − Rooster Jǐyǒu − Dragon Wùchén − Pig Dīnghaì Horse Bǐngwǔ − Ox Yǐchǒu − Monkey Jiǎshēn − Rabbit Guǐmǎo − Dog Rénxū − 6 Feb Ox Guǐchǒu Monkey Rénshēn Rabbit Xīnmǎo Dog Gēngxū Snake Jǐsì Rat Wùzǐ + Goat Dīngwèi Tiger Bǐngyín Rooster Yǐyǒu − Dragon Jiǎchén Pig Guǐhaì + 27 Jan Tiger Jiǎyín − Rooster Guǐyǒu − Dragon Rénchén Pig Xīnhaì Horse Gēngwǔ Ox Jǐchǒu − Monkey Wùshēn − Rabbit Dīngmǎo − Dog Bǐngxū − Snake Yǐsì − Rat Jiǎzǐ + 14 Feb Rabbit Yǐmǎo Dog Jiǎxū Snake Guǐsì Rat Rénzǐ + Goat Xīnwèi + Tiger Gēngyín Rooster Jǐyǒu − Dragon Wùchén Pig Dīnghaì Horse Bǐngwǔ Ox Yǐchǒu + 3 Feb Dragon Bǐngchén Pig Yǐhaì + Horse Jiǎwǔ Ox Guǐchǒu Monkey Rénshēn + Rabbit Xīnmǎo Dog Gēngxū Snake Jǐsì − Rat Wùzǐ Goat Dīngwèi Tiger Bǐngyín + 24 Jan Snake Dīngsì − Rat Bǐngzǐ Goat Yǐwèi Tiger Jiǎyín − Rooster Guǐyǒu − Dragon Rénchén − Pig Xīnhaì − Horse Gēngwǔ − Ox Jǐchǒu − Monkey Wùshēn Rabbit Dīngmǎo 11 Feb Horse Wùwǔ Ox Dīngchǒu Monkey Bǐngshēn + Rabbit Yǐmǎo Dog Jiǎxū − Snake Guǐsì − Rat Rénzǐ Goat Xīnwèi Tiger Gēngyín Rooster Jǐyǒu − Dragon Wùchén + 31 Jan Goat Jǐwèi + Tiger Wùyín Rooster Dīngyǒu Dragon Bǐngchén Pig Yǐhaì Horse Jiǎwǔ Ox Guǐchǒu Monkey Rénshēn + Rabbit Xīnmǎo Dog Gēngxū − Snake Jǐsì 19 Feb Monkey Gēngshēn + Rabbit Jǐmǎo Dog Wùxū − Snake Dīngsì − Rat Bǐngzǐ Goat Yǐwèi Tiger Jiǎyín Rooster Guǐyǒu Dragon Rénchén Pig Xīnhaì − Horse Gēngwǔ 7 Feb Rooster Xīnyǒu + Dragon Gēngchén + Pig Jǐhaì + Horse Wùwǔ Ox Dīngchǒu Monkey Bǐngshēn + Rabbit Yǐmǎo + Dog Jiǎxū + Snake Guǐsì Rat Rénzǐ Goat Xīnwèi + 28 Jan Dog Rénxū Snake Xīnsì − Rat Gēngzǐ Goat Jǐwèi Tiger Wùyín Rooster Dīngyǒu Dragon Bǐngchén Pig Yǐhaì Horse Jiǎwǔ − Ox Guǐchǒu − Monkey Rénshēn + 16 Feb Pig Guǐhaì Horse Rénwǔ − Ox Xīnchǒu Monkey Gēngshēn Rabbit Jǐmǎo Dog Wùxū Snake Dīngsì − Rat Bǐngzǐ − Goat Yǐwèi − Tiger Jiǎyín − Rooster Guǐyǒu 5 Feb Rat Jiǎzǐ Goat Guǐwèi Tiger Rényín Rooster Xīnyǒu Dragon Gēngchén Pig Jǐhaì Horse Wùwǔ − Ox Dīngchǒu − Monkey Bǐngshēn Rabbit Yǐmǎo Dog Jiǎxū + 25 Jan Ox Yǐchǒu − Monkey Jiǎshēn Rabbit Guǐmǎo Dog Rénxū Snake Xīnsì − Rat Gēngzǐ Goat Jǐwèi − Tiger Wùyín − Rooster Dīngyǒu − Dragon Bǐngchén Pig Yǐhaì + 13 Feb Tiger Bǐngyín Rooster Yǐyǒu Dragon Jiǎchén Pig Guǐhaì Horse Rénwǔ − Ox Xīnchǒu − Monkey Gēngshēn − Rabbit Jǐmǎo − Dog Wùxū − Snake Dīngsì − Rat Bǐngzǐ + 1 Feb Rabbit Dīngmǎo + Dog Bǐngxū + Snake Yǐsì + Rat Jiǎzǐ + Goat Guǐwèi Tiger Rényín Rooster Xīnyǒu Dragon Gēngchén + Pig Jǐhaì + Horse Wùwǔ Ox Dīngchǒu + 22 Jan Dragon Wùchén + Pig Dīnghaì Horse Bǐngwǔ − Ox Yǐchǒu 20 Feb Monkey Jiǎshēn Rabbit Guǐmǎo Dog Rénxū Snake Xīnsì − Rat Gēngzǐ Goat Jǐwèi − Tiger Wùyín 9 Feb Snake Jǐsì + Rat Wùzǐ + Goat Dīngwèi Tiger Bǐngyín Rooster Yǐyǒu Dragon Jiǎchén + Pig Guǐhaì + Horse Rénwǔ Ox Xīnchǒu Monkey Gēngshēn Rabbit Jǐmǎo + 30 Jan Horse Gēngwǔ Ox Jǐchǒu − Monkey Wùshēn Rabbit Dīngmǎo − Dog Bǐngxū − Snake Yǐsì − Rat Jiǎzǐ Goat Guǐwèi − Tiger Rényín − Rooster Xīnyǒu − Dragon Gēngchén Note+: a day later; Note−: a day earlier. Note#: AM=anno Mínguó Mythology[edit] Hand-written Chinese New Year's poetry pasted on the sides of doors leading to people's homes, Lijiang, Yunnan According to tales and legends, the beginning of the Chinese New Year started with a mythical beast called the Nian (a beast that lives under the sea or in the mountains) during the annual Spring Festival. The Nian would eat villagers, especially children in the middle of the night.[19] One year, all the villagers decided to go hide from the beast. An old man appeared before the villagers went into hiding and said that he would stay the night, and would get revenge on the Nian. The old man put red papers up and set off firecrackers. The day after, the villagers came back to their town and saw that nothing had been destroyed. They assumed that the old man was a deity who came to save them. The villagers then understood that Yanhuang had discovered that the Nian was afraid of the color red and loud noises.[19] Then the tradition grew when New Year was approaching, the villagers would wear red clothes, hang red lanterns, and red spring scrolls on windows and doors and used firecrackers and drums to frighten away the Nian. From then on, Nian never came to the village again. The Nian was eventually captured by Hongjun Laozu, an ancient Taoist monk. After that, Nian retreated to a nearby mountain. The name of the mountain has long been lost over the years.[20] There is also a saying that the beast is "Xi", rather than Nian. Spring Festival included New Year’s Eve and New Year. Xi is a kind of faint monster, and Nian is not related to the animal beasts in terms of meaning, it is more like a mature harvest.[clarification needed] There is no record of the beast in the ancient texts; it is only in Chinese folklore. The word "Nian" is composed of the words "he" and "Qian". It means that the grain is rich and the harvest is good. The farmers review the harvest at the end of the year and are also full of expectations for the coming year.[21] Origin Theory[edit] There are various theory about the origin of Chinese New year, the one that accepted most is that it was started by Emperor Yao in China's Bronze Age. When Emperor Yao ascend to the throne as a mantle leader, he brought his subordinates and people together to worship the sky and the earth. The day of his inauguration was set as the starting day of a year, and people gathered to do the worshipping yearly ever since.[22] History[edit] Before the new year celebration was established, ancient Chinese gathered and celebrated the end of harvest in autumn. However, this was not the Mid-Autumn Festival, during which Chinese gathered with family to worship the moon. The Classic of Poetry, a poem written during Western Zhou (1045 BC - 771 BC) by an anonymous farmer, described the traditions of celebrating the 10th month of the ancient solar calendar, which was in autumn.[23] According to the poem, during this time people clean millet-stack sites, toast guests with mijiu (rice wine), kill lambs and cook their meat, go to their masters' home, toast the master, and cheer the prospect of living long together. The 10th-month celebration is believed to be one of the prototypes of Chinese New Year.[22] The first Chinese new year celebration can be traced to the Warring States period (475 BC – 221 AD). In the Lüshi Chunqiu, in Qin state an exorcism ritual to expel illness, called "Big Nuo" (大傩), was recorded as being carried out on the last day of the year.[24][25] Later, Qin unified China, and the Qin dynasty was founded; and the ritual spread. It evolved into the practice of cleaning one's house thoroughly in the days preceding Chinese New Year. The first mention of celebrating at the start of a new year was recorded during the Han dynasty (202 BC – 220 AD). In the book Simin Yueling (四民月令), written by the Eastern Han agronomist Cui Shi (崔寔), a celebration was described: "The starting day of the first month, is called Zheng Ri. I bring my wife and children, to worship ancestors and commemorate my father." Later he wrote: "Children, wife, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren all serve pepper wine to their parents, make their toast, and wish their parents good health. It's a thriving view."[26] The practice of worshipping ancestors on New Year's Eve is maintained by Chinese people to this day.[27] Han Chinese also started the custom of visiting acquaintances' homes and wishing each other a happy new year. In Book of the Later Han, volume 27, a county officer was recorded as going to his prefect's house with a government secretary, toasting the prefect, and praising the prefect's merit.[28][29] During the Jin dynasty (266 – 420 AD), people started the New Year's Eve tradition of all-night reverlry called shousui (守岁). It was described in Western Jin general Zhou Chu's article Fengtu Ji (风土记): "At the ending of a year, people gift and wish each other, calling it Kuisui (馈岁); people invited others with drinks and food, calling it Biesui (别岁); on New Year's Eve, people stayed up all night until sunrise, calling it Shousui (守岁)."[30][31] The article used the word chu xi (除夕) to indicate New Year's Eve, and the name is still used until this day. The Northern and Southern dynasties book Jingchu Suishiji described the practice of firing bamboo in the early morning of New Year's Day,[32] which became a New Year tradition of the ancient Chinese. Poet and chancellor of the Tang dynasty Lai Gu also described this tradition in his poem Early Spring (早春): "新历才将半纸开，小亭犹聚爆竿灰", meaning "Another new year just started as a half opening paper, and the family gathered around the dust of exploded bamboo pole".[33] The practice was used by ancient Chinese people to scare away evil spirits, since firing bamboo would noisily crack or explode the hard plant. During the Tang dynasty, people established the custom of sending bai nian tie (拜年帖), which are New Year's greeting cards. It is said that the custom was started by Emperor Taizong of Tang. The emperor wrote "普天同庆" (whole nation celebrate together) on gold leaves and sent them to his ministers. Word of the emperor's gesture spread, and later it became the custom of people in general, who used Xuan paper instead of gold leaves.[34] Another theory is that bai nian tie was derived from the Han dynasty's name tag, "门状" (door opening). As imperial examinations became essential and reached their heyday under the Tang dynasty, candidates curried favour to become pupils of respected teachers, in order to get recommendation letters. After obtaining good examination marks, a pupil went to the teacher's home with a men zhuang (门状) to convey their gratitude. Therefore, eventually men zhuang became a symbol of good luck, and people started sending them to friends on New Year's Day, calling them by a new name, bai nian tie (拜年帖, New Year's Greetings).[35] Spring couplets written by Qianlong Emperor of Qing dynasty, now stored in The Palace Museum The Chunlian (Spring Couplets) was written by Meng Chang, an emperor of the Later Shu (935 – 965 AD), during the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period："新年纳余庆，嘉节号长春" (Enjoying past legacies in the new year, the holiday foreseeing the long-lasting spring). As described by Song dynasty official Zhang Tangying in his book Shu Tao Wu, volume 2: on the day of New Year's Eve, the emperor ordered the scholar Xin Yinxun to write the couplets on peach wood and hang them on the emperor's bedroom door.[36][37] It is believed that placing the couplets on the door to the home in the days preceding the new year was widespread during the Song dynasty. The famous Northern Song politician, litterateur, philosopher, and poet Wang Anshi recorded the custom in his poem "元日" (New Year's Day).[38] 爆竹声中一岁除， 春风送暖入屠苏。 千门万户瞳瞳日， 总把新桃换旧符。 --王安石, (元日) Amid the sound of firecrackers a year has come to an end, The spring wind has wafted warm breath to the Tusu wine. While the rising sun shines over each and every household, People get rid of the old couplets and put up the new ones. --Wang Anshi, (New Year’s Day) Chinese firecracker, 鞭炮. The poem Yuan Ri (元日) also includes the word "爆竹" (bao zhu, exploding bamboo), which is believed to be a reference to firecrackers, instead of the previous tradition of firing bamboo, both of which are called the same in the Chinese language. After gunpowder was invented in the Tang dynasty and widely used under the Song dynasty, people modified the tradition of firing bamboo by filling the bamboo pole with gunpowder, which made for louder explosions. Later under the Song, people discarded the bamboo and started to use paper to wrap the gunpowder in cylinders, in imitation of the bamboo. The firecracker was still called "爆竹", thus equating the new and old traditions. It is also recorded that people linked the firecrackers with hemp rope and created the "鞭炮" (bian pao, gunpowder whip) in the Song dynasty. Both "爆竹" and "鞭炮" are still used by present-day people to celebrate the Chinese New Year and other festive occasions.[39] It was also during the Song dynasty that people started to give money to children in celebration of a new year. The money was called sui nian qian (随年钱), meaning "the money based on age". In the chapter "Ending of a year" (岁除) of Wulin jiushi (武林旧事), the writer recorded that concubines of the emperor prepared a hundred and twenty coins for princes and princesses, to wish them long lives.[40] The new year celebration continued under the Yuan dynasty, when people also gave nian gao (年糕, year cakes) to relatives.[41] The tradition of eating Chinese dumplings jiaozi (饺子) was established under the Ming dynasty at the latest. It is described in the book Youzhongzhi (酌中志): "People get up at 5 am in the morning of new year's day, burn incense and light firecrackers, throw door latch or wooden bars in the air three times, drink pepper and thuja wine, eat dumplings. Sometimes put one or two silver currency inside dumplings, and whoever gets the money will attain a year of fortune."[42] Modern Chinese people also put other food that is auspicious into dumplings: such as dates, which prophesy a flourishing new year; candy, which predicts sweet days; and nian gao, which foretells a rich life. Qing dynasty's new year lucky money purse, with coin, gold and silver ingots, and jade included. Now stored in the Palace Museum.[43] In the Qing dynasty, the name ya sui qian (压岁钱, New Year's Money) was given to the lucky money given to children at the new year. The book Qing Jia Lu (清嘉录) recorded: "elders give children coins threaded together by a red string, and the money is called Ya Sui Qian."[44] The name is still used by modern Chinese people. The lucky money was presented in one of two forms: one was coins strung on red string; the other was a colorful purse filled with coins.[45][43] In 1928, the ruling Kuomintang party decreed that the Chinese New Year would fall on 1 Jan of the Gregorian Calendar, but this was abandoned due to overwhelming popular opposition. In 1967, during the Cultural Revolution, official Chinese New Year celebrations were banned in China. The State Council of the People's Republic of China announced that the public should "change customs"; have a "revolutionized and fighting Spring Festival"; and since people needed to work on Chinese New Year Eve, they did not need holidays during Spring Festival day. The old celebrations were reinstated in 1980.[46] Naming[edit] While Chinese New Year remains the official name for Chinese New Year in the Republic of China (Taiwan), Spring Festival was adopted by the People's Republic of China instead. On the other hand, the overseas Chinese diaspora mostly prefer the term Chinese New Year, and “Chinese New Year” remains a popular and convenient translation for people of non-Chinese cultural backgrounds. Along with the Han Chinese in and outside Greater China, as many as 29 of the 55 ethnic minority groups in China also celebrate Chinese New Year. Korea, Vietnam, Singapore, Malaysia, and Indonesia celebrate it as an official festival.[47] Public holiday[edit] Chinese New Year is observed as a public holiday in some countries and territories where there is a sizable Chinese population. Since Chinese New Year falls on different dates on the Gregorian calendar every year on different days of the week, some of these governments opt to shift working days in order to accommodate a longer public holiday. In some countries, a statutory holiday is added on the following work day if the New Year (as a public holiday) falls on a weekend, as in the case of 2013, where the New Year's Eve (9 February) falls on Saturday and the New Year's Day (10 February) on Sunday. Depending on the country, the holiday may be termed differently; common names are "Chinese New Year", "Lunar New Year", "New Year Festival", and "Spring Festival". For New Year celebrations that are lunar but are outside of China and Chinese diaspora (such as Korea's Seollal and Vietnam's Tết), see the article on Lunar New Year. For other countries and regions where Chinese New Year is celebrated but not an official holiday, see the table below. Country and region Official name Description Number of days Malaysia Tahun Baru Cina Half-day on Chinese New Year's Eve and the first 2 days of Chinese New Year.[citation needed] 2[48][49] Singapore Chinese New Year The first 2 days of Chinese New Year.[50] 2 Brunei Tahun Baru Cina Half-day on Chinese New Year's Eve and the first day of Chinese New Year.[51] 1 Hong Kong Lunar New Year The first 3 days of Chinese New Year.[52] 3 Macau Novo Ano Lunar The first 3 days of Chinese New Year[53] 3 Indonesia Tahun Baru Imlek (Sin Cia) The first day of Chinese New Year.[54][55] 1 Mainland China Spring Festival (Chūn Jié) The first 3 days of Chinese New Year. Extra holiday days are de facto added adjusting the weekend days before and after the three days holiday, resulting in a full week of public holiday known as Golden Week.[56][57] During the Chunyun holiday travel season. 3 (official holiday days) / 7 (de facto holiday days) Philippines Bagong Taong Tsino Half-day on Chinese New Year's Eve and the first day of Chinese New Year.[58] 1 South Korea Korean New Year (Seollal) The first 3 days of Chinese New Year. 3 Taiwan Lunar New Year / Spring Festival Half-day on Chinese New Year's Eve and the first 3 days of Chinese New Year.[59][60] 4[61] Thailand Wan Trut Chin (Chinese New Year's Day) Observed by Thai Chinese and parts of the private sector. Usually celebrated for three days, starting on the day before the Chinese New Year's Eve. Chinese New Year is observed as a public holiday in Narathiwat, Pattani, Yala, Satun[62] and Songkhla Provinces.[50] 1 Vietnam Tết Nguyên Đán (Vietnamese New Year) The first 3 days of Chinese New Year. 3 Suriname Maan Nieuwjaar The first day of Chinese New Year. 1 Festivities[edit] Red couplets and red lanterns are displayed on the door frames and light up the atmosphere. The air is filled with strong Chinese emotions. In stores in Beijing, Shanghai, Wuhan, and other cities, products of traditional Chinese style have started to lead fashion trend[s]. Buy yourself a Chinese-style coat, get your kids tiger-head hats and shoes, and decorate your home with some beautiful red Chinese knots, then you will have an authentic Chinese-style Spring Festival. — Xinwen Lianbo, January 2001, quoted by Li Ren, Imagining China in the Era of Global Consumerism and Local Consciousness[63] During the festival, people around China will prepare different gourmet dishes for their families and guests. Influenced by the flourished cultures, foods from different places look and taste totally different. Among them, the most well-known ones are dumplings from northern China and Tangyuan from southern China. Preceding days[edit] On the eighth day of the lunar month prior to Chinese New Year, the Laba holiday (腊八; 臘八; làbā), a traditional porridge, Laba porridge (腊八粥; 臘八粥; làbā zhōu), is served in remembrance of an ancient festival, called La, that occurred shortly after the winter solstice.[64] Pickles such as Laba garlic, which turns green from vinegar, are also made on this day. For those that practice Buddhism, the Laba holiday is also considered Bodhi Day. Layue (腊月; 臘月; Làyuè) is a term often associated with Chinese New Year as it refers to the sacrifices held in honor of the gods in the twelfth lunar month, hence the cured meats of Chinese New Year are known as larou (腊肉; 臘肉; làròu). The porridge was prepared by the women of the household at first light, with the first bowl offered to the family's ancestors and the household deities. Every member of the family was then served a bowl, with leftovers distributed to relatives and friends.[65] It's still served as a special breakfast on this day in some Chinese homes. The concept of the "La month" is similar to Advent in Christianity. Many families eat vegetarian on Chinese New Year eve, the garlic and preserved meat are eaten on Chinese New Year day. Receive the Gods in Chinese New Year, (1900s) On the days immediately before the New Year celebration, Chinese families give their homes a thorough cleaning. There is a Cantonese saying "Wash away the dirt on nin ya baat" (Chinese: 年廿八，洗邋遢; pinyin: nián niàn bā, xǐ lātà; Jyutping: nin4 jaa6 baat3, sai2 laap6 taap3 (laat6 taat3)), but the practice is not restricted to nin ya baat (the 28th day of month 12). It is believed the cleaning sweeps away the bad luck of the preceding year and makes their homes ready for good luck. Brooms and dust pans are put away on the first day so that the newly arrived good luck cannot be swept away. Some people give their homes, doors and window-frames a new coat of red paint; decorators and paper-hangers do a year-end rush of business prior to Chinese New Year.[66] Homes are often decorated with paper cutouts of Chinese auspicious phrases and couplets. Purchasing new clothing and shoes also symbolize a new start. Any hair cuts need to be completed before the New Year, as cutting hair on New Year is considered bad luck due to the homonymic nature of the word "hair" (fa) and the word for "prosperity". Businesses are expected to pay off all the debts outstanding for the year before the new year eve, extending to debts of gratitude. Thus it is a common practice to send gifts and rice to close business associates, and extended family members. In many households where Buddhism or Taoism is prevalent, home altars and statues are cleaned thoroughly, and decorations used to adorn altars over the past year are taken down and burned a week before the new year starts, to be replaced with new decorations. Taoists (and Buddhists to a lesser extent) will also "send gods back to heaven" (Chinese: 送神; pinyin: sòngshén), an example would be burning a paper effigy of Zao Jun the Kitchen God, the recorder of family functions. This is done so that the Kitchen God can report to the Jade Emperor of the family household's transgressions and good deeds. Families often offer sweet foods (such as candy) in order to "bribe" the deities into reporting good things about the family. Prior to the Reunion Dinner, a prayer of thanksgiving is held to mark the safe passage of the previous year. Confucianists take the opportunity to remember their ancestors, and those who had lived before them are revered. Some people do not give a Buddhist prayer due to the influence of Christianity, with a Christian prayer offered instead. Chinese New Year's Eve[edit] Main article: Chinese New Year’s Eve The biggest event of any Chinese New Year's Eve is the annual reunion dinner. Dishes consisting of special meats are served at the tables, as a main course for the dinner and offering for the New Year. This meal is comparable to Thanksgiving dinner in the U.S. and remotely similar to Christmas dinner in other countries with a high percentage of Christians. In northern China, it is customary to make jiaozi, or dumplings, after dinner to eat around midnight. Dumplings symbolize wealth because their shape resembles a Chinese sycee. In contrast, in the South, it is customary to make a glutinous new year cake (niangao) and send pieces of it as gifts to relatives and friends in the coming days. Niángāo [Pinyin] literally means "new year cake" with a homophonous meaning of "increasingly prosperous year in year out".[67] After dinner, some families go to local temples hours before the new year begins to pray for a prosperous new year by lighting the first incense of the year; however in modern practice, many households hold parties and even hold a countdown to the new year. Traditionally, firecrackers were lit to scare away evil spirits with the household doors sealed, not to be reopened until the new morning in a ritual called "opening the door of fortune" (开财门; 開財門; kāicáimén).[68] Beginning in 1983, the CCTV New Year's Gala is broadcast in China four hours before the start of the New Year and lasts until the succeeding early morning. Watching it has gradually become a tradition in China. The final countdown to the New Year is led by the hosts near the end of the show; traditionally, the Gala has closed with a performance of the song "Can't forget tonight" (难忘今宵), originally performed by Li Guyi. A tradition of going to bed late on Chinese New Year's Eve, or even keeping awake the whole night and morning, known as shousui (守岁), is still practised as it is thought to add on to one's parents' longevity. First day[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The first day is for the welcoming of the deities of the heavens and earth, officially beginning at midnight. It is a traditional practice to light fireworks, burn bamboo sticks and firecrackers and to make as much of a din as possible to chase off the evil spirits as encapsulated by nian of which the term Guo Nian was derived. Some consider lighting fires and using knives to be bad luck on New Year's Day, so all food to be consumed is cooked the days before. On this day, it is considered bad luck to use the broom, as good fortune is not to be "swept away" symbolically. Most importantly, the first day of Chinese New Year is a time to honor one's elders and families visit the oldest and most senior members of their extended families, usually their parents, grandparents and great-grandparents. Some families may invite a lion dance troupe as a symbolic ritual to usher in the Chinese New Year as well as to evict bad spirits from the premises. Members of the family who are married also give red envelopes containing cash known as lai see (Cantonese: 利事) or angpow (Hokkien and Teochew), or hongbao (Mandarin), a form of blessings and to suppress the aging and challenges associated with the coming year, to junior members of the family, mostly children and teenagers. Business managers also give bonuses through red packets to employees for good luck, smooth-sailing, good health and wealth. While fireworks and firecrackers are traditionally very popular, some regions have banned them due to concerns over fire hazards. For this reason, various city governments (e.g., Kowloon, Beijing, Shanghai for a number of years) issued bans over fireworks and firecrackers in certain precincts of the city. As a substitute, large-scale fireworks display have been launched by governments in Hong Kong and Singapore. However, it is a tradition that the indigenous peoples of the walled villages of New Territories, Hong Kong are permitted to light firecrackers and launch fireworks in a limited scale. Second day[edit] Incense is burned at the graves of ancestors as part of the offering and prayer rituals. The second day of the Chinese New Year, known as "beginning of the year" (开年; 開年; kāinián),[69] was when married daughters visited their birth parents, relatives and close friends. (Traditionally, married daughters didn't have the opportunity to visit their birth families frequently.) During the days of imperial China, "beggars and other unemployed people circulate[d] from family to family, carrying a picture [of the God of Wealth] shouting, "Cai Shen dao!" [The God of Wealth has come!]."[70] Householders would respond with "lucky money" to reward the messengers. Business people of the Cantonese dialect group will hold a 'Hoi Nin' prayer to start their business on the 2nd day of Chinese New Year so they will be blessed with good luck and prosperity in their business for the year. As this day is believed to be The Birthday of Che Kung, a deity worshipped in Hong Kong, worshippers go to Che Kung Temples to pray for his blessing. A representative from the government asks Che Kung about the city's fortune through kau cim. Third day[edit] The third day is known as "red mouth" (赤口; Chìkǒu). Chikou is also called "Chigou's Day" (赤狗日; Chìgǒurì). Chigou, literally "red dog", is an epithet of "the God of Blazing Wrath" (Chinese: 熛怒之神; pinyin: Biāo nù zhī shén). Rural villagers continue the tradition of burning paper offerings over trash fires. It is considered an unlucky day to have guests or go visiting.[71] Hakka villagers in rural Hong Kong in the 1960s called it the Day of the Poor Devil and believed everyone should stay at home.[72] This is also considered a propitious day to visit the temple of the God of Wealth and have one's future told. Fourth day[edit] In those communities that celebrate Chinese New Year for 15 days, the fourth day is when corporate "spring dinners" kick off and business returns to normal. Other areas that have a longer Chinese New Year holiday will celebrate and welcome the gods that were previously sent on this day. Fifth day[edit] This day is the god of Wealth's birthday. In northern China, people eat jiaozi, or dumplings, on the morning of powu (Chinese: 破五; pinyin: pòwǔ). In Taiwan, businesses traditionally re-open on the next day (the sixth day), accompanied by firecrackers. It is also common in China that on the 5th day people will shoot off firecrackers to get Guan Yu's attention, thus ensuring his favor and good fortune for the new year.[73] Sixth day[edit] The sixth day is Horse's Day, on which people drive away the Ghost of Poverty by throwing out the garbage stored up during the festival. The ways vary but basically have the same meaning—to drive away the Ghost of Poverty, which reflects the general desire of the Chinese people to ring out the old and ring in the new, to send away the previous poverty and hardship and to usher in the good life of the New Year.[74] Seventh day[edit] Main article: Renri The seventh day, traditionally known as Renri (the common person's birthday), is the day when everyone grows one year older. In some overseas Chinese communities in Southeast Asia, such as Malaysia and Singapore, it is also the day when tossed raw fish salad, yusheng, is eaten for continued wealth and prosperity. For many Chinese Buddhists, this is another day to avoid meat, the seventh day commemorating the birth of Sakra, lord of the devas in Buddhist cosmology who is analogous to the Jade Emperor. Chinese New Year's celebrations, on the eighth day, in the Metro Vancouver suburb of Richmond, British Columbia, Canada. Eighth day[edit] Another family dinner is held to celebrate the eve of the birth of the Jade Emperor, the ruler of heaven. People normally return to work by the eighth day, therefore the Store owners will host a lunch/dinner with their employees, thanking their employees for the work they have done for the whole year. Ninth day[edit] The ninth day of the New Year is a day for Chinese to offer prayers to the Jade Emperor of Heaven in the Daoist Pantheon.[75] The ninth day is traditionally the birthday of the Jade Emperor. This day, called Ti Kong Dan (Chinese: 天公誕; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Thiⁿ-kong Tan), Ti Kong Si (Chinese: 天公生; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Thiⁿ-kong Siⁿ/Thiⁿ-kong Seⁿ) or Pai Ti Kong (拜天公; Pài Thiⁿ-kong), is especially important to Hokkiens, even more important than the first day of the Chinese New Year.[76] Come midnight of the eighth day of the new year, Hokkiens will offer thanks to the Emperor of Heaven. A prominent requisite offering is sugarcane.[76] Legend holds that the Hokkien were spared from a massacre by Japanese pirates by hiding in a sugarcane plantation during the eighth and ninth days of the Chinese New Year, coinciding with the Jade Emperor's birthday.[76] Since "sugarcane" (甘蔗; kam-chià) is a near homonym to "thank you" (感謝; kám-siā) in the Hokkien dialect, Hokkiens offer sugarcane on the eve of his birthday, symbolic of their gratitude.[76] In the morning of this birthday (traditionally anytime from midnight to 7 am), Taiwanese households set up an altar table with 3 layers: one top (containing offertories of six vegetables (Chinese: 六齋; pinyin: liù zhāi), noodles, fruits, cakes, tangyuan, vegetable bowls, and unripe betel, all decorated with paper lanterns) and two lower levels (containing the five sacrifices and wines) to honor the deities below the Jade Emperor.[75] The household then kneels three times and kowtows nine times to pay obeisance and wish him a long life.[75] Incense, tea, fruit, vegetarian food or roast pig, and gold paper is served as a customary protocol for paying respect to an honored person. Tenth day[edit] The Jade Emperor's birthday party is celebrated on this day. Fifteenth day[edit] Main article: Lantern Festival The fifteenth day of the new year is celebrated as "Yuanxiao Festival" (元宵节; 元宵節; Yuán xiāo jié), also known as "Shangyuan Festival" (上元节; 上元節; Shàng yuán jié) or the Lantern Festival (otherwise known as Chap Goh Mei (十五暝; Shíwǔmíng; 'the fifteen night') in Hokkien). Rice dumplings tangyuan (汤圆; 湯圓; tang yuán), a sweet glutinous rice ball brewed in a soup, are eaten this day. Candles are lit outside houses as a way to guide wayward spirits home. This day is celebrated as the Lantern Festival, and families walk the street carrying lighted lantern. In China and Malaysia, this day is celebrated by individuals seeking a romantic partner, akin to Valentine's Day.[77] Nowadays, single women write their contact number on mandarin oranges and throw them in a river or a lake after which single men collect the oranges and eat them. The taste is an indication of their possible love: sweet represents a good fate while sour represents a bad fate. This day often marks the end of the Chinese New Year festivities. Traditional food[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) One version of niangao, Chinese New Year cake A reunion dinner (nián yè fàn) is held on New Year's Eve during which family members gather for a celebration. The venue will usually be in or near the home of the most senior member of the family. The New Year's Eve dinner is very large and sumptuous and traditionally includes dishes of meat (namely, pork and chicken) and fish. Most reunion dinners also feature a communal hot pot as it is believed to signify the coming together of the family members for the meal. Most reunion dinners (particularly in the Southern regions) also prominently feature specialty meats (e.g. wax-cured meats like duck and Chinese sausage) and seafood (e.g. lobster and abalone) that are usually reserved for this and other special occasions during the remainder of the year. In most areas, fish (鱼; 魚; yú) is included, but not eaten completely (and the remainder is stored overnight), as the Chinese phrase "may there be surpluses every year" (年年有余; 年年有餘; niánnián yǒu yú) sounds the same as "let there be fish every year." Eight individual dishes are served to reflect the belief of good fortune associated with the number. If in the previous year a death was experienced in the family, seven dishes are served. Other traditional foods consists of noodles, fruits, dumplings, spring rolls, and Tangyuan which are also known as sweet rice balls. Each dish served during Chinese New Year represents something special. The noodles used to make longevity noodles are usually very thin, long wheat noodles. These noodles are longer than normal noodles that are usually fried and served on a plate, or boiled and served in a bowl with its broth. Expectedly, the noodles symbolize the wish for a long life. The fruits that are typically selected would be oranges, tangerines, and pomelos as they are round and "golden" color symbolizing fullness and wealth. Their lucky sound when spoken also brings good luck and fortune. The Chinese pronunciation for orange is 橙 (chéng /chnng/), which sounds the same as the Chinese for 'success' (成). One of the ways to spell tangerine(桔 jú /jyoo/) contains the Chinese character for luck (吉 jí /jee/). Pomelos is believed to bring constant prosperity. Pomelo in Chinese (柚 yòu /yo/) sounds similar to 'to have' (有 yǒu), disregarding its tone, however it sounds exactly like 'again' (又 yòu). Dumplings and spring rolls symbolize wealth, whereas sweet rice balls symbolize family togetherness. Red packets for the immediate family are sometimes distributed during the reunion dinner. These packets contain money in an amount that reflects good luck and honorability. Several foods are consumed to usher in wealth, happiness, and good fortune. Several of the Chinese food names are homophones for words that also mean good things. Many places in China still follow the tradition of eating only vegetarian food on the first day of the New Year, as it is believed that doing so will bring joy and peace into their lives for the whole year. Like many other New Year dishes, certain ingredients also take special precedence over others as these ingredients also have similar-sounding names with prosperity, good luck, or even counting money. Food item Simplified Chinese Traditional Chinese Hanyu Pinyin Description Buddha's delight 罗汉斋 羅漢齋 Luóhàn zhāi An elaborate vegetarian dish served by Chinese families on the eve and the first day of the New Year. A type of black hair-like algae, pronounced "fat choy" in Cantonese, is also featured in the dish for its name, which sounds like "prosperity". Hakkas usually serve kiu nyuk (扣肉; kòuròu) and ngiong teu fu. Chicken 鸡 雞 Jī Boiled chicken is served because it is figured that any family, no matter how humble their circumstances, can afford a chicken for Chinese New Year. Apples 苹果 蘋果 Píngguǒ Apples symbolize peace because the word for apple ("ping") is a homonym of the word for peace. Fish 鱼 魚 Yú Is usually eaten or merely displayed on the eve of Chinese New Year. The pronunciation of fish makes it a homophone for "surpluses"(余; 餘; yú). Garlic 蒜 Suàn Is usually served in a dish with rondelles of Chinese sausage or Chinese cured meat during Chinese New Year. The pronunciation of Garlic makes it a homophone for "calculating (money)" (算; suàn). The Chinese cured meat is so chosen because it is traditionally the primary method for storing meat over the winter and the meat rondelles resemble coins. Jau gok 油角 Yóu jiǎo The main Chinese new year dumpling for Cantonese families. It is believed to resemble a sycee or yuánbǎo, the old Chinese gold and silver ingots, and to represent prosperity for the coming year. Jiaozi 饺子 餃子 Jiǎozi The common dumpling eaten in northern China, also believed to resemble sycee. In the reunion dinner, Chinese people add various food into Jiaozi fillings to represent good fortune: coin, Niangao, dried date, candy, etc. Mandarin oranges 桔子 Júzi Oranges, particularly mandarin oranges, are a common fruit during Chinese New Year. They are particularly associated with the festival in southern China, where its name is a homophone of the word for "luck" in dialects such as Teochew (in which 橘, jú, and 吉, jí, are both pronounced gik).[78] Melon seed/Guazi 瓜子 Guāzi Other variations include sunflower, pumpkin and other seeds. It symbolizes fertility and having many children. Niangao 年糕 Niángāo Most popular in eastern China (Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Shanghai) because its pronunciation is a homophone for "a more prosperous year (年高 lit. year high)". Niangao is also popular in the Philippines because of its large Chinese population and is known as tikoy (Chinese: 甜粿, from Min Nan) there. Known as Chinese New Year pudding, niangao is made up of glutinous rice flour, wheat starch, salt, water, and sugar. The color of the sugar used determines the color of the pudding (white or brown). Noodles 面条 麵條 Miàntiáo Families may serve uncut noodles (making them as long as they can[79]), which represent longevity and long life, though this practice is not limited to the new year. Sweets 糖果 Tángguǒ Sweets and similar dried fruit goods are stored in a red or black Chinese candy box. Rougan (Yok Gon) 肉干 肉乾 Ròugān Chinese salty-sweet dried meat, akin to jerky, which is trimmed of the fat, sliced, marinated and then smoked for later consumption or as a gift. Taro cakes 芋头糕 芋頭糕 Yùtougāo Made from the vegetable taro, the cakes are cut into squares and often fried. Turnip cakes 萝卜糕 蘿蔔糕 Luóbogāo A dish made of shredded radish and rice flour, usually fried and cut into small squares. Yusheng or Yee sang 鱼生 魚生 Yúshēng Raw fish salad. Eating this salad is said to bring good luck. This dish is usually eaten on the seventh day of the New Year, but may also be eaten throughout the period. Five Xinpan 五辛盘 五辛盤 Wǔ xīnpán Five Xin include onion, garlic, pepper, ginger, mustard. As an ancient traditional folk culture, it has been existing since the Jin Dynasty. It symbolizes health. In a well-economic development dynasty, like Song, The Five Xinpan not only have five spicy vegetables. Also, include Chinese bacon and other vegetables. Moreover, it offered to the family's ancestors to express respect and seek a blessing.[80] Laba porridge 腊八粥 臘八粥 Làbā zhōu This dish eats on the eighth day of the twelfth month of the Chinese lunar calendar. The congees are made of mixed Walnut, pine nuts, mushrooms, persimmon. The congees are for commemorate the sacrificing to the ancestors and celebrate the harvest.[81] Practices[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Red envelopes[edit] Red packets for sale in a market in Taipei, Taiwan, before the Year of the Rat Shoppers at a New Year market in Chinatown, Singapore Traditionally, red envelopes or red packets (Mandarin: simplified Chinese: 红包; traditional Chinese: 紅包; pinyin: hóngbāo; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: âng-pau; Hakka: fung bao / Cantonese: Chinese: 利是, 利市 or 利事; pinyin: lìshì; Cantonese Yale: lai sze / lai see) are passed out during the Chinese New Year's celebrations, from married couples or the elderly to unmarried juniors or children. During this period, red packets are also known as "yasuiqian" (压岁钱; 壓歲錢; yāsuìqián, which was evolved from 压祟钱; 壓祟錢; yāsuìqián, literally, "the money used to suppress or put down the evil spirit").[82] Red packets almost always contain money, usually varying from a couple of dollars to several hundred. Chinese superstitions favour amounts that begin with even numbers, such as 8 (八, pinyin: bā) — a homophone for "wealth", and 6 (六, pinyin: liù) — a homophone for "smooth", except for the number 4 (四, pinyin: sì) — as it is a homophone of "death", and is, as such, considered unlucky in Asian culture. Odd numbers are also avoided, as they are associated with cash given during funerals (帛金, pinyin: báijīn).[83][84] It is also customary for bills placed inside a red envelope to be new.[85] The act of asking for red packets is normally called (Mandarin): 討紅包 tǎo-hóngbāo, 要利是 or (Cantonese): 逗利是. A married person would not turn down such a request as it would mean that he or she would be "out of luck" in the new year. Red packets are generally given by established married couples to the younger non-married children of the family. It is custom and polite for children to wish elders a happy new year and a year of happiness, health and good fortune before accepting the red envelope. Red envelopes are then kept under the pillow and slept on for seven nights after Chinese New Year before opening because that symbolizes good luck and fortune. In Taiwan in the 2000s, some employers also gave red packets as a bonus to maids, nurses or domestic workers from Southeast Asian countries, although whether this is appropriate is controversial.[86][87] In the mid-2010s, Chinese messaging apps such as WeChat popularized the distribution of red envelopes in a virtual format via mobile payments, usually within group chats.[88][89] In 2017, it was estimated that over 100 billion of these virtual red envelopes would be sent over the New Year holiday.[90][91] Gift exchange[edit] Chinese candy box In addition to red envelopes, which are usually given from older people to younger people, small gifts (usually food or sweets) are also exchanged between friends or relatives (of different households) during Chinese New Year. Gifts are usually brought when visiting friends or relatives at their homes. Common gifts include fruits (typically oranges, but never trade pears), cakes, biscuits, chocolates, and candies. Certain items should not be given, as they are considered taboo. Taboo gifts include:[92][93][94] items associated with funerals (i.e. handkerchiefs, towels, chrysanthemums, items colored white and black) items that show that time is running out (i.e. clocks and watches) sharp objects that symbolize cutting a tie (i.e. scissors and knives) items that symbolize that you want to walk away from a relationship (examples: shoes and sandals) mirrors homonyms for unpleasant topics (examples: "clock" sounds like "the funeral ritual", green hats because "wear a green hat" sounds like "cuckold", "handkerchief" sounds like "goodbye", "pear" sounds like "separate", and "umbrella" sounds like "disperse"). Markets[edit] Markets or village fairs are set up as the New Year is approaching. These usually open-air markets feature new year related products such as flowers, toys, clothing, and even fireworks and firecrackers. It is convenient for people to buy gifts for their new year visits as well as their home decorations. In some places, the practice of shopping for the perfect plum tree is not dissimilar to the Western tradition of buying a Christmas tree. Hong Kong filmmakers also release "New Year celebration films" (Chinese: 賀歲片), mostly comedies, at this time of year. Fireworks[edit] See also: Fireworks bans in China A Chinese man setting off fireworks during Chinese New Year in Shanghai. Bamboo stems filled with gunpowder that was burnt to create small explosions were once used in ancient China to drive away evil spirits. In modern times, this method has eventually evolved into the use of firecrackers during the festive season. Firecrackers are usually strung on a long fused string so it can be hung down. Each firecracker is rolled up in red papers, as red is auspicious, with gunpowder in its core. Once ignited, the firecracker lets out a loud popping noise and, as they are usually strung together by the hundreds, the firecrackers are known for their deafening explosions that are thought to scare away evil spirits. The burning of firecrackers also signifies a joyful time of year and has become an integral aspect of Chinese New Year celebrations.[95] Since the 2000s, firecrackers have been banned in various countries and towns. Spring Festival Gala[edit] Watching Spring Festival Gala on is essential for Chinese families. A family would watch the CCTV New Year's Gala together after or at the same time as their reunion dinner on the eve of Chinese New Year. The CCTV New Year's Gala is also broadcast by every local television channels in China. It is a nation-wide celebrating event. Local TV stations also hosts their own new year's gala, broadcasting in the days before. Chinese community all around the world hold their local Spring Festival Gala show by their own. Music[edit] "Happy New Year!" (Chinese: 新年好呀; pinyin: Xīn Nián Hǎo Ya; lit. 'New Year's Good, Ya') is a popular children's song for the New Year holiday.[96] The melody is similar to the American folk song, Oh My Darling, Clementine. Chorus: Happy New Year! Happy New Year! (Chinese: 新年好呀！新年好呀！; pinyin: Xīnnián hǎo ya! Xīnnián hǎo ya!) Happy New Year to you all! (Chinese: 祝賀大家新年好！; pinyin: Zhùhè dàjiā xīnnián hǎo!) We are singing; we are dancing. (Chinese: 我們唱歌，我們跳舞。; pinyin: Wǒmen chànggē, wǒmen tiàowǔ.) Happy New Year to you all! (Chinese: 祝賀大家新年好！; pinyin: Zhùhè dàjiā xīnnián hǎo!) Another popular Chinese New Year song is Gong Xi Gong Xi(Chinese: 恭喜恭喜！; pinyin: Gongxi Gongxi!) . Movies[edit] Main article: Lunar New Year Film Watching Lunar New Year Films is also a Chinese cultural identity. During the New Year holidays, the stage boss gathers the most popular actors whom from various troupes let them perform repertories from Qing dynasty. Nowadays people prefer celebrating the new year with their family by watching these movies together. Clothing[edit] Girls dressed in red (Hong Kong). The color red is commonly worn throughout Chinese New Year; traditional beliefs held that red could scare away evil spirits and bad fortune. The wearing of new clothes is another clothing custom during the festival, the new clothes symbolize a new beginning in the year, and enough things to use and wear in this time. Family portrait[edit] In some places, the taking of a family portrait is an important ceremony after the relatives are gathered. The photo is taken at the hall of the house or taken in front of the house. The most senior male head of the family sits in the center. Symbolism[edit] See also: Fu character An inverted character fu is a sign of arriving blessings. As with all cultures, Chinese New Year traditions incorporate elements that are symbolic of deeper meaning. One common example of Chinese New Year symbolism is the red diamond-shaped fu characters (Chinese: 福; pinyin: fú; Cantonese Yale: fuk1; lit. 'blessings, happiness'), which are displayed on the entrances of Chinese homes. This sign is usually seen hanging upside down, since the Chinese word dao (Chinese: 倒; pinyin: dào; lit. 'upside down'), is homophonous or nearly homophonous with (Chinese: 到; pinyin: dào; lit. 'arrive') in all varieties of Chinese. Therefore, it symbolizes the arrival of luck, happiness, and prosperity. For the Cantonese-speaking people, if the fu sign is hung upside down, the implied dao (upside down) sounds like the Cantonese word for "pour", producing "pour the luck [away]", which would usually symbolize bad luck; this is why the fu character is not usually hung upside-down in Cantonese communities. Red is the predominant color used in New Year celebrations. Red is the emblem of joy, and this color also symbolizes virtue, truth and sincerity. On the Chinese opera stage, a painted red face usually denotes a sacred or loyal personage and sometimes a great emperor. Candies, cakes, decorations and many things associated with the New Year and its ceremonies are colored red. The sound of the Chinese word for "red" (simplified Chinese: 红; traditional Chinese: 紅; pinyin: hóng; Cantonese Yale: hung4) is in Mandarin homophonous with the word for "prosperous." Therefore, red is an auspicious color and has an auspicious sound. According to Chinese tradition, the year of the pig is a generally unlucky year for the public, which is why you need to reevaluate most of your decisions before you reach a conclusion. However, this only helps you get even more control over your life as you learn to stay ahead of everything by being cautious.[97] Nianhua[edit] Chinese New Year festival in Chinatown, Boston Nianhua can be a form of Chinese colored woodblock printing, for decoration during Chinese New Year.[98] Flowers[edit] The following are popular floral decorations for the New Year and are available at new year markets. Floral Decor Meaning Plum Blossom symbolizes luckiness Kumquat symbolizes prosperity Calamondin Symbolizes luck Narcissus symbolizes prosperity Bamboo a plant used for any time of year Sunflower means to have a good year Eggplant a plant to heal all of your sicknesses Chom Mon Plant a plant which gives you tranquility Icons and ornaments[edit] Icons Meaning Illustrations Lanterns These lanterns that differ from those of Mid-Autumn Festival in general. They will be red in color and tend to be oval in shape. These are the traditional Chinese paper lanterns. Those lanterns, used on the fifteenth day of the Chinese New Year for the Lantern Festival, are bright, colorful, and in many different sizes and shapes. Decorations Decorations generally convey a New Year greeting. They are not advertisements. Fai Chun—Chinese calligraphy of auspicious Chinese idioms on typically red posters—are hung on doorways and walls. Other decorations include a New year picture, Chinese knots, and papercutting and couplets. Dragon dance and Lion dance Dragon and lion dances are common during Chinese New Year. It is believed that the loud beats of the drum and the deafening sounds of the cymbals together with the face of the Dragon or lion dancing aggressively can evict bad or evil spirits. Lion dances are also popular for opening of businesses in Hong Kong and Macau. Fortune gods Cai Shen Ye, Che Kung, etc. Red envelope Typically given to children, elderly and Dragon/Lion Dance performers while saying t 恭喜發財 j gung1 hei2 faat3 coi4, s 恭喜发财 p gōng xǐ fā cái Spring travel[edit] Scene of the 2009 Chunyun period inside Beijing West railway station Main article: Chunyun Traditionally, families gather together during the Chinese New Year. In modern China, migrant workers in China travel home to have reunion dinners with their families on Chinese New Year's Eve. Owing to a large number of interprovincial travelers, special arrangements were made by railways, buses and airlines starting from 15 days before the New Year's Day. This 40-day period is called chunyun, and is known as the world's largest annual migration.[99] More interurban trips are taken in mainland China in this period than the total population of China. In Taiwan, spring travel is also a major event. The majority of transportation in western Taiwan is in a north–south direction: long-distance travel between urbanized north and hometowns in the rural south. Transportation in eastern Taiwan and that between Taiwan and its islands is less convenient. Cross-strait flights between Taiwan and mainland China began in 2003 as part of Three Links, mostly for "Taiwanese businessmen" to return to Taiwan for the new year.[100] Festivities outside Greater China[edit] Decorations on the occasion of Chinese New Year – River Hongbao 2016, Singapore Chinese New Year is also celebrated annually in many countries which houses significant Chinese populations. These include countries throughout Asia, Oceania, and North America. Sydney,[101] London,[102] and San Francisco[103] claim to host the largest New Year celebration outside of Asia and South America. Southeast Asia[edit] In some countries of Southeast Asia, Chinese New Year is a national public holiday and considered to be one of the most important holidays of the year. Chinese New Year's Eve is typically a half-day holiday for Malaysia and Singapore. The biggest celebrations take place in Malaysia (notably in Kuala Lumpur, George Town, Johor Bahru, Ipoh and Klang) and Singapore.[104] Gaya Street in Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia filled with Chinese lanterns during the New Year celebration. In Singapore, Chinese New Year is accompanied by various festive activities. One of the main highlights is the Chinatown celebrations. In 2010, this included a Festive Street Bazaar, nightly staged shows at Kreta Ayer Square and a lion dance competition.[105] The Chingay Parade also features prominently in the celebrations. It is an annual street parade in Singapore, well known for its colorful floats and wide variety of cultural performances.[106] The highlights of the Parade for 2011 include a Fire Party, multi-ethnic performances and an unprecedented travelling dance competition.[107] Lanterns hanged around Senapelan street, the Pekanbaru Chinatown In the Philippines, Chinese New Year is considered to be the most important festival for Filipino-Chinese, and its celebration has also extended to the non-Chinese majority Filipinos. In 2012, Chinese New Year was included in public holidays in the Philippines, which is only the New Year's Day itself.(Sin-nî: Chinese new years in Philippine Hokkien) Greeting banners of various companies in the Chinese New Year 2016, Yaowarat In Thailand, one of the most populous Chinese descent populated countries. Also celebrated the great Chinese New Year festivities throughout the country, especially in provinces where many Chinese descent live such as Nakhon Sawan, Suphan Buri, Phuket etc. Which is considered to promote tourism in the same agenda as well.[108][109][110] In the capital, Bangkok in Chinatown, Yaowarat Road, there is a great celebration. Which usually closes the road making it a pedestrian street and often have a member of royal family came to be the president of the ceremony, always open every year, such as Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn.[111][112][113] Indonesia[edit] In Indonesia, the Chinese New Year is officially named as Hari Tahun Baru Imlek,[114][115] or Sin Cia in Hokkien.[116] It was celebrated as one of the official national religious holiday by Chinese Indonesians since 18 June 1946 to 1 January 1953 through government regulation signed by President Sukarno on 18 June 1946.[117] It was unofficially celebrated by ethnic Chinese from 1953 to 1967 based on government regulation signed by Vice President Muhammad Hatta on 5 February 1953 which annul the previous regulation, among others, the Chinese New Year as a national religious holiday,[118] Effectively from 6 December 1967,[119] until 1998, the spiritual practice to celebrate the Chinese New Year by Chinese families was restricted specifically only inside of the Chinese house. This restriction is made by Indonesian government through a Presidential Instruction, Instruksi Presiden No.14 Tahun 1967, signed by President Suharto. This restriction is ended when the regime has changed and the President Suharto was overthrown. The celebration is conducted unofficially by Chinese community from 1999 to 2000. On 17 January 2000, the President Abdurrahman Wahid issued a Presidential Decree through Keputusan Presiden RI No 6 Tahun 2000 to annul Instruksi Presiden No.14 Tahun 1967.[120] On 19 January 2001, the Ministry of Religious Affairs (Kementerian Agama Republik Indonesia) issued a Decree through Keputusan Menteri Agama RI No 13 Tahun 2001 tentang Imlek sebagai Hari Libur Nasional to set of Hari Tahun Baru Imlek as a Facultative Holiday for Chinese Community.[121] Through the Presidential Decree it was officially declared as a 1 (one) day public religious holiday as of 9 April 2002 by President Megawati.[115] The Indonesian government authorize only the first day of the Chinese New Year as a public religious holiday and it is specifically designated only for Chinese people.[114][115][117][118][122] In Indonesia, the first day of the Chinese New Year is recognized as a part of the celebration of the Chinese religion and tradition of Chinese community.[114][115][117][118][121] There are no other official or unofficial of the Chinese New Year as a public holiday. The remaining 14 days are celebrated only by ethnic Chinese families.[123] In Indonesia, the Chinese Year is named as a year of Kǒngzǐ (孔子) or Kongzili in Bahasa Indonesia. Every year, the Ministry of Religious Affairs (Kementerian Agama Republik Indonesia) set the specific date of religious holiday based on input from religious leaders.[123] The Chinese New Year is the only national religious holiday in Indonesia that was enacted specifically with the Presidential Decree, in this case with the Keputusan Presiden Republik Indonesia (Keppres RI) No 19 Tahun 2002 dated on 9 April 2002.[114][115] The celebration of the Chinese New Year as a religious holiday is specifically intended only for Chinese People in Indonesia (tradisi masyarakat Cina yang dirayakan secara turun temurun di berbagai wilayah di Indonesia,[115] dan umat Agama Tionghoa[117]) and it is not intended to be celebrated by Indonesian Indigenous Peoples or Masyarakat Pribumi Indonesia.[114][115][117][118][119][121] Big Chinese population cities and towns like of Chinatown includes Jakarta, Medan, Singkawang, Pangkal Pinang, Binjai, Bagansiapiapi, Tanjungbalai, Pematangsiantar, Selat Panjang, Pekanbaru, Tanjung Pinang, Batam, Ketapang, Pontianak, Sungailiat, Tanjung Pandan, Manggar, Toboali, Muntok, Lubuk Pakam, Bandung, Semarang, Surabaya, Rantau Prapat, Tebing Tinggi, Sibolga, Dumai, Panipahan, Bagan Batu, Tanjung Balai Karimun, Palembang, Bengkayang, and Tangerang always have its own New Year's celebration every years with parade and fireworks. A lot shopping malls decorated its building with lantern, Chinese words and lion or dragon with red and gold as main color. Lion dance is a common sight around Chinese houses, temples and its shophouses. Usually, the Buddhist, Confucian and Taoist Chinese will burn a big incense made by aloeswood with dragon-decorated at front of their house. The Chinese temple is open 24 hours at the first day, their also distributes a red envelopes and sometimes rice, fruits or sugar to the poor around. Thailand[edit] Divided into 3 days, the first day is the Wan chai (Thai: วันจ่าย; pay day), meaning the day that people go out to shop for offerings, second day is the Wan wai (Thai: วันไหว้; worship day), is a day of worshiping the gods and ancestral spirits, which is divided into three periods: dawn, late morning and afternoon, the third day is a Wan tieow (Thai: วันเที่ยว; holiday), is a holiday that everyone will leave the house to travel or to bless relatives or respectable people. And often wear red clothes because it is believed to bring auspiciousness to life.[124] Observed by Thai Chinese and parts of the private sector. Usually celebrated for three days, starting on the day before the Chinese New Year's Eve. Chinese New Year is observed as a public holiday in Narathiwat, Pattani, Yala, Satun[62] and Songkhla[125] Provinces. For the year 2021 (one year only) the government declared Chinese New Year a government holiday. It applies mostly to civil servants, financial institutions and private businesses can decide whether or not to observe it.[126] Australia and New Zealand[edit] Melbourne: Chinese New Year in Chinatown With one of the largest Chinese populations outside of Asia, Sydney also claims to have the largest Chinese New Year Celebrations outside of Asia with over 600,000 people attending the celebrations in Chinatown annually. The events there span over three weeks including the launch celebration, outdoor markets, evening street food stalls, Chinese top opera performances, dragon boat races, a film festival and multiple parades that incorporate Chinese, Japanese, Korean people and Vietnamese performers. More than 100,000 people attend notably the main parade with over 3,500 performers.[127] The festival also attracts international media coverage, reaching millions of viewers in Asia.[128] The festival in Sydney is organized in partnership with a different Chinese province each year. Apart from Sydney, other state capital cities in Australia also celebrate Chinese New Year due to large number of Chinese residents.[129] The cities include: Brisbane, Adelaide, Melbourne Box Hill and Perth. The common activities are lion dance, dragon dance, New Year market, and food festival. In the Melbourne suburb of Footscray, Victoria a Lunar New Year celebration initially focusing on the Vietnamese New Year has expanded into a celebration of the Chinese New Year as well as the April New Year celebrations of the Thais, Cambodians, Laotians and other Asian Australian communities who celebrate the New Year in either January/February or April.[130] The city of Wellington hosts a two-day weekend festival for Chinese New Year,[131] and a one-day festival is held in Dunedin, centred on the city's Chinese gardens.[132] North America[edit] Play media Chinese lunar new year in Washington DC Many cities in North America sponsor official parades for Chinese New Year. Among the cities with such parades are San Francisco,[133] Los Angeles,[134] New York City,[135] Boston,[136] Chicago,[137] Mexico City,[138] Toronto, and Vancouver.[139] However, even smaller cities that are historically connected to Chinese immigration, such as Butte, Montana,[140] have recently hosted parades. New York[edit] Multiple groups in New York City cooperate to sponsor a week-long Lunar New Year celebration. The festivities include cultural festival,[135] music concert,[141] fireworks on the Hudson River near the Chinese Consulate,[142] and special exhibits.[141] One of the key celebrations is the Chinese New Year parade[143] with floats and fireworks taking place along the streets in Lower Manhattan.[144] In June 2015, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio declared that the Lunar New Year would be made a public school holiday.[145] California[edit] Lion costume for New Year parade, Los Angeles, 1953 The San Francisco Chinese New Year Festival and Parade is the oldest and largest event of its kind outside of Asia, and the largest Asian cultural event in North America. The festival incorporates Grant and Kearny Streets into its street festival and parade route, respectively. The use of these streets traces its lineage back to early parades beginning the custom in San Francisco. In 1849, with the discovery of gold and the ensuing California Gold Rush, over 50,000 people had come to San Francisco to seek their fortune or just a better way of life. Among those were many Chinese, who had come to work in the gold mines and on the railroad. By the 1860s, the residents of San Francisco's Chinatown were eager to share their culture with their fellow San Francisco residents who may have been unfamiliar with (or hostile towards) it. The organizers chose to showcase their culture by using a favorite American tradition – the parade. They invited a variety of other groups from the city to participate, and they marched down what today are Grant Avenue and Kearny Street carrying colorful flags, banners, lanterns, drums, and firecrackers to drive away evil spirits. In San Francisco, over 100 units participate in the annual Chinese New Year Parade held since 1958.[146] The parade is attended by some 500,000 people along with another 3 million TV viewers.[147] Europe[edit] United Kingdom London: Chinatown with Chinese New Year decoration Chinese New Year in Manchester,UK In London, the celebrations take place throughout Chinatown, Leicester Square and Trafalgar Square. Festivities include a parade, cultural feast, fireworks, concerts and performances.[148] The celebration attracts between 300,000 and 500,000 people yearly according to the organisers.[149] France In Paris, the celebrations have been held since the 1980s in several districts during one month with many performances[150] and the main of the three parades with 40 groups and 4,000 performers is attended alone by more than 200,000 people in the 13th arrondissement.[151][152] Netherlands Celebrations have been held officially in The Hague since 2002.[153][154] Other celebration are held in Amsterdam and in Rotterdam.[155][156] India and Pakistan[edit] Chinese New Year 2014 Celebration in Kolkata The Chinese New Year celebrated in Kolkata The Chinese New Year celebrated in Kolkata Many celebrate the festival in Chinatown, Kolkata, India where a significant community of people of Chinese origin exists. In Kolkata, Chinese New Year is celebrated with lion and dragon dance. In Pakistan, the Chinese New Year is also celebrated among the sizable Chinese expatriate community that lives in the country. During the festival, the Chinese embassy in Islamabad arranges various cultural events in which Pakistani arts and cultural organizations and members of the civil society also participate.[157][158][159][160] Greetings[edit] The Chinese New Year is often accompanied by loud, enthusiastic greetings, often referred to as 吉祥話 (jíxiánghuà) in Mandarin or 吉利說話 (Kat Lei Seut Wa) in Cantonese, loosely translated as auspicious words or phrases. New Year couplets printed in gold letters on bright red paper, referred to as chunlian (春聯) or fai chun (揮春), is another way of expressing auspicious new year wishes. They probably predate the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), but did not become widespread until then.[161] Today, they are ubiquitous with Chinese New Year. Some of the most common greetings include: Xin nian kuai le/San nin fai lok: simplified Chinese: 新年快乐; traditional Chinese: 新年快樂; pinyin: Xīnniánkuàilè; Jyutping: san1 nin4 faai3 lok6; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Sin-nî khòai-lo̍k; Hakka: Sin Ngen Kai Lok; Taishanese: Slin Nen Fai Lok. A more contemporary greeting reflective of Western influences, it literally translates from the greeting "Happy new year" more common in the west. It is written in English as "xin nian kuai le".[162] In northern parts of China, traditionally people say simplified Chinese: 过年好; traditional Chinese: 過年好; pinyin: Guònián Hǎo instead of simplified Chinese: 新年快乐; traditional Chinese: 新年快樂 (Xīnniánkuàile), to differentiate it from the international new year. And 過年好 (Guònián Hǎo) can be used from the first day to the fifth day of Chinese New Year. However, 過年好 (Guònián Hǎo) is considered very short and therefore somewhat discourteous. Gong Hei Fat Choi at Lee Theatre Plaza, Hong Kong Gong xi fa cai/Gong hey fat choi: simplified Chinese: 恭喜发财; traditional Chinese: 恭喜發財; pinyin: Gōngxǐfācái; Hokkien: Kiong hee huat chai (POJ: Kiong-hí hoat-châi); Cantonese: Gung1 hei2 faat3 coi4; Hakka: Gung hee fatt choi, which loosely translates to "Congratulations and be prosperous". It is spelled varyingly in English, such as "Gung hay fat choy",[163] "gong hey fat choi",[162] or "Kung Hei Fat Choy".[164] Often mistakenly assumed to be synonymous with "Happy New Year", its usage dates back several centuries. While the first two words of this phrase had a much longer historical significance (legend has it that the congratulatory messages were traded for surviving the ravaging beast of Nian, in practical terms it may also have meant surviving the harsh winter conditions), the last two words were added later as ideas of capitalism and consumerism became more significant in Chinese societies around the world.[citation needed] The saying is now commonly heard in English speaking communities for greetings during Chinese New Year in parts of the world where there is a sizable Chinese-speaking community, including overseas Chinese communities that have been resident for several generations, relatively recent immigrants from Greater China, and those who are transit migrants (particularly students). Numerous other greetings exist, some of which may be exclaimed out loud to no one in particular in specific situations. For example, as breaking objects during the new year is considered inauspicious, one may then say 歲歲平安 (Suìsuì-píng'ān) immediately, which means "everlasting peace year after year". Suì (歲), meaning "age" is homophonous with 碎 (suì) (meaning "shatter"), in the demonstration of the Chinese love for wordplay in auspicious phrases. Similarly, 年年有餘 (niánnián yǒu yú), a wish for surpluses and bountiful harvests every year, plays on the word yú that can also refer to 魚 (yú meaning fish), making it a catch phrase for fish-based Chinese new year dishes and for paintings or graphics of fish that are hung on walls or presented as gifts. The most common auspicious greetings and sayings consist of four characters, such as the following: 金玉滿堂 Jīnyùmǎntáng – "May your wealth [gold and jade] come to fill a hall" 大展鴻圖 Dàzhǎnhóngtú – "May you realize your ambitions" 迎春接福 Yíngchúnjiēfú – "Greet the New Year and encounter happiness" 萬事如意 Wànshìrúyì – "May all your wishes be fulfilled" 吉慶有餘 Jíqìngyǒuyú – "May your happiness be without limit" 竹報平安 Zhúbàopíng'ān – "May you hear [in a letter] that all is well" 一本萬利 Yīběnwànlì – "May a small investment bring ten-thousandfold profits" 福壽雙全 Fúshòushuāngquán – "May your happiness and longevity be complete" 招財進寶 Zhāocáijìnbǎo – "When wealth is acquired, precious objects follow"[165] These greetings or phrases may also be used just before children receive their red packets, when gifts are exchanged, when visiting temples, or even when tossing the shredded ingredients of yusheng particularly popular in Malaysia and Singapore. Children and their parents can also pray in the temple, in hopes of getting good blessings for the new year to come. Children and teenagers sometimes jokingly use the phrase "恭喜發財，紅包拿來" (pinyin: gōngxǐfācái, hóngbāo nálái; Cantonese: 恭喜發財,利是逗來; Jyutping: gung1hei2 faat3coi4, lei6 si6 dau6 loi4), roughly translated as "Congratulations and be prosperous, now give me a red envelope!". In Hakka the saying is more commonly said as 'Gung hee fatt choi, hung bao diu loi' which would be written as 恭喜發財，紅包逗來 – a mixture of the Cantonese and Mandarin variants of the saying. Back in the 1960s, children in Hong Kong used to say 恭喜發財，利是逗來，斗零唔愛 (Cantonese, Gung Hei Fat Choy, Lai Si Tau Loi, Tau Ling M Ngoi), which was recorded in the pop song Kowloon Hong Kong by Reynettes in 1966. Later in the 1970s, children in Hong Kong used the saying: 恭喜發財，利是逗來，伍毫嫌少，壹蚊唔愛, roughly translated as, "Congratulations and be prosperous, now give me a red envelope, fifty cents is too little, don't want a dollar either." It basically meant that they disliked small change – coins which were called "hard substance" (Cantonese: 硬嘢). Instead, they wanted "soft substance" (Cantonese: 軟嘢), which was either a ten dollar or a twenty dollar note. See also[edit] Overseas Chinese Lunar New Year fireworks display in Hong Kong The Birthday of Che Kung Other celebrations of Lunar New Year in China: Tibetan New Year (Losar) Mongolian New Year (Tsagaan Sar) Celebrations of Lunar New Year in other parts of Asia: Buryat New Year (Sagaalgan) Korean New Year (Seollal) Japanese New Year (Shōgatsu) Mongolian New Year (Tsagaan Sar) Vietnamese New Year (Tết) Similar Asian Lunisolar New Year celebrations that occur in April: Burmese New Year (Thingyan) Cambodian New Year (Chaul Chnam Thmey) Lao New Year (Pii Mai) Sri Lankan New Year (Aluth Avuruddu) Thai New Year (Songkran) Chinese New Year Gregorian Holiday in Malaysia Malaysia Chinese New Year (Tahun Baru Cina) Indonesian Chinese New Year (Imlek) Notes and references[edit] ^ "Asia welcomes lunar New Year". BBC. 1 February 2003. Retrieved 7 November 2008. ^ "There are 6 Chinese solar terms in spring". GBTIMES. Retrieved 28 January 2020. ^ And extremely rarely, 21 February, such as in 2033, the first occurrence since the 1645 calendar reform – Helmer Aslaksen, "The Mathematics of the Chinese Calendar" ^ Roy, Christian (2005). Traditional Festivals: A Multicultural Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 320. ISBN 978-1-57607-089-5. ^ "Chinese New Year 2011". VisitSingapore.com. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "Chinese New Year Celebrated in Grand Scale in Yangon". Mizzima.com. Retrieved 28 January 2019. ^ "Philippines adds Chinese New Year to holidays". Yahoo News Philippines. 2 December 2011. Retrieved 29 June 2013. ^ "Festivals, Cultural Events and Public Holidays in Mauritius". Mauritius Tourism Authority. Archived from the original on 11 February 2016. Retrieved 28 January 2012. ^ Crabtree, Justina (16 February 2018). "As the Lunar New Year celebrations begin, CNBC looks at Chinatowns across the world". CNBC. ^ "Happy Chinese New Year! The year of the Dog has begun". USA TODAY. ^ "Chinese New Year and its effect on the world economy". BostonGlobe.com. ^ "Chinese New Year". History. Retrieved 9 February 2013. ^ "The Year of the Dog – Celebrating Chinese New Year 2018". EC Brighton. 16 February 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2018. ^ Chiu, Lisa. "The History of Chinese New Year". About.com. Retrieved 8 February 2013. ^ 中國古代歲首分那幾種?各以何為起點? [In ancient China, how to decide the starting point of a year?] (in Chinese). Central Weather Bureau. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017. ^ a b Aslaksen, Helmer (17 July 2010), The Mathematics of the Chinese Calendar (PDF), National University of Singapore, p. 31, archived from the original (PDF) on 13 January 2014 ^ "Chinese New Year Calendar". chinesenewyears.info. Retrieved 2 August 2017. ^ See Chinese calendar for details and references. ^ a b Chan Sui Jeung (2001). Traditional Chinese Festivals and Local Celebrations. Wan Li Book Company Limited. ^ "The Origin of Lunar New Year and the legend of Nian". Ancient Origins. 31 January 2014. Retrieved 6 September 2015. ^ Laura Rico. "Lunar New Year origins, customs explained". Retrieved 19 February 2015. ^ a b "春节起源". www.sohu.com. ^ Classic of Poetry - Qi Yue (in Chinese). ...十月涤场。 朋酒斯飨、曰杀羔羊。 跻彼公堂、称彼兕觥、万寿无疆。 ^ Lü, Buwei. "12". Lüshi Chunqiu (in Chinese). 命有司大儺，旁磔，出土牛，以送寒氣。 ^ 田, 东江. "傩 戏". 《吕氏春秋·季冬纪》《后汉书·礼仪志》均有相应记载，前者云，届时"命有司大傩，旁磔，出土牛，以送寒气"。后者云："先腊一日，大傩，谓之逐疫。" ^ 崔, 寔. 四民月令. 正月之旦，是謂正日。躬率妻孥，絜祀祖禰...子、婦、孫、曾，各上椒酒於其家長，稱觴舉壽，欣欣如也。 ^ "Chinese New Year". History.com. Ritual sacrifices of food and paper icons were offered to gods and ancestors. ^ Book of the Later Han. p. Vol. 27. 歲旦與掾史入賀，門下掾王望舉觴上壽，謅稱太守功德。 ^ "The Lunar New Year: Rituals and Legends". Asia for Educators, Columbia University. On New Year’s Day and for the next several days, people still follow the custom of exchanging visits — with close relatives first, then with distant relatives and friends. Traditionally, the order of these visits also began with the eldest, and the first day was usually devoted to paternal family relatives. ^ "除夕守岁". 据晋周处《〈周土记〉》载：除夕之夜，各相与赠送称曰馈岁：酒食相邀，称曰别岁：长幼聚欢，祝颂完备称曰分岁，大家终夜不眠，以待天明，称曰守岁。 ^ 周, 处. 风土记 (in Chinese). Jin Dynasty. 蜀之风俗，晚岁相与馈问，谓之馈岁。酒食相邀为别岁。至除夕，达旦不眠，谓之守岁。 ^ 宗, 懍. 荊楚歲時記. 正月一日，是三元之日也，謂之端月。鷄鳴而起。先於庭前爆竹，以辟山臊惡鬼。 ^ 来, 鹄. "早春". 新历才将半纸开，小庭犹聚爆竿灰。 偏憎杨柳难钤辖，又惹东风意绪来。 ^ "各朝代过年的那些事儿，你造吗？". www.360doc.com. ^ "古人拜年常用"拜年帖"". ^ Zhang, Tangying. Shu Tao Wu,Vol.2 (蜀未亡前一年歲除日，昶令學士辛寅遜題桃符板於寢門，以其詞工，昶命筆自題云：「新年納餘慶，嘉節賀長春。」). ^ "Love of Chinese Language Expressed in Couplets". The earliest known couplet was written at Spring Festival 964 by the King of Later Shu. It said: "The New Year is bathed in forefathers' blessings; the joyous festival promises everlasting youth and wealth." ^ "Chinese Couplets History, Categories & Quotable Examples". The famous poet Wang Anshi (1021–1086) in Northern Song Dynasty even created a poem to depict the spectacular scene of pasting Spring Festival couplets, called New Year's Day (《元日》 [yuán rì]). ^ 周, 广玲 (9 February 2011). "宋代人怎样过年：大抵与今人相似". Guangzhou Daily. ^ Zhou, Mi. Journal of Wulin. 后妃諸閣，又各進歲軸兒及珠翠百事、吉利市袋兒、小樣金銀器皿，並隨年金錢一百二十文。 ^ Xiong, Mengxiang. 析津志辑佚. 车马纷纭于街衢、茶坊、酒肆，杂沓交易至十三日，人家以黄米为糍糕，馈遗亲戚，岁如常。 ^ Liu, Ruoyu. "20". Youzhongzhi (酌中志). 正月初一五更起，焚香放纸炮，将门闩或木杠于院地上抛掷三度，名曰"跌千金"。饮椒柏酒，吃水点心，即"扁食"也。或暗包银钱一二于内，得之者以卜一年之吉。 ^ a b "Ya Sui Qian's custom and origin 压岁钱的习俗与起源". 皇帝领到的压岁钱的内容是这样的：赐皇上之荷包，乃黄缎绣五彩加金，绣有岁岁平安四字，内装金银钱、金银锞子、金银八宝各一个（各五分重），口上插一小金如意，约二吋许。上錾连年如意四字。 ^ Gu, Lu. "6". Qing Iia Lu (清嘉录). 長者貽小兒以朱繩綴百錢謂之壓歲錢 ^ "Ya Sui Qian's custom and origin 压岁钱的习俗与起源". 成书于道光年间的《清嘉录》就有明确地描述“压岁钱”，可见在清代长辈给压岁钱就已经很普及了:长者贻小儿以朱绳缀百钱，谓之压岁钱；置橘、荔（栗）诸果于枕畔、谓之压岁果子。 元旦睡觉时食之，取谶于吉利（橘／桔子与栗子的谐音），为新年休征。 ^ Huang, Wei; Xie, Ying (January 2012). "The New Year That Wasn't". NewsChina. NewsChinaMagazine. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 24 February 2015. ^ Haiwang Yuan. "The Origin of Chinese New Year". Retrieved 2 January 2016. ^ "Jadual hari kelepasan am persekutuan 2012" [Federal Public Holiday Schedule 2012] (PDF) (in Malay). Putrajaya, Malaysia: Jabatan Perdana Menteri (Department of the Prime Minister). Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 4 March 2015. ^ "HOLIDAYS". Embassy of the United States: Kuala Lumpur, Mayalsia. U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 29 January 2017. ^ a b "Public holidays: entitlement and pay". Ministry of Manpower Singapore. ^ "Embassy Holidays". Embassy of the United States: Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam. U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 13 May 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2015. ^ "General holidays for 2018". Hong Kong Government. Retrieved 16 February 2018. ^ "Public Holidays in 2019 Decree Law No. 60/2000 on Public Holidays". Macao SARG Portal. Macao SAR of the People's Republic of China. Retrieved 24 January 2019. ^ "National Public Holidays in Indonesia". AngloINFO, the global expat network: INDONESIA. AngloINFO Limited. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2015. ^ "Holiday Schedule". Embassy of the United States: Jakarta, Indonesia. U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2015. ^ Zhu Yafei (16 October 2006). "从数字之外看黄金周的去与留 (Seeing Golden Week from Beyond the Numbers)". news.cctv.com. Retrieved 7 June 2020. 黄金周的7天连续假期是通过对法定三天假日前、后的周末休息日进行调整而形成的。(The 7 seven-consecutive day Golden Week is formed by adjusting the weekend days before and after the 3 day holiday). ^ "Chinese New Year – China's Grandest Festival & Longest Public Holiday". TravelChinaGuide. ^ "Proclamation No. 831, s. 2014 by the President of the Philippines, Declaring the Regular Holidays, Special (Non-Working) Days, and Special Holiday (for all Schools) for the Year 2015" (Press release). Malacañang Palace, Manila: Official Gazette of the Philippines. 17 July 2014. Retrieved 3 May 2017. ^ "Before You Go: Useful Information: Public Holidays". Taiwan, the heart of Asia. Tourism Bureau, Republic of China (Taiwan). 4 February 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2015. Chinese Lunar year: Lunar New Year's Eve; 1st, 2nd, 3rd of the 1st month by lunar calendar ^ 2015 Work Calendar (Revised Version), Directorate-General of Personnel Administration, 27 October 2014, archived from the original on 23 September 2015 ^ "AIT Offices to Close for Multiple Holidays in February" (Press release). American Institute in Taiwan. 10 February 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2015. ^ a b "ประกาศสำนักนายกรัฐมนตรี เรื่อง กำหนดเวลาทำงานและวันหยุดราชการ (ฉบับที่ ๒๐) พ.ศ. ๒๕๕๕" (PDF). ^ Li Ren (2003). "Imagining China in the Era of Global Consumerism and Local Consciousness: Media, Mobility, and the Spring Festival". PhD thesis, College of Communications, Ohio University. Retrieved 13 September 2007. Edited for grammar. ^ Bodde, Derk. Festivals in Classical China: New Year and other Annual Observances during the Han Dynasty, Princeton University Press, 1975, pp. 49 ff. ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 5. ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 9. ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 36. ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 30. ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 40. ^ Kong, Shiu L. Chinese Culture and Lore. HK: University of Toronto Press, 1989, p. 48 ^ "¬K¸'". .ctps.tp.edu.tw. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 25 August 2010. ^ Berkowitz and Brandauer, Folk Religion in an Urban Setting, Hong Kong, 1969, p. 49. ^ Rodgers, Greg. "Chinese New Year Traditions". About.com. Retrieved 8 February 2013. ^ "Chinese New Year". yourchineseastrology.com. ^ a b c Lin Meirong (2011). "Jade Emperor". Encyclopedia of Taiwan. Council for Cultural Affairs. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2012. ^ a b c d Conceicao, Jeanne Louise (2009). "Hokkien community". Singapore Infopedia. National Library Board Singapore. Retrieved 12 September 2012. ^ "Thousands throw oranges to mark Chap Goh Meh". Thestar.com.my. 1 March 2010. Archived from the original on 2 March 2010. Retrieved 25 August 2010. ^ Thianchai Iamworamet. Chinese-Thai Dictionary. Bangkok: Ramsar, 1998. page 73, 272. (เธียรชัย เอี่ยมวรเมธ. พจนานุกรม จีน-ไทย. กรุงเทพฯ : รวมสาส์น, 2541. หน้า 73, 272.) ISBN 978-974-246-307-6 ^ Butler, Stephanie (30 January 2014). "Symbolic Foods Of Chinese New Year – Hungry History". History.com. Retrieved 11 February 2019. ^ 李, 開周 (2016). 過一個歡樂的宋朝新年. 臺北市: 華藝數位股份有限公司. pp. 95–98. ISBN 9789571365213. ^ （宋）周密. 武林舊事·卷一~卷三. 浙江大学图书馆. ^ Flanagan, Alice K. (2004). Chinese New Year. Compass Point Books. ISBN 9780756504793. Retrieved 4 November 2008. ^ "This numbers game is crazy – for 8s". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 24 January 2020. ^ "How much money should you put in red envelope..." Taiwan News. Retrieved 24 January 2020. ^ "What's the significance of Lunar New Year red envelopes?". The Seattle Times. 25 January 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2020. ^ "Ofw chinese new year things to remember" (PDF). South East Asia Group [an agency introducing foreign workers to work in Taiwan]. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 March 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2012. ^ 家庭外傭過年習俗應注意事項 (JPEG) (in Chinese, Vietnamese, Indonesian, Thai, and English). South East Asia Group. ^ "How Social Cash Made WeChat The App For Everything". Fast Company. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2017. ^ Young, Doug. "Red envelope wars in China, Xiaomi eyes US". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. ^ "Why this Chinese New Year will be a digital money fest". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2017. ^ "Tencent, Alibaba Send Lunar New Year Revelers Money-Hunting". Caixin Global. 13 January 2017. Archived from the original on 29 August 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018. ^ "Chinese Culture: New Years – Cantonese Culture Notes and Phrases". chinese-lessons.com. Retrieved 4 November 2008. ^ David (3 December 2009). "Green Hat a No-No". ^ Mack, Lauren (27 February 2015). "Chinese Gift-Giving: What Not to Buy – Avoid These Chinese Gift-Giving Blunders". About.com. Retrieved 29 January 2017. ^ "Firecrackers". Infopedia.nlb.gov.sg. 15 April 1999. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "新年好 (xīnniánhǎo) Happy New Year". eChineseLearning.com. Retrieved 20 December 2012. ^ "Year of the Pig | 2019 Chinese Horoscope | Ask Astrology Blog". 16 October 2018. ^ Wood, Frances. "The Boxer Rebellion, 1900: A Selection of Books, Prints and Photographs". British Library. Retrieved 28 June 2010. ^ China's holiday rush begins early, BBC ^ Shan, Shelley (7 January 2012). "Ministry warns of heavy Lunar New Year holiday traffic". Taipei Times. Lee, I-chia (25 January 2012). "Despite rain, millions hit the road". Taipei Times. Lee, I-chia (29 January 2012). "Early start beats tolls and congestion as the holiday ends". Taipei Times. ... total traffic volume on Friday was 2.7  million vehicles, about 1.7 times the average daily traffic volume of about 1.6  million. "We estimate the total traffic volume [yesterday] was between 2.1  million and 2.3  million vehicles," Chen said. "Northbound traffic volume was much higher than southbound and peak hours were between 3  pm and 6  pm." ^ "Chinese New Year parade doomed as Baird government's new route 'too narrow' for floats". Smh.com.au. 15 August 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2019. ^ "London – Chinese New Year – "The largest celebrations outside of Asia"". BBC. 22 January 2009. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ Kim, Ryan (28 February 2010). "Year of the Tiger off to roaring start at parade". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 1 March 2010. ^ "Chinese New Year in Southeast Asia". Goseasia.about.com. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "Singapore in spring: Chinatown Chinese New Year Celebrations 2010". VisitSingapore.com. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "Chingay Parade Singapore 2011". VisitSingapore.com. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "Chinggay Parade 2011 Highlights". Archived from the original on 31 July 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2017. "Chinggay Parade 2011 Highlights". Archived from the original on 31 July 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2017. ^ "NAKHON SAWAN CHINESE NEW YEAR FESTIVAL". TAT. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. ^ "Chinese New Year in Phuket". PHUKET.COM. Retrieved 10 January 2019. ^ "SUPHANBURI CHINESE NEW YEAR FESTIVAL". TAT. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. ^ Pramarnpanich, Tanachai (16 February 2018). "Gateway to the Chinese new year". The Nation. Retrieved 10 January 2019. ^ "Princess Sirindhorn to open Chinese New Year Festival in China Town Bangkok today". TPBS. 19 February 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. ^ "Princess Sirindhorn opens Chinese New Year Celebration at China Town". TPBS. 31 January 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. ^ a b c d e "Hari-Hari Penting Di Indonesia" (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 8 October 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2018. ^ a b c d e f g "KEPUTUSAN PRESIDEN REPUBLIK INDONESIA. NOMOR 19 TAHUN 2002. TENTANG. HARI TAHUN BARU IMLEK" (PDF). kepustakaan-presiden.pnri.go.id. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 November 2017. ^ Chang-Yau Hoon (2009). "The politics of Imlek". Inside Indonesia. Retrieved 28 July 2013. ^ a b c d e "Penetapan Pemerintah 1946 No 2/Um::Aturan Hari Raya". ngada.org. Retrieved 23 March 2018. ^ a b c d "KEPUTUSAN PRESIDEN REPUBLIK INDONESIA NO. 24 TAHUN 1953 TENTANG HARI-HARI LIBUR". Aswin Weblog (in Indonesian). 24 May 2012. Retrieved 23 March 2018. ^ a b "Instruksi Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 14 Tahun 1967 – Wikisource bahasa Indonesia". id.wikisource.org (in Indonesian). Retrieved 23 March 2018. ^ "Keputusan Presiden Republik Indonesia Nomor 6 Tahun 2000 – Wikisource bahasa Indonesia". id.wikisource.org (in Indonesian). Retrieved 23 March 2018. ^ a b c "Keputusan Menteri Agama No. 13 dan 14 Tahun 2001 – Imlek Sebagai Hari Libur Fakultatif ". www.hukumonline.com. Retrieved 24 March 2018. ^ AFP (22 January 2012). "Chinese-Indonesians celebrate once-forbidden roots". Taipei Times. ^ a b "Pemerintah Tetapkan Hari Libur Nasional dan Cuti Bersama Tahun 2017". Retrieved 23 March 2018. ^ "วันตรุษจีน 2561 กับ 7 คำถามยอดฮิตที่คนอยากรู้" [Chinese New Year 2018 with 7 popular questions that people want to know]. Kapook.com (in Thai). 7 January 2013. Retrieved 11 January 2019. ^ "ประกาศสำนักนายกรัฐมนตรี เรื่อง กำหนดเวลาทำงานและวันหยุดราชการ (ฉบับที่ ๒๑) พ.ศ. ๒๕๕๖" (PDF). ^ "CHINESE NEW YEAR IS AMONG NEW GOV'T HOLIDAYS FOR 2021". Khao Sod. 29 December 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2021. ^ "2013 Sydney Chinese New Year Twilight Parade". sydneychinesenewyear.com. 17 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "City of Sydney Official Chinese New Year Website". Cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au. 1 January 2011. Archived from the original on 31 August 2011. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "Chinese New Year in Australia". www.chinesenewyear.net.au. Archived from the original on 6 January 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017. ^ "East Meets West Lunar New Year Festival". Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2019. ^ "Chinese New Year Festival, Wellington New Zealand". Chinesenewyear.co.nz. Retrieved 7 November 2008. ^ "Tourists flock for Year of the Rooster". www.odt.co.nz. 28 January 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2017. ^ "Southwest Airlines Chinese New Year Parade in San Francisco". Chineseparade.com. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ "The Golden Dragon Parade". Chinese Chamber of Commerce of Los Angeles. 2014. Archived from the original on 1 September 2013. ^ a b Cross, Heather. "Chinese Lunar New Year in New York City: 2015 – Don't miss out on Lunar New Year festivities in NYC". About.com. Retrieved 18 February 2015. ^ "Welcome to Chinatown, Boston". Chinatown Main Street. Archived from the original on 13 January 2015. Retrieved 23 January 2012. ^ "Chicago Chinatown Chamber of Commerce Events". Chicago Chinatown Chamber of Commerce. 2016. ^ "Realizarán desfile en DF por Año Nuevo chino". El Universal. Retrieved 12 March 2015. ^ "Chinese New Year Parade in Vancouver". Seechinatown.com. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ Rhein, Jamie (16 February 2007). "A Chinese New Year Parade in Butte, Montana? Sure". Gadling.com. Retrieved 2 November 2011. ^ a b "Fireworks Fly on Hudson River For Chinese Lunar New Year". CBSNewYork. 17 February 2015. ^ Semple, Kirk (16 February 2015). "With Lunar New Year Show, Another Link to China for a New York Fireworks Family". The New York Times. ^ "Chinese New Year". ^ "LNY PARADE". ^ Harris, Elizabeth A.; Grynbaum, Michael M. (22 June 2015). "Mayor de Blasio to Make Lunar New Year a School Holiday". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 September 2015. ^ "Chinese New Year festival & Parade". chineseparade.com. 1 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "Best San Francisco Bay Area Events, Weekends & Festivals 2013". hiddensf.com. 1 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "Chinese New Year 2013 – Year of the Snake starts in style". chinatownlondon.org. 4 February 2013. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "London's Chinese New Year is More Chinese than Ever Before". londonnet.co.uk. 8 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "Le Nouvel An Chinois à Paris 2013". sortiraparis.com. 9 February 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "Le Nouvel An Chinois". mairie13.paris.fr. 2 February 2013. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ "Le grand défilé du Nouvel An Chinois". mairie13.paris.fr. 2 February 2013. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 22 February 2013. ^ https://www.denhaag.nl/en/general/chinese-new-year-festival.htm ^ "Chinees Nieuwjaarfeest Den Haag 2020". Stichting Chinese Culturele Evenementen Nederland. 27 December 2019. ^ "Chinees Nieuwjaar in Amsterdam (binnenstad)". Immaterieel Erfgoed. ^ "'Chinees Nieuwjaar stelt steeds meer voor in Nederland'". NU. 31 January 2019. ^ Iqbal, Myra (15 February 2013). "Chinese New Year: Celebrating spring and all it brings". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 18 February 2013. ^ "Chinese new year : Pakistan in photo show". The Express Tribune. 12 February 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. ^ https://www.youlinmagazine.com, Youlin Magazine. "CELEBRATING THE CHINESE NEW YEAR WITH THE PAKISTAN-CHINA INSTITUTE - - Youlin Magazine". www.youlinmagazine.com. ^ "Chinese New Year celebrated in Islamabad". CCTV English. 15 February 2013. Archived from the original on 20 February 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 20. ^ a b Friedman, Sophie. "Top 10 things to know about Chinese New Year". nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved 5 February 2019. In Mandarin, they’ll say gong xi fa cai (恭喜发财), wishing you a prosperous New Year. In Cantonese, it’s gong hey fat choi. Still, if you wish someone xin nian kuai le (新年快乐), literally 'happy new year,' that’s perfectly welcome, too. ^ Rabinovitz, Jonathan (29 January 1998). "Bettors Try to Ride the Tiger; Chinese Hope Good Luck Accompanies the New Year". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 February 2019. When they arrived at Foxwoods, casino employees greeted them with 'Gung hay fat choy,' the Cantonese phrase that translates roughly as 'Happy New Year.' ^ Magida, Lenore (18 December 1994). "WHAT'S DOING IN Hong Kong". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 February 2019. In such an environment, it seems fitting that the traditional New Year's greeting is, in Cantonese, 'Kung Hei Fat Choy' – which means 'Wishing You Success and Prosperity.' ^ Welch, Patricia Bjaaland, p. 22 Further reading[edit] Welch, Patricia Bjaaland (1997). Chinese New Year. Oxford University Press. External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons v t e Public holidays in Cambodia National holidays New Year's Day Victory over Genocide Day Meak Bochea International Women's Day Khmer New Year Visak Bochea Labour Day Royal Ploughing Ceremony King Norodom Sihamoni's Birthday National Day of Remembrance International Children's Day Queen Mother's Birthday Constitution Day Pchum Ben King Father's Commemoration Day Paris Peace Agreement Day Coronation Day of King Norodom Sihamoni Independence Day Water and Moon Festival Human Rights Day Other Chinese New Year Spirit Parade Siem Reap Puppet Parade Qingming Festival Silkworm Festival Full Moon Festival Kite Flying Festival v t e Public holidays in China Golden weeks Spring Festival National Day Other holidays New Year's Day Qingming Festival Workers' Day Duanwu Festival Mid-Autumn Festival Sometimes if Mid-Autumn Festival is near National Day, Mid-Autumn Festival may be in the golden week. v t e Public holidays in Hong Kong New Year's Day Lunar New Year (first 3 days of the period) Ching Ming Festival Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Monday Buddha's Birthday Labour Day Tuen Ng Festival Hong Kong SAR Establishment Day Mid-Autumn Festival PRC National Day Chung Yeung Festival Christmas Day Boxing Day Cancelled Queen's Birthday Liberation Day Double Ten Day Remembrance Day v t e Public holidays in Indonesia New Year's Day Chinese New Year Day of Silence Isra and Mi'raj Good Friday Labour Day Waisak Day Ascension Day Pancasila Day Collective Days Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Independence Day Islamic New Year Prophet's Birthday Christmas v t e Public holidays in Malaysia National holidays Chinese New Year Labour Day Wesak Day Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Merdeka Day Muharram Agong's Birthday Malaysia Day Muhammad's Birthday Christmas State holidays (differ by states) New Year's Day Yang di-Pertua Negeri Sembilan's Birthday Sultan of Kedah's Birthday Thaipusam Federal Territory Day Anniversary of Installation of the Sultan of Terengganu Sultan of Johor's Birthday Isra and Mi'raj Declaration of Malacca City as Historical City Good Friday Sultan of Terengganu's Birthday First Day of Ramadan Day of Nuzul Al-Quran Tadau Kaamatan Gawai Dayak Declaration of George Town as World Heritage Site Penang State Governor's Birthday Raja of Perlis's Birthday Sarawak Independence Day Hol Day of Sultan Iskandar of Johor Sabah State Governor's Birthday Melaka State Governor's Birthday Sarawak State Governor's Birthday Sultan of Pahang's Birthday Deepavali Sultan of Perak's Birthday Sultan of Kelantan's Birthday Sultan of Selangor's Birthday Christmas Eve Public holidays in Singapore National holidays (fixed) New Year's Day (1 January) Labour Day (1 May) National Day (9 August) Christmas Day (25 December) National holidays (moveable) Chinese New Year (2 days) Good Friday Vesak Day Hari Raya Puasa Hari Raya Haji Deepavali Cancelled Thaipusam Easter Monday Holy Saturday Boxing Day Birthday of Prophet Mohamed Second day of Hari Raya Puasa v t e Public holidays in Thailand National holidays New Year's Day Magha Puja Chakri Memorial Day Songkran Labour Day Royal Ploughing Ceremony and Farmer's Day Vesak King Vajiralongkorn's Birthday Asanha Bucha Phansa Queen Sirikit's Birthday King Bhumibol Adulyadej's Memorial Day King Chulalongkorn Day King Bhumibol Adulyadej's Birthday Constitution Day New Year's Eve Region-based holidays Chinese New Year Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Christmas v t e Public holidays in the Philippines Regular holidays New Year's Day Maundy Thursday Good Friday Araw ng Kagitingan Labor Day Independence Day: Eid'l Fitr National Heroes' Day Eid'l Adha Bonifacio Day Christmas Rizal Day Special non-working days Chinese New Year Black Saturday Ninoy Aquino Day All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day Immaculate Conception Christmas Eve Last day of the year Special holiday (for schools) EDSA Revolution Anniversary Italicized: Movable holiday v t e Chinese New Year Culture of China Topics Dashuhua Nian Lion dance Dragon dance New Year picture Red envelope Reunion dinner Fireworks Firecracker Chinese dragon Fu Food Nian gao Spring pancake Jiaozi Bakkwa Buddha's delight Fa gao Fat choy Yau gok Kralan Kuih Lotus seed Pineapple tart Squab Taro cake Turnip cake Yusheng Melon seed Mandarin orange Fish Other CCTV New Year's Gala Chinese calendar Chunyun Color in Chinese culture San Francisco Chinese New Year Festival and Parade Christmas and holiday season Golden Week v t e New Year by calendar Africa Enkutatash (Ethiopian, Eritrean) Fandroana (Malagasy) Nayrouz (Coptic) Yennayer (Berber) Americas North Yancuic Xīhuitl (Aztec) Quviasukvik (Inuit) Hobiyee (Nisg̱a'a) South Inti Raymi (Incan) Willkakuti (Aymara) Asia East Spring Festival (Chinese) Tết (Vietnamese) Shōgatsu (Japanese) Seollal (Korean) Tsagaan Sar (Mongolian) Losar (Tibetan) South Vaisakhi (Punjabi, North & Central India(Solar), Nepali) Chaitra Navaratri (North & Central India (Lunar)) Navreh (Kashmiri) Cheti Chand (Sindhi) Balipratipada (Gujarati, Rajasthani) Bohag Bihu (Assamese) Pahela Baishakh (Bengali) Pana Sankranti (Odia) Jur Sital (Maithili) Mha Puja (Newari) Losoong (Sikkimese) Galdan Namchot (Ladakhi) Bwisagu (Bodo) Sajibu Cheiraoba (Meetei) Buisu (Tripuri) Sangken (Tai) Bizhu (Chakma) Gudi Padwa (Marathi, Konkani) Ugadi (Telugu, Kannada) Bisu Parba (Tulu) Puthandu (Tamil) Vishu (Malayali) Aluth Avurudda (Sinhala) Southeast Thingyan (Burmese) Choul Chnam Thmey (Cambodian) Pi Mai (Lao) Songkran (Thai) Water-Sprinkling Festival (Dai) Nyepi (Balinese) Satu Suro (Javanese) West and Central Islamic New Year Kha b-Nisan (Assyrian) Nauruz (Afghan) Navruz (Uzbek) Naw-Rúz (Baháʼí) Newroz (Kurd) Novruz (Azeri) Nowruz (Iranian) Nowruz (Mazandarani) Rosh Hashanah (Hebrew) Nogbon (Ossetian) North Yhyakh (Sakha) Europe New Year's Day (Gregorian, Julian) Old New Year (traditional Julian) Oceania Makahiki (Hawaii) Matariki (Māori) See Also Lunar New Year South and Southeast Asian solar New Year Mesha Sankranti Songkran Indian New Year's days Asia portal China portal Holidays portal