For the Italian river, see Clitunno. For the stick insect genus, see Ramulus. Late 4th century Temple of Clitumnus in Campello sul Clitunno, Italy In Roman mythology, Clitumnus (/klɪˈtʌmnəs/; Latin: Clītumnus) was a son of Oceanus and Tethys. He was the god of the Clitunno River in Umbria. Reference to Clitumnus is best attested in Pliny the Younger "Letters" 8.8: "Hard by is an ancient and sacred temple, where stands Jupiter Clitumnus himself clad and adorned with a toga praetexta, and the oracular responses delivered there prove that the deity dwells within and foretells the future."[1] The Roman Emperor Caligula visited the sacred grove prior to his invasion of Germany, presumably to consult the oracle of Clitumnus.[2][3] References[edit] ^ Pliny; Firth, J.B. (tr.) (1900). Letters 8.8. Retrieved Mar 21, 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Hofmann, Paul (Sep 20, 1998). "A Fount of Poetic Inspiration". The New York Times. Retrieved Mar 21, 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Suetonius. Caligula 43. Retrieved Mar 21, 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities (Dii Consentes) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Liber Libertas Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Venus Veritas Vesta Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Victoria Terra Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Metamorphoses Fasti Propertius Apuleius The Golden Ass Varro Res divinae Concepts and practices Religion in ancient Rome Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Pomerium Temples Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism See also Glossary Greek mythology Etruscan religion Myth and ritual Roman polytheism (List) Classical mythology Conversion to Christianity Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism This article relating to an Ancient Roman myth or legend is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e