Music album made by combining previously made tracks A compilation album comprises tracks, which may be previously released or unreleased, usually from several separate recordings by either one or several performers. If by one artist, then generally the tracks were not originally intended for release together as a single work,[1] but may be collected together as a greatest hits album or box set.[2] If from several performers, there may be a theme, topic, time period, or genre which links the tracks,[3][4] or they may have been intended for release as a single work—such as a tribute album.[5] When the tracks are by the same recording artist, the album may be referred to as a retrospective album or an anthology.[6] Contents 1 Content and scope 2 Common types 3 Royalties 4 Charts 5 See also 6 References Content and scope[edit] Songs included on a compilation album may be previously released or unreleased, usually from several separate recordings by either one or several performers. If by one artist, then generally the tracks were not originally intended for release together as a single work, but may be collected together as a greatest hits album or box set. Compilation albums may employ traditional product bundling strategies.[citation needed] According to sound technician Richard King, classical music compilations "may require more processing to match tracks coming from various sources and recording venues as well as the different sizes of ensembles."[7] In Christgau's Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies (1981), Robert Christgau said, "While compilation albums by album artists (as opposed to stylistically unified singles specialists) are often useless, sometimes they present themselves as events", citing as examples the 1971 Ray Charles LP A 25th Anniversary in Show Business Salute to Ray Charles, The Kink Kronikles (1972), and Changesonebowie (1976).[8] Common types[edit] Common types of compilation include: "Greatest hits", "best of", or "singles collection" LPs, gathering together an artist's or a group's best-known songs. If the artist or group continues to record, compilers commonly include one or more previously unreleased tracks as an incentive for fans to buy the album, even if they already have the other material on the compilation.[9] Other single-artist compilations, such as rarities or B-side collections, albums compiled from radio sessions, songs performed by an artist exclusively for a film soundtrack or collections that combine multiple releases, such as LPs and EPs together on one or more compact discs. Such compilations generally target existing fans of the artist and have little mainstream appeal, though postmortem compilations of unreleased materials from recently deceased artists have significant popularity.[citation needed] Box sets, elaborate multi-disc collections often covering the entire breadth of an artist's career or the full sweep of an entire record label or genre. Many anthologies are released in this format. Various artist themed compilations, e.g. love songs, Christmas songs, songs featuring a particular instrument (such as saxophone or piano), one-hit wonders, and countless other variations. Original work by various artists for a single album or single, such as Phil Spector's A Christmas Gift For You or Band-Aid's Do They Know It's Christmas? (Feed The World) occasionally get erroneously mentioned as compilation albums or singles due to the fact that the songs are a compilation of various singers or musicians, however, they are original albums, not compilation albums. Various artist genre compilations, e.g. jazz, synthpop, rock, etc. These may be from the same time period (Year, decade or era, for example.), or may incorporate a common theme, as a soundtrack exemplifies well.[10] Various artist hit compilations. This has been a very successful part of the album market since the early 1970s. Recent hit singles would be sourced, given an eye-catching name (e.g. "Power Hits '72!") and squeezed on to a single vinyl LP with around ten tracks per side. This was achieved by truncating the songs with harsh edits, or through the use of tightly packed grooves - frequently a combination of the two. Thus, while the album might live up to the title of "20 Mind Blowing Hits", they certainly wouldn't be "20 Speaker Blowing Hits". Released as cash grabs for budget labels, they were treated with derision, disdain, and often outright horror by audiophiles due to the brevity of each track and the nasty dynamic range. By the 1980s, a double album with six or eight tracks on each side became the norm. Now that CDs are the dominant format, these compilations are usually released on one, two, or three CDs.[11] Promotional compilations or samplers. These are creative, successful forms of promotion for artists or record labels to promote their music. Generally, these types of releases are free or cost very little for the consumer or end listener. Elektra Records released the first sampler albums in the 1950s. Private label promotional compilations. Promotional compilation CDs can be private labeled for products, retail outlets, or commercial organizations or non-profit organizations. Artists and labels like to co-brand themselves with well-known brands for marketing purposes, and transversely well-known brands like to co-brand themselves with artists. Business-to-business promotional compilations. The music industry may use other types of promotional compilations within a business-to-business context to promote artists to media concerns (radio stations, music supervisors for TV, film or video games for synchronization) Composer/producer albums/record label. Many hip hop producers will release a compilation album which features various artists, but with each track composed by the same producer or it is under the same record label. Royalties[edit] For multi-artist compilations, royalties are usually pro-rated. In most cases, each artist's per-record royalty rate (typically 12–14% in 1999)[12] is divided by the number of artists on the album. However, some record companies opt to simplify the equation and pay a rounded-off rate, either as a percentage or as a set amount, regardless of the total number of artists on the record. As of 1999[update], these rates were around 1/2% to 1% or 15–16 cents per record.[12] When a compilation album includes a track from a different record company, the royalties are split between the artist and the original record company.[12] Unless specifically limited by a contract, record companies may release as many greatest hits albums by their recording artist as they wish without requiring the artist's agreement or permission.[13] Charts[edit] In the United Kingdom, The Official Charts Company compiles a weekly compilation albums chart, limited to various artists compilations and soundtrack compilations.[14] See also[edit] List of anthologies (music) List of punk rock compilation albums Mixtape Double album References[edit] ^ McDonald, Heather (30 April 2018). "A Definition of, and Look at, Compilation Albums". The Balance Careers. Archived from the original on 20 August 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2018. ^ Marc Burrows (20 November 2013). "Why a greatest hits album can be the band's greatest". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. ^ "Definition of 'compilation album'". collinsdictionary.com. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. ^ Emily Jupp (25 September 2015). "32 years of NOW music compilations". independent.co.uk. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. ^ Michael Hann (9 April 2018). "Covered in glory: the tribute albums that saved careers and changed lives". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. ^ "Definition of retrospective in English". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. ^ King, Richard (2016). Recording Orchestra and Other Classical Music Ensembles. Taylor & Francis. p. 223. ISBN 978-1317520818. ^ Christgau, Robert (1981). "The Criteria". Christgau's Record Guide: Rock Albums of the Seventies. Ticknor & Fields. ISBN 0899190251. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019. Retrieved 6 April 2019 – via robertchristgau.com. ^ "TLC to Release Greatest Hits Compilation to Accompany Biopic, New Album Coming in 2014". Pitchfork. 23 September 2013. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2013. ^ Gentile, John (8 November 2013). "Deadmau5 Compilation 'We Are Friends Vol. 2' – Album Premiere". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2013. ^ Suchet, Richard (28 November 2013). "Now Compilation Albums Celebrate 30 Years". Sky News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2013. ^ a b c Brian McPherson (1999). Get It in Writing: The Musician's Guide to the Music Business. Hal Leonard Corp. p. 68. ISBN 9780793566990. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 24 March 2015. ^ Brian McPherson (1999). Get It in Writing: The Musician's Guide to the Music Business. Hal Leonard Corp. p. 89. ISBN 9780793566990. ^ "UK Top 40 Compilation Albums Archived 14 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine", BBC, retrieved 1 April 2012 v t e Music History of music Prehistoric Ancient Religious Biblical Secular Martial Art music Afghan classical music—Klasik Andalusian classical music Azerbaijani Mugham Cambodian ceremonial music—Pinpeat Burmese classical music—Mahāgīta Chinese traditional music Gongche Western Classical Music Medieval Renaissance Baroque Classical period Romantic Modernist 20th century Contemporary Postmodernist 21st century Indian classical music Ancient Tamil music Carnatic Hindustani Indonesian art music—Gamelan Classical music of Iran Japanese court music—Gagaku Korean court music Lao classical music Mandé art music Ottoman classical music Philippine art songs—Kundiman Scottish Ceòl Mór Kandyan dance of Sri Lanka Thai classical music—Piphat Vietnam imperial court music—Nhã nhạc Vernacular music Circus music Folk music Popular music Musical genres by era Blues Country music Electronic music Electronic dance music Hip hop music Jazz Pop music Progressive music Psychedelic music Rock music Heavy metal Punk rock Alternative Soul music Musician Ensembles Band (rock and pop) Backup band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Choir Concert band Songwriter Conducting Disc jockey Military band Orchestra Singing Lead vocalist Backing vocalist Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Improvisation Lyrics Song Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Music archaeology Music education Music history Music psychology Musicology Biomusicology Cognitive musicology Computational musicology Ecomusicology Ethnomusicology New musicology Sociomusicology Zoomusicology Production Single A-side and B-side Extended play Compilation Live Remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Sound recording and reproduction Cover Remix Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Central Eastern Northern Southeastern Southern Western Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state   Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic East Timor Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Albums Audio Classical and art music traditions Cultural and regional genres Index Instruments Jazz and popular music glossary Musical genres by era Outline Popular music genres Songs Terminology Related articles Aesthetics of music Album era Music and politics Music festival Music therapy Musical instrument Women in music Outline Category Portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125