v t e Worldwide laws regarding experimentation on non-human apes    Ban on all ape experimentation    Ban on great ape experimentation This is a list of countries banning non-human ape experimentation. The term non-human ape here refers to all members of the superfamily Hominoidea, excluding Homo sapiens. Banning in this case refers to the enactment of formal decrees prohibiting experimentation on non-human apes, though often with exceptions for extreme scenarios.[a] Great ape experimentation is currently banned in the European Union, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand (29 countries total).[1] These countries have ruled that chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans are so cognitively similar to humans that using them as test subjects is unethical.[2][3] Austria is the only country in the world to have completely banned experiments on all apes, including both the great apes and the lesser apes, commonly known as gibbons.[4] Contents 1 Table of countries banning all non-human ape experimentation 2 Table of countries banning non-human great ape experimentation 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Table of countries banning all non-human ape experimentation[edit] Country Date Law Statute Refs Austria 2012 Animal Experiments Act 2012[b] An animal experiment is in any case unlawful if the animal experiment is on any species and subspecies of the chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), bonobos (Pan paniscus) and gorillas (Gorilla gorilla spp), and on any species and subspecies of the families Orangutans (Pongidae[c]) and Gibbons (Hylobatidae).[d] [5][6][7] Table of countries banning non-human great ape experimentation[edit] Country Year Title Statute Refs European Union Member States 2013 EU Directive 2010/63/EU The use of great apes, as the closest species to human beings with the most advanced social and behavioural skills, should be permitted only for the purposes of research aimed at the preservation of those species and where action in relation to a life-threatening, debilitating condition endangering human beings is warranted, and no other species or alternative method would suffice in order to achieve the aims of the procedure. The Member State claiming such a need should provide information necessary for the Commission to take a decision. [8] New Zealand 1999 Animal Welfare Act 1999 No person may carry out any research, testing, or teaching involving the use of a non-human hominid unless such use has first been approved by the Director-General and the research, testing, or teaching is carried out in accordance with any conditions imposed by the Director-General. The Director-General must not give approval unless he or she is satisfied that the use of the non-human hominid in the research, testing, or teaching is in the best interests of the non-human hominid; or that the use of the non-human hominid in the research, testing, or teaching is in the interests of the species to which the non-human hominid belongs and that the benefits to be derived from the use of the non-human hominid in the research, testing, or teaching are not outweighed by the likely harm to the non-human hominid. [9] See also[edit] Animal rights by country or territory Great ape personhood Great Ape Trust Declaration on Great Apes Great Ape Project List of animal rights advocates Project R&R: Release and Restitution for Chimpanzees in US Laboratories Animal liberation movement Notes[edit] ^ E.g. EU Directive 2010/63/EU allows for experimentation on great apes only for "the preservation of those species and where action in relation to a life-threatening, debilitating condition endangering human beings is warranted, and no other species or alternative method would suffice in order to achieve the aims of the procedure." ^ Original German: "Tierversuchsgesetz 2012" ^ Pongidae is an obsolete taxon, encompassing all the mentioned apes. Probably Pongo was meant. ^ Original German: "Ein Tierversuch ist jedenfalls unzulässig, wenn der Tierversuch an allen Arten und Unterarten der Schimpansen (Pan troglodytes), Bonobos (Pan paniscus) und Gorillas (Gorilla gorilla spp), sowie an allen Arten und Unterarten der Familien Orang Utans (Pongidae) und Gibbons (Hylobatidae)" References[edit] ^ "International Bans | Laws | Release & Restitution for Chimpanzees". releasechimps.org. Retrieved 2019-11-08. ^ Knight, Andrew (2008-06-02). "The beginning of the end for chimpanzee experiments?". Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine. 3 (1): 16. doi:10.1186/1747-5341-3-16. ISSN 1747-5341. PMC 2432070. PMID 18518999. ^ Benz-Schwarzburg, Judith; Knight, Andrew (2011). "Cognitive Relatives yet Moral Strangers?". Journal of Animal Ethics. 1 (1): 9–36. doi:10.5406/janimalethics.1.1.0009. ISSN 2156-5414. JSTOR 10.5406/janimalethics.1.1.0009. ^ "ANIMAL RESEARCH AMENDMENT (PRIMATES) BILL - Mark Pearson MLC - Mark Pearson". Retrieved 2019-11-08. ^ "RIS - Tierversuchsgesetz 2012 - Bundesrecht konsolidiert, Fassung vom 08.11.2019". www.ris.bka.gv.at. Retrieved 2019-11-08. ^ "Austria Bans Experiments on Great Apes | Related News | News". www.releasechimps.org. Retrieved 2019-11-04. ^ "Austria | World Animal Protection". api.worldanimalprotection.org. Retrieved 2019-11-08. ^ "DIRECTIVE 2010/63/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL". ^ "Animal Welfare Act 1999 No 142 (as at 08 September 2018), Public Act 85 Restrictions on use of non-human hominids – New Zealand Legislation". www.legislation.govt.nz. Retrieved 2019-11-07. External links[edit] ReleaseChimps.org v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Animal rights movement Animal rights by country or territory Anarchism and animal rights Animal rights and punk subculture Animal rights and the Holocaust Animal rights in Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism Christianity and animal rights Moral status of animals in the ancient world Timeline of animal welfare and rights Universal Declaration on Animal Welfare Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal ethics Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal protectionism Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthrozoology Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Ethology Insects in ethics Meat paradox Nonviolence Open rescue Opposition to hunting Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Sentiocentrism Speciesism Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal agriculture Animal product Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Concentrated animal feeding operation Fish farming Fur farming Fur trade Insect farming Intensive animal farming Intensive pig farming Livestock Poultry farming Slaughterhouse Wildlife farming Animal testing Animal testing on non-human primates Animal testing regulations Covance Great ape research ban Green Scare Huntingdon Life Sciences Model organism Nafovanny Operation Backfire Animal welfare Animal euthanasia Cruelty to animals Pain in animals Pain in amphibians Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Pain and suffering in laboratory animals Welfare of farmed insects Fishing Commercial fishing Fishing bait Recreational fishing Wild animals Culling wildlife Hare coursing Hunting International primate trade Ivory trade Predation problem Wild animal suffering Wildlife management Other Abandoned pets Animal sacrifice Animals in sport Live food Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Kristin Andrews Tom Beauchamp Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Jake Conroy Alice Crary David DeGrazia Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux John Hadley Oscar Horta Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum David Pearce Siobhan O'Sullivan Clare Palmer Bernard Rollin Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Peter Singer Jérôme Segal Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein Corey Lee Wrenn Historical David Renaud Boullier Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry Arthur Helps John Hildrop Soame Jenyns John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Edward Nicholson Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Adam Gottlieb Weigen Thomas Tryon Jon Wynne-Tyson Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Brigitte Gothière Bob Barker Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Rod Coronado Karen Davis Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Jordan Halliday Wayne Hsiung Ronnie Lee Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Nathan Runkle Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Gary Yourofsky Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Ernest Bell Frances Power Cobbe Alice Drakoules Robert Enke Emarel Freshel Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jill Phipps Catherine Smithies Henry Spira Andrew Tyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Front Anonymous for the Voiceless Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Equanimal Farm Animal Rights Movement Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Mercy for Animals New England Anti-Vivisection Society Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for Animals People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Sentience Politics Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Historical Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Welfare Party (UK) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animalist Party Against Mistreatment of Animals (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for Animal Welfare (Ireland) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) Animals' Rights (1892) The Universal Kinship (1906) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) The Lives of Animals (1999) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Sentientist Politics (2019) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Dominion (2018) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Category ( 84 ) v t e Apes Extant ape species Human (Homo sapiens) Pan (genus) Bonobo (Pan paniscus) Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) Gorilla (Gorilla spp.) Western gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) Eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei) Orangutan (Pongo spp.) Sumatran orangutan (Pongo abelii) Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) Tapanuli orangutan (Pongo tapanuliensis) Gibbon (family: Hylobatidae) Study of apes Ape language Dian Fossey Birutė Galdikas Jane Goodall Chimpanzee genome project Human genome project Neanderthal genome project Willie Smits Lone Drøscher Nielsen Ian Redmond Elgin Center Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary Borneo Orangutan Survival Legal and social status Personhood Research ban Kinshasa Declaration Great Ape Project Survival Project International Primate Day Related List of individual apes (non-human) Apes in space (non-human) Bigfoot Bushmeat Chimpanzee–human last common ancestor Gorilla–human last common ancestor Orangutan–human last common ancestor Gibbon–human last common ancestor List of fictional primates (non-human) Great apes Human evolution Monkey Day Mythic humanoids Sasquatch Yeren Yeti Yowie Category Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125