This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (June 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The coat of arms of Norway, with the royal crown displayed atop the escutcheon Part of a series on Heraldic achievement External devices in addition to the central coat of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto  Heraldry portal v t e A crown is often an emblem of a sovereign state, usually a monarchy (see The Crown), but also used by some republics. A specific type of crown is employed in heraldry under strict rules. Indeed, some monarchies never had a physical crown, just a heraldic representation, as in the constitutional kingdom of Belgium. Crowns are also often used as symbols of religious status or veneration, by divinities (or their representation such as a statue) or by their representatives, e.g. the Black Crown of the Karmapa Lama, sometimes used a model for wider use by devotees. A crown can be a charge in a coat of arms, or set atop the shield to signify the status of its owner, as with the coat of arms of Norway. Contents 1 Physical and heraldic crowns 2 As a display of rank 3 Naval, civic, mural and similar crowns 4 Commonwealth usage 5 Continental usages 5.1 Andorra 5.2 Bulgaria 5.3 France 5.3.1 Ancien Régime 5.3.2 Napoleonic Empire 5.3.3 July Monarchy 5.4 Georgia 5.5 German-speaking countries 5.5.1 Holy Roman Empire 5.5.2 Liechtenstein 5.5.3 Austria 5.5.4 Germany 5.6 Greece 5.7 Hungary 5.8 Croatia 5.9 Italy 5.9.1 Kingdom of Italy (1861-1946) 5.9.2 Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, Two Sicilies 5.9.3 Grand Duchy of Tuscany 5.9.4 Other Italian states before 1861 5.10 Low Countries 5.10.1 Netherlands 5.10.2 Belgium 5.10.3 Luxembourg 5.11 Monaco 5.12 Poland and Lithuania 5.13 Portuguese-speaking countries 5.13.1 Portugal 5.13.2 Brazil 5.14 Romania 5.14.1 Kingdom of Romania 5.15 Russia 5.16 Nordic countries 5.16.1 Denmark 5.16.2 Finland 5.16.3 Norway 5.16.4 Sweden 5.17 Serbia 5.18 Spanish-speaking countries 5.18.1 Spain 5.18.2 Mexico 5.18.3 Chile 6 Non-European usages 6.1 Bahrain 6.2 Bhutan 6.3 Cambodia 6.4 Central African Empire 6.5 Egypt before 1953 6.6 Jordan 6.7 Morocco 6.8 Oman 6.9 Siam and Thailand 6.10 Tonga 6.11 Other examples 7 Catholic Church 8 Multinational 9 As a charge 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Physical and heraldic crowns[edit] Sometimes, the crown commonly depicted and used in heraldry differs significantly from any specific physical crown that may be used by a monarchy. Photograph of the physical crown of Norway Representation of the physical crown of Norway The heraldic crown for the King of Norway As a display of rank[edit] If the bearer of a coat of arms has the title of baron or higher (or hereditary knight in some countries), he or she may display a coronet of rank above the shield, usually below the helm in British heraldry, and often above the crest (if any) in Continental heraldry. In this case, the appearance of the crown or coronet follows a strict set of rules. A royal coat of arms may display a royal crown, such as that of Norway. A princely coat of arms may display a princely crown, and so on. Naval, civic, mural and similar crowns[edit] A mural crown is commonly displayed on coats of arms of towns and some republics. Other republics may use a so-called people's crown or omit the use of a crown altogether. The heraldic forms of crowns are often inspired by the physical appearance of the respective country's actual royal or princely crowns. Ships and other units of some navies have a naval crown, composed of the sails and sterns of ships, above the shield of their coats of arms. Squadrons of some air forces have an astral crown, composed of wings and stars. There is also the Eastern crown, made up of spikes, and when each spike is topped with a star, it becomes a celestial crown.[1] Whereas most county councils in England use mural crowns, there is a special type of crown that was used by Scottish county councils. It was composed of spikes, was normally shown vert (green) and had golden wheat sheaves between the spikes.[2] Today, most of the Scottish unitary authorities still use this "wheat sheaf crown", but it is now the usual gold. A depiction of a naval crown A depiction of an astral crown A depiction of a mural crown A depiction of a celestial crown A depiction of an eastern crown A depiction of a camp crown Commonwealth usage[edit] The coat of arms of the Barons Hawke displays a baronial coronet In formal English, the word crown is reserved for the crown of a monarch, whereas the word coronet is used for all other crowns used by members of the British royal family and peers of the realm. In the British peerage, the design of a coronet shows the rank of its owner, as in German, French and various other heraldic traditions. The coronet of a duke has eight strawberry leaves, that of a marquess has four strawberry leaves and four silver balls (known as "pearls", but not actually pearls), that of an earl has eight strawberry leaves and eight "pearls" raised on stalks, that of a viscount has sixteen "pearls", and that of a peerage baron or (in Scotland) lord of parliament has six "pearls". Between the 1930s and 2004, feudal barons in the baronage of Scotland were granted a chapeau or cap of maintenance as a rank insignia.[citation needed] This is placed between the shield and helmet in the same manner as a peer's coronet. Since a person entitled to heraldic headgear customarily displays it above the shield and below the helm and crest, this can provide a useful clue as to the owner of a given coat of arms. Members of the British royal family have coronets on their coats of arms, and they may wear physical versions at coronations. They are according to regulations made by King Charles II in 1661, shortly after his return from exile in France (getting a taste for its lavish court style; Louis XIV started monumental work at Versailles that year) and Restoration, and they vary depending upon the holder's relationship to the monarch. Occasionally, additional royal warrants vary the designs for individuals. In Canadian heraldry, special coronets are used to designate descent from United Empire Loyalists. A military coronet signifies ancestors who served in Loyalist regiments during the American Revolution, while a civil coronet is used by all others. The loyalist coronets are used only in heraldry, never worn. Monarch St Edward's Crown Monarch Crown of Scotland Monarch Imperial/Tudor Crown Monarch Imperial Crown of India Heir Apparent Child of a Sovereign Child of Heir Apparent Grandchild of a Sovereign[a] Child of daughter of a Sovereign, if styled Highness[3] Duke Marquess Earl Viscount Peerage Baron/Lord of Parliament (Scotland) Feudal Baron (Scotland) Loyalist military coronet (Canada) Loyalist civil coronet (Canada) King of Arms (College of Arms) [4] Continental usages[edit] Precisely because there are many traditions and more variation within some of these, there are a plethora of continental coronet types. Indeed, there are also some coronets for positions that do not exist, or do not entitle use of a coronet, in the Commonwealth tradition. Such a case in French heraldry of the Ancien Régime, where coronets of rank did not come into use before the 16th century, is the vidame, whose coronet (illustrated) is a metal circle mounted with three visible crosses. (No physical headgear of this type is known.) Helmets are often substitutes for coronets, and some coronets are worn only on a helmet. Andorra[edit] Co-Princes Bulgaria[edit] Tsar Tsaritsa Prince Older Princesses Younger Princesses France[edit] Capital Department Capital[b] Commune[b] Ancien Régime[edit] King (after the 1500s) Heir to the throne (Dauphin) Children of the sovereign (fils de France ) Prince of the Blood Duke and Peer of France Duke Marquis and Peer of France Marquis Count and Peer of France Count Count (older) Viscount Vidame Baron Knight's crown Knight's tortillon Napoleonic Empire[edit] Emperor (1st Empire) Emperor (2nd Empire) Sovereign Prince Prince Duke Count Baron Knight Bonnet d'honneur July Monarchy[edit] King of the French Georgia[edit] Georgian Royal Crown, also known as the "Iberian Crown" German-speaking countries[edit] Holy Roman Empire[edit] Older Imperial Crown Newer Imperial Crown Oldest Crown of the King of the Romans Older Crown of the King of the Romans Newer Crown of the King of the Romans Crown of the King of Bohemia Archducal hat Ducal hat of Styria Oldest Electoral hat Older Electoral hat New Electoral hat & new Ducal hat Ducal crown Crown of an heir to a duchy Princely hat Princely crown Crown of a Landgrave Older crown of a Count Newer crown of a Count Older crown of a Baron/Freiherr Newer crown of a Baron/Freiherr Older Crown of Nobility Newer Crown of Nobility Liechtenstein[edit] Prince of Liechtenstein Austria[edit] Mural crown of the coat of arms of Austria Mural crown of the State of Lower Austria Austrian Empire Crown of the Emperor of Austria Crown of the King of Bohemia Archducal hat Archducal crown Ducal hat of Styria Ducal hat Ducal crown Princely hat Princely crown Crown of a Count Crown of a Baron/Freiherr Crown of Nobility Germany[edit] Volkskrone (People's Crown) Mural crown of the arms of the Berlin boroughs German Empire Crown of the German Emperor Crown of the German Empress Crown of the German Crown Prince Crown of the King of Prussia Crown of the King of Bavaria Crown of the King of Württemberg Greece[edit] Crown of the King of the Hellenes The Crown as it appears on the Royal Coat of Arms of Greece Hungary[edit] Holy Crown of Hungary Croatia[edit] Crown of Zvonimir Italy[edit] Province City Municipality Kingdom of Italy (1861-1946)[edit] King (crown of Savoy) Heir to the throne (Prince of Piedmont) Royal prince[c] Prince of the blood Duke Marquess Count Viscount Baron Noble Hereditary Knight Patrician Province City Municipality Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, Two Sicilies[edit] King of Naples Heir to the throne (Duke of Calabria) Prince and princess Grand Duchy of Tuscany[edit] Medici Grand Dukes of Tuscany Other Italian states before 1861[edit] Crown of San Marino Crown of Napoleonic Italy Iron Crown of Lombardy Papal Tiara Doge of Venice Doge of Genoa Low Countries[edit] Netherlands[edit] Holy Roman Emperor King Prince (Members of the Royal House, children of the Monarch) Prince (Members of the Royal House, grandchildren of the Monarch) Prince (nobility, for titles granted after 1815) Duke Marquess Count Count (alternative style) Viscount Baron Hereditary Knight (Erfridder) Jonkheer Belgium[edit] The older crowns are often still seen in the heraldry of older families. King Prince of the Royal house Prince (nobility, for titles granted after 1815) Prince (nobility, for titles granted during the Ancien Régime) Duke Marquess Count Count (older) Count (oldest) Viscount Baron Baron (older) Hereditary Knight (Chevalier/Erfridder) Luxembourg[edit] Grand Duke Monaco[edit] Prince Poland and Lithuania[edit] King Grand Duke Prince Nobleman Portuguese-speaking countries[edit] Portugal[edit] Capital (Lisbon) City Town Civil Parish Administrative Region (1930-1999) Kingdom of Portugal (until 1910) King Heir to the throne (Prince Royal) Prince of Beira Infante Duke Marquess Count Viscount Baron Knight / Fidalgo Brazil[edit] Capital of State of the Federation[b] City[b] Town[b] Village[b] Empire of Brazil Emperor Heir to the throne (Prince Imperial) Prince Duke Marquess Count Viscount Baron Romania[edit] Capital City Town Village Kingdom of Romania[edit] King (The Steel Crown of Romania) Russia[edit] Emperor Crown of the Grand Duchy of Finland Monomakh's Cap Prince Count Baron Baron (alternative style) Crown of Nobility Nordic countries[edit] Denmark[edit] King Crown Prince Prince (royal family) Duke Marquess Count Baron Crown of Nobility Finland[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2014) During the Swedish reign, Swedish coronets were used. Crowns were used in the coats of arms of the historical provinces of Finland. For Finland Proper, Satakunta, Tavastia and Karelia, it was a ducal coronet, for others, a comital coronet. In 1917 with independence, the coat of arms of Finland was introduced with a Grand Ducal coronet, but it was soon removed, in 1920. Today, some cities use coronets, e.g. Pori has a mural crown and Vaasa a Crown of Nobility. Ducal coronet Satakunta Comital coronet Savo Norway[edit] Heraldic crown of the King Physical crown of the King Physical crown of the Queen Crown Prince Prince or Princess Duke Marquess Count Baron Crown of Nobility Sweden[edit] King Crown Prince Prince/Princess Duke/Duchess Count Baron Crown of Nobility Serbia[edit] King (medieval) King (after 1903) Spanish-speaking countries[edit] Spain[edit] King (National arms design) King (Monarch's arms design) King (Aragon, Catalonia, Balearics, Valencia) Heir to the throne (Prince of Asturias) Heir to the throne (Prince of Girona) (Aragon, Catalonia, Balearics, Valencia) Infante Infante (Aragon, Catalonia, Balearics, Valencia) Grandee of Spain Duke Marquess Count Viscount Baron Señor/Don (Lord) Hidalgo (Nobleman) Knight's burelete Mexico[edit] Emperor (1st Empire) Emperor (2nd Empire) Prince (1st Empire and 2nd Empire) Chile[edit] Municipal Mural Crown Non-European usages[edit] Bahrain[edit] King Bhutan[edit] 'Raven Crown' of the Kingdom of Bhutan Cambodia[edit] Crown of the Kingdom of Cambodia Central African Empire[edit] Emperor Egypt before 1953[edit] Khedive (-1914) and Sultan (1914-22) King (1922-53) Jordan[edit] Crown of Jordan Morocco[edit] Heraldic Crown of Morocco Oman[edit] Crown of Oman Siam and Thailand[edit] Great Crown of Victory of the Kings of Siam and Thailand Phra Kiao (princely coronet, also the emblem of King Chulalongkorn) Tonga[edit] Crown of Tonga Other examples[edit] Imperial Crown of Ethiopia Royal Crown of Tahiti Royal Crown of Hawaii Royal Crown of Hawaii Crown of the Shah of Persia Crown of the Shah of Iran Twig crown of the Republic of the Congo [5] Catholic Church[edit] Papal Tiara (Pope) Patriarch Cardinal Metropolitan Archbishop Archbishop Eastern Catholic prelate, combining elements of both Eastern and Western ecclesiastical heraldry Apostolic protonotary (Monsignor) Honorary Prelate (Monsignor) Chaplain of His Holiness (Monsignor) Bishop Abbot Priest Multinational[edit] Astral crown Camp crown Celestial crown Eastern crown Mural crown Naval crown As a charge[edit] In heraldry, a charge is an image occupying the field of a coat of arms. Many coats of arms incorporate crowns as charges. One notable example of this lies in the Three Crowns of the arms of Sweden. Additionally, many animal charges (frequently lions and eagles) and sometimes human heads also appear crowned. Animal charges gorged (collared) of an open coronet also occur, though far less frequently. A golden crown appears prominently in the arms of Vestfold, a county in Norway. A crowned lion head in the arms of Kreis Biedenkopf, a county in Hesse, Germany (1832-1974) The Three Crowns, as well as lions and leopards crowned, in the arms of Eric of Pomerania Both lions and eagles crowned appear in the coat of arms of the Czech Republic. Badge of the Unicorn Pursuivant, a unicorn gorged of a coronet See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heraldic crowns. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Crown jewels Imperial crown List of monarchies Coronet Notes[edit] ^ Currently, besides the grandchildren of the present Queen Elizabeth II, the current Duke of Gloucester and Duke of Kent, along with Princess Alexandra, are granted the privilege to use the crown of a Sovereign's Grandchild as they are the grandchildren of a former sovereign, George V. ^ a b c d e f This standard has many exceptions. ^ The dukes of Genoa were granted the privilege to use the crown of a royal prince though they were only princes of the blood References[edit] ^ Mackinnon of Dunakin, Charles (1968). The Observer's Book of Heraldry. Frederick Warne & Co. Ltd. p. 73. ^ Moncreiffe, Iain; Pottinger, Don (1953). Simple Heraldry Cheerfully Illustrated. Thomas Nelson and Sons. p. 58. ^ Cox, Noel The Coronets of Members of the Royal Family and of the Peerage. Archived 2018-01-04 at the Wayback Machine Originally published in (1999) 22 The Double Tressure, the Journal of The Heraldry Society of Scotland 8-13. Acceded 8 April 2017 ^ Boutell, Charles (1914). Fox-Davies, A.C. (ed.). Handbook to English Heraldry, The (11th ed.). London: Reeves & Turner. pp. 104–156. ^ Ströhl, Hugo Gerard (1899). Heraldischer Atlas. Stuttgart. v t e Types of crowns By rank Papal Imperial Royal Consort By use Coronation Heraldic State By form Astral Camp Celestial Circlet Corolla Coronet Diadem Eastern Golden hat Hoop Mural Naval Tiara Parts Half-arch Hoop Monde Cap Cross Cross pattée Lappet v t e Crowns Austria Imperial Crown of Austria Crown of Empress Elizabeth (Austria) Archducal hat Archducal hat of Tyrol Archducal hat of Joseph II Ducal hat of Styria Balkans Crown of Zvonimir (Croatia) Crown of Greece Nemanjic Crown (Serbia) Crown of Peter I (Serbia and Yugoslavia) Diamond Crown (Bulgaria) Crown of Skanderbeg (Albania) Bohemia Crown of Saint Wenceslas Crown of the Środa Treasure British Isles Crown of Princess Blanche Crown of Scotland St Edward's Crown Crown of Mary of Modena Tudor Crown State Crown of George I Coronet of Frederick, Prince of Wales Coronation Crown of George IV Crown of Queen Adelaide Imperial State Crown Small Diamond Crown of Queen Victoria Crown of Queen Alexandra Coronet of George, Prince of Wales Crown of Queen Mary Imperial Crown of India Crown of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother Coronet of Charles, Prince of Wales Denmark Crown of Christian IV (Denmark) Crown of Christian V (Denmark) France Crown of Charlemagne Sainte Couronne Crown of Louis XV Crown of Napoleon I Crown of Charles X Crown of Napoleon III Crown of Empress Eugénie Germany Crown of Wilhelm I (Prussia) German State Crown Crown of Wilhelm II (Prussia) Royal Crown of Bavaria Royal Crown of Württemberg Royal Crown of Hanover Grand Ducal Crown of Baden Crown of Frederick I (Prussia) Crown of Sophie Charlotte (Prussia) Electoral Hat of Saxony Holy Roman Empire Reliquary Crown of Henry II Imperial Crown of the Holy Roman Empire Imperial Crowns of Charles VII Reliquary Crown of Otto II Crown of Otto III Reliquary Crown of Empress Cunigunde Salian Funeral Crowns of Spires Kamelaukion of Frederick II or Constance of Sicily Reliquary Crown of Charlemagne (14th century) Holy See Papal tiara Hungary Holy Crown of Hungary Crown of Stephen Bocskai Italy Napoleonic Crown of Italy Iron Crown of Lombardy Grand Ducal Crown of Tuscany Norway Norwegian Crown Prince's Coronet Crown of Norway Crown of the Queen of Norway Poland Crown of Bolesław I the Brave Swedish Crown Muscovy Crown Hungarian Crown Homagial Crown Funeral Crown Queen's Crown Crown of Augustus II Crown of Augustus III Crown of Maria Josepha Płock Diadem Portugal Crown of João VI (Portugal) Diadem of the Stars Romania Crown of Elisabeta (Romania) Crown of Maria (Romania) Steel Crown of Romania Russia "Cap of Monomakh" Crown of Kazan Tzardom Crown of Tsar Michael Fyodorovich Cap of Monomakh of the second set Diamond crown of Tsar Peter I Diamond crown of Tsar Ivan V Altabas crown of the third set Crown of Empress Catherine I Crown of Empress Anna Ivanovna Great Imperial Crown Maltese Crown Small Imperial Crown Serbia Crown of Serbia Spain Royal Crown of Spain Sweden Crown of Eric XIV Crown of the Queen Crown of Queen Christina Crown of the Heir Apparent Other European Crown of the Netherlands Crown of Rus (Ukraine) Africa Crown of Madagascar Crown of Ranavalona III Silver crown of Emperor Tewodros (Ethiopia) Americas Crown of Faustin I (Haiti) Imperial Crown of Brazil Imperial Crown of Mexico Asia Sasanian crowns (Iran) Empress Crown (Iran) Kiani Crown (Iran) Pahlavi Crown (Iran) Crown of Baekje (Korea) Crown of Gaya (Korea) Crown of Silla (Korea) Great Crown of Victory (Siam/Thailand) Crown of Sri Vikrama Rajasinha of Sri Lanka Oceania Crown of Hawaii Crown of Tahiti See also Coronation Crown jewels Heir apparent Heir presumptive King Monarchy Queen Regalia Royal family v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources