Resort complex in Melbourne, Australia Crown Melbourne Crown Casino in 2007, along the Yarra River in Melbourne Location Southbank, Victoria, Australia Address Yarra Promenade Opening date 30 June 1994; 26 years ago (1994-06-30) (temporary location) 8 May 1997; 23 years ago (1997-05-08) (permanent location) No. of rooms 1,604 Signature attractions The Palladium Seasons of Fortune, Southern Porte Cochere, Revelry, Brigades and Celebration Casino type Land Owner Crown Resorts Website crownmelbourne.com.au Aerial view of the complex from the north The Atrium at Crown Crown Melbourne (also referred to as Crown Casino and Entertainment Complex) is a casino and resort located on the south bank of the Yarra River, in Melbourne, Australia. Crown Casino is a unit of Crown Limited, and the first casino of the now-international Crown brand. Initially having opened in 1994 on the north bank of the Yarra, Crown Melbourne relocated and re–opened on the south bank of the Yarra, in 1997. It remains one of the central features of the Southbank precinct of the Melbourne central business district. The entire complex has a space of 510,000 m²—the equivalent to two city blocks—making it the largest casino complex in the Southern Hemisphere and one of the largest in the world. The complex also hosts four hotels, Crown Towers, Crown Promenade, and Crown Metropol, with a fourth hotel approved for construction which is expected to commence in 2018. The casino is accessible by tram routes 12, 58, 96, 109 which all pass near Southern Cross railway station and the Melbourne City Centre. Contents 1 Founding and statistics 2 Crown Casino 2.1 Games 2.2 Government oversight 3 General features: Entertainment Complex 3.1 Nightclubs, restaurants and stores 4 Hotels 4.1 Notable guests at Crown 5 The Palladium Ballroom 6 Water features 7 Incidents 8 References 9 External links Founding and statistics[edit] Crown's casino complex opened on 8 May 1997,[1] after moving from a temporary location that opened on 30 June 1994 on the north bank of the Yarra.[2] It was designed by a team of architects and interior designers working in collaboration, including : Bates Smart, Perrott Lyon Mathieson and Daryl Jackson (in association). Principal practitioners included architects Lyndon Hayward, Bob Sinclair, Peter Dredge, and Hamish Lyon, and interior designers Jeff Copolov, Paul Hecker, Jackie Johnston, Kathy Hall, Fiona Ennis, Jan Eastwood, and Kerry Phelan.[3] It is one of the central features of the Southbank area in the central business district and the Crown Towers fronts onto the waterfront as part of Southbank Promenade. Children under the age of 18 are permitted into the entertainment and shopping section of complex, but not into the gaming area or areas serving alcohol. The entire complex has a space of 510,000 m², making it the largest casino complex in the Southern Hemisphere[4] and one of the largest in the world.[5][6] Crown Casino[edit] Crown Casino opened in 1994 at the World Trade Centre on the north bank of the Yarra River. This location was a temporary, and training, setup while construction of the proper complex occurred. The Casino complex opened in its proper planned location at Southbank in 1997. Actress Rachel Griffiths infamously ran through the casino topless on its opening night to protest the project.[7] It is open 24 hours a day, seven days a week except on Christmas Day, Good Friday and Anzac Day when it is closed from 4 a.m. to midday. It was founded, owned and run by Lloyd Williams until the Packer takeover by PBL in 1999. Crown Casino has a licence for 540 table games (100 poker tables) and 2,500 poker machines.[8] Games[edit] Amongst other games, Crown provides the six main casino games of blackjack, craps, pai gow, poker, baccarat and roulette and it was also the first to introduce an electronic version of roulette known as Rapid Roulette. There is also Bigwheel, the electronic Vegas Star Roulette and Rapid Baccarat. All lower denomination blackjack tables only offer a proprietary variant of the game called BlackJack Plus,[9] which has been described as "the worst game of blackjack in Australia".[10] This variation enormously increases the house advantage from around 0.5% in the higher denomination tables, to around 5%,[11] making its odds comparable to double-zero roulette.[12] As well as three card poker on the main gaming floor, Crown has also offers varieties of poker including Texas hold 'em. The Crown Poker Room encompasses a large separate space in the Crown basement. The Crown is also one of the major centres for competitive poker in the Asia-Pacific region. It annually hosts the Aussie Millions, currently the Southern Hemisphere's richest poker event. Starting in 2013, it became home to the World Series of Poker Asia-Pacific, the latest expansion of the World Series of Poker. Crown Casino has 3,500 poker machines on the casino floor, with values ranging from one cent to one dollar, as well as a few two- and five-dollar machines in the VIP areas. Slot machines at Crown are made by Aristocrat, Ainsworth Gaming Technology (AGT), IGT, Konami and SHFL entertainment/Shuffle Master and WMS Gaming, the latter using Shuffle Master machines. Government oversight[edit] The regulator overseeing the casino's activities, and to whom grievances can be addressed, is the Victorian Commission for Gambling Regulation (VCGR). The VCGR regularly monitors the casino's operations to ensure Crown conforms to Victorian gambling laws.[13] Crown has been repeatedly charged and fined for minor breaches of the Casino Control Act 1991.[14] The commission has an office located on site which is staffed around the clock. General features: Entertainment Complex[edit] Nightclubs, restaurants and stores[edit] The Crown Entertainment Complex has a rewards program where members earn points on every dollar spent at most outlets within the Crown complex. There are several nightclubs and restaurants as well as "PLAYTIME Crown" (formerly Galactic Circus), an electronic games arcade, laser tag game and bowling alley. Restaurants include: Conservatory Koko Rockpool Bar and Grill Nobu Melbourne The Atlantic Silks Notable features of the casino include its entrance (commonly known as the "Atrium", featuring stepped fountains and sound/light shows under the themes of the four seasons), and pyrotechnic towers running the length of the Casino promenade. The casino is also home to a number of luxury brand stores including: Harrods Prada Burberry Louis Vuitton BVLGARI Rolex Paspaley Salvatore Ferragamo Omega Hugo Boss Hotels[edit] Crown has three hotel towers, and a fourth which has received planning approval: Crown Towers: a skyscraper comprising a five-star luxury hotel located within the Crown Entertainment Complex. It houses 481 rooms and villas over 38 floors.[15] Located on the banks of the Yarra River it overlooks the city centre, Kings Domain, Port Phillip and Docklands. Crown Metropol: reputedly Australia's largest hotel by number of rooms. This five-star hotel houses 658 rooms across 28 floors. Crown Promenade: a 465-room, 4.5-star hotel on 23 floors.[16] It is located on the block behind Crown Towers and is connected to the main complex by a pedestrian overpass. It also houses Australia's only purpose built hotel conference facility the 'Crown Conference Centre'. Notable guests at Crown[edit] Notable guests at the Crown Towers, Crown Metropol and Crown Promenade Hotels have included Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Kim Kardashian, Katy Perry, Nicole Kidman, Rachel Griffiths, One Direction, Keanu Reeves, Kerry Packer,[17] Tiger Woods[18] and Neil Murray and many other high-profile celebrities and politicians. Roger Federer, and several other tennis players often stay at the Casino during the Australian Open, partly due to the rooftop tennis courts which can be used for training. The Palladium Ballroom[edit] The ornate modern ceiling of the Crown Palladium room The Palladium at Crown is a ballroom with a seating capacity of 1500. It has played host to some of Australia's premier functions, including the annual TV Week Logie Awards, Brownlow Medal, Melbourne Victory Player of the Year Medal, Allan Border Medal, the Australian Formula One Grand Prix ball and the Melbourne Press Club Quill award for excellence in journalism. Water features[edit] Water features appear both inside and outside the Crown Casino complex. They include the Seasons of Fortune, Southern Porte Cochere, Revelry, Brigades and Celebration. Water veneers the textured granite faces of six towers that are located on a promenade at the Crown Casino along the Yarra River in Melbourne. At night, spheres of fire issue at choreographed intervals from the tops of the towers. Nine feet in diameter, these pyrotechnics have become an iconic[citation needed] part of Melbourne's night life. Incidents[edit] In 2013, a man with access to the video feeds from Crown's security cameras via an accomplice cheated the casino out of $33 million.[19] In September 2015, Rochelle Nolan the fiancée and de facto wife of entertainer/comedian Russell Gilbert, took her own life after a battle with depression and was found deceased in one of the rooms of the hotel.[20][failed verification] In 2016, eighteen employees of Crown Casino were detained by Chinese police after having been accused of resorting to gambling crimes.[21] References[edit] ^ Gibson, Rachel (1997-05-09). "Come and see it: Premier - Casino Opening Night". The Age. Fairfax Media. p. 4. ^ Porter, David (1994-06-30). "Simply the best for a glittering Crown". The Age. p. 6. ^ "Melbourne Casino". ArchitectureAU. Retrieved 2020-01-02. ^ "Crown Casino Melbourne entertainment restaurant". Melbourne-hotels.redflag.info. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Crown Casino". Gambling Info. Retrieved 27 June 2011. ^ "Resources Project Database Crown Melbourne, Southbank". Schiavello. 14 December 2014. Retrieved 11 February 2017 ^ Herald Sun. "Crown protest led to naked ambition". HeraldSun.com.au. Retrieved 28 April 2007. ^ Ian Sutton. "New game revolutionises Roulette". Gamingfloor.com. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ Jason Dowling (22 March 2012). "Crown can bust and still not lose". Theage.com.au. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Crown offers worst BJ game in Australia". Blackjack-masters.com. Archived from the original on 25 April 2014. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Blackjack Rule Variations". Wizard of Odds. 27 March 2012. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Roulette". Wizard of Odds. 2 March 2013. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Victorian Commission for Gambling Regulation". Vcgr.vic.gov.au. 19 February 2013. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ Victorian Commission for Gambling Regulation: Disciplinary Action Decisions Archived 2 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Crown Towers Melbourne Accommodation: Exciting, Cosmopolitan, Holiday Destination | City Guides & Travel Tips". Guides.info2travel.com. 19 December 2010. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Crown Promenade, Discount hotel reservations in Melbourne". OzTravel.com. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes to be James Packer's guests at Crown Towers". Smh.com.au. 28 February 2013. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Tiger Woods joined by his mother Kutilda in Melbourne at Crown Towers". Herald Sun. Retrieved 8 March 2013. ^ "Man steals $33 million from Australian casino in 'Ocean's Eleven'-esque heist". forums.themavesite.com/. Retrieved 26 Jan 2015. ^ "Comedian Russell Gilbert mourns loss of partner of 19 years". ^ Day, Philip Wen, Business (31 October 2016). "Four Australians are now involved in the Crown Resorts arrests in China". Business Insider Australia. Retrieved 12 November 2016. One more source from local Australian project with Crown Casino review. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Crown Casino. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Official website CrownLimited.com Coordinates: 37°49′20″S 144°57′36″E﻿ / ﻿37.822324°S 144.960099°E﻿ / -37.822324; 144.960099 v t e Crown Resorts Crown Aspinall's (50% stake) Betfair Australia Crown Melbourne Crown Sydney Crown Perth Crown Sri Lanka (45% stake) CrownBet (67% stake) Gateway Casinos (50% stake) Melco Resorts & Entertainment (34%) Altira Macau City of Dreams Macau City of Dreams Manila Studio City Macau v t e Casinos in Australia New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory Christmas Island Crown (Sydney) The Star (Sydney) Crown (Melbourne) The Reef (Cairns) The Star (Gold Coast) The Treasury (Brisbane) The Ville (Townsville) Adelaide Casino (Adelaide) Crown (Perth) Country Club (Launceston) Wrest Point (Hobart) Lasseters (Alice Springs) Mindil Beach (Darwin) Casino Canberra (Canberra) Christmas Island Resort v t e Landmarks in the Melbourne City Centre Note: this includes landmarks in the Melbourne City Centre and its immediate surrounds, not the Greater Melbourne metropolitan area Precincts Arts Chinatown Docklands East End Government Greek Little Italy Paris End RMIT Quarter Southbank/Wharf Sports and Entertainment University of Melbourne Entertainment Aquarium Arts Centre Convention & Exhibition Centre Crown Entertainment Complex Luna Park Theatre District Tramcar Restaurant Visitor Shuttle Zoo Shopping centres Block Arcade Collins Place DFO Emporium GPO Melbourne Central Myer Flagship Store Queen Victoria Market QV Royal Arcade St. Collins Lane The District Docklands Public museums ACCA ACMI Chinese Hellenic Ian Potter Immigration Melbourne Observatory NGV Australia NGV International Old Melbourne Gaol Old Treasury Building RMIT Gallery Institutions Government House Town Hall Parliament House State Library Supreme Court Victoria Barracks Notable structures Arts Centre Australia 108 Eureka Tower Federation Square Melbourne Star Royal Exhibition Building Shrine of Remembrance St Patrick's Cathedral St Paul's Cathedral Sports venues Docklands (Marvel) Stadium Grand Prix Circuit Icehouse Lakeside Stadium MCG Melbourne Park (John Cain Arena - Margaret Court Arena - Rod Laver Arena - Show Court Arena) Rectangular Stadium (AAMI Park) Sports & Aquatic Centre Sports and Entertainment (Holden) Centre Royal Park Golf Club State Netball Hockey Centre Parks and gardens Albert Park Alexandra Gardens Birrarung Marr Carlton Gardens Fitzroy Gardens Flagstaff Gardens Kings Domain Queen Victoria Gardens Royal Botanic Gardens Royal Park Treasury Gardens Yarra Park Transport Bolte Bridge Capital City Trail City Circle Tram CityLink City Loop Flinders Street station Melbourne Central station Southern Cross station Trams West Gate Bridge Yarra River