Cultural references to H. P. Lovecraft This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A sketch of the Cthulhu statue found in The Call of Cthulhu. The sketch was done by H. P. Lovecraft in 1934 This article provides a list of cultural references to the work of author H. P. Lovecraft. These references are collectively known as the Cthulhu Mythos. For works that are stylistically Lovecraftian, including comics and film adaptations influenced by Lovecraft, see Lovecraftian horror. Contents 1 Film 2 Tabletop games 3 Video games 4 Music 5 Print 6 Television 7 Comics 8 Other 9 See also 10 References Film[edit] Films based on, or inspired by, the writings of H. P. Lovecraft include the following.[1] The Haunted Palace (1963), directed by Roger Corman, starring Vincent Price, and with Lon Chaney Jr.. Marketed as "Edgar Allan Poe's The Haunted Palace", the film is actually based on The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, and also includes elements taken from The Shadow over Innsmouth and "The Dunwich Horror".[2] Die, Monster, Die! (1965), directed by Daniel Haller, and starring Boris Karloff and Nick Adams. An adaptation of "The Colour Out of Space".[3] Curse of the Crimson Altar (1968), directed by Vernon Sewell, and starring Boris Karloff and Christopher Lee. Released in the U.S. as The Crimson Cult. Loosely based on "The Dreams in the Witch House.[4] The Dunwich Horror (1970), directed by Daniel Haller, and starring Sandra Dee, Dean Stockwell, and Ed Begley. Based on the short story of the same name.[5] Re-Animator (1985), directed by Stuart Gordon, and starring Jeffrey Combs, Bruce Abbott, Barbara Crampton, and David Gale. An adaptation of "Herbert West—Reanimator".[6] From Beyond (1986), directed by Stuart Gordon, and starring Jeffrey Combs, Barbara Crampton, and Ken Foree. Based on the short story of the same name.[7] The Curse (1987), directed by David Keith, and starring Wil Wheaton. Based on "The Colour Out of Space".[8] The Unnamable (1988), directed by Jean-Paul Ouellette and starring Mark Kinsey Stephenson. Based on the short story of the same name.[9] Bride of Re-Animator (1990), directed by Brian Yuzna and starring Jeffrey Combs, Bruce Abbott, Claude Earl Jones, David Gale, and Kathleen Kinmont. A sequel to Re-Animator, it is also based on "Herbert West—Reanimator".[10][11] The Resurrected (1991), directed by Dan O'Bannon and starring John Terry, Jane Sibbett, and Chris Sarandon. Based on The Case of Charles Dexter Ward.[12] Cast a Deadly Spell (1991), directed by Martin Campbell and starring Fred Ward, Julianne Moore, David Warner, and Clancy Brown. An original story that combines the Cthulhu mythos with a film noir detective mystery.[13] The Unnamable II: The Statement of Randolph Carter (1992), directed by Jean-Paul Ouellette and starring Mark Kinsey Stephenson. The film combines story elements from "The Unnameable" and "The Statement of Randolph Carter".[14] Necronomicon (1993), an anthology of three stories based on "The Rats in the Walls", "Cool Air", and The Whisperer in Darkness, with a framing story featuring a fictionalized H. P. Lovecraft.[15] Castle Freak (1995), directed by Stuart Gordon and starring Jeffrey Combs and Barbara Crampton. Inspired by "The Outsider".[16] Dagon (2001), directed by Stuart Gordon and starring Ezra Godden, Francisco Rabal, and Raquel Meroño. Based on The Shadow over Innsmouth.[17] Beyond Re-Animator (2003), directed by Brian Yuzna and starring Jeffrey Combs, Jason Barry, and Elsa Pataky. The third movie of the Re-Animator trilogy, loosely based on "Herbert West—Reanimator".[18] The Call of Cthulhu (2005), a silent black-and-white featurette designed to look like it was released in the late 1920s, when the short story "The Call of Cthulhu" was published.[19] Cthulhu (2007), directed by Daniel Gildark, and starring Jason Cottle, Cara Buono, and Tori Spelling. Based on The Shadow over Innsmouth.[20] The Last Lovecraft: Relic of Cthulhu (2009), directed by Henry Saine, and starring Kyle Davis. A comedy horror film, with an original story set amidst the Chulthu Mythos.[21] The Whisperer in Darkness (2011), a black-and-white film designed to look like it was released in the 1930s. Based on the short story of the same name.[22] Howard Lovecraft and the Frozen Kingdom (2016), Howard Lovecraft and the Undersea Kingdom (2017), and Howard Lovecraft and the Kingdom of Madness (2018) are animated movies that are based on graphic novels inspired by the writings of Lovecraft.[23][24] Color Out of Space (2020), directed by Richard Stanley and starring Nicolas Cage. Based on "The Colour Out of Space".[25] Underwater (2020), an original story that follows a group of workers on a drilling facility at the bottom of the ocean who encounter hostile creatures from the Cthulhu mythos.[26] Tabletop games[edit] Game Title Publisher/Developer Year Notes Arkham Horror Chaosium Fantasy Flight Games 1987 2005 A board game originally published by Chaosium. The license was later acquired by Fantasy Flight Games, with a revised and expanded version of the game re-released in 2005.[27] Call of Cthulhu Chaosium 1981 Award-winning role-playing game based on the Mythos.[28] Call of Cthulhu Collectible Card Game Fantasy Flight Games 2004 Collectible card game based on the Mythos.[29] Chaos of Cthulhu Imp House Game Company 2016 A dice game based on the Cthulhu Mythos.[30] Chez Cthulhu A Chez Geek (by Steve Jackson Games) variant where slackers may descend into Lovecraftian madness.[31] Delta Green Pagan Publishing, Arc Dream Publishing 1997, 2016 A Call of Cthulhu sourcebook and later its own standalone game. The Player Characters are members of a secret organization inside the US Government named Delta Green, which fights against creatures from the Mythos and conspiracies related to them. Cthulhu Fluxx Looney Labs 2012 An H. P. Lovecraft-themed variant of the original Fluxx game, including cards based on some of the characters, objects and events in the Cthulhu Mythos.[32] Cthulhu Gloom A spin-off of the card game Gloom, wherein players are given a family of Lovecraftian characters. The goal of the game is for the players to kill their own characters in horribly terrifying deaths for negative points, while keeping their opponents' families healthy and happy. All of the cards in the game contain references to Lovecraftian themes, places and characters. Cthulhu Dice Steve Jackson Games 2010 A dice game with a custom 12-sided die, embossed with tentacles, Elder Signs and more. Players roll the dice in an attempt to destroy their opponent's "sanity".[33] Dungeons & Dragons TSR, Inc. 1980 Games company TSR included an entire chapter on the Cthulhu Mythos (including statistics for the character) in the first printing of Dungeons & Dragons sourcebook Deities & Demigods (1980). TSR, however, were unaware that Arkham House - copyright holder on almost all Lovecraft literature - had already licensed the Cthulhu property to the game company Chaosium. Although Chaosium stipulated that TSR could continue to use the material if each future edition featured a published credit to Chaosium, TSR refused and the material was removed from all subsequent editions.[34] Elder Sign Fantasy Flight Games 2011 A dice game involving a team of investigators attempting to prevent the "Ancient Ones" from awakening. Also, a mobile App Game with the same goal.[35] Eldritch Horror (board game) Fantasy Flight Games 2013 A board game published by Fantasy Flight Games and inspired by the Arkham Horror board game.[36] Illuminati A card game with an expansion supplement, "Servants of Cthulhu".[37] Magic: The Gathering Wizards of the Coast In the set Rise of the Eldrazi, the size and descriptions of the Eldrazi are partially based on the Cthulhu Mythos.[38] In the set Shadows over Innistrad, the plot of the stories as well as the set's name alludes to Shadows over Innsmouth. Mansions of Madness Fantasy Flight Games Board game involving one player in the service of malevolent deities and other players attempting to stop them.[39] Monsterpocalypse Privateer Press 2008 - A tactical board game pitting giant monsters against each other. One of the factions is the Lords of Cthul, a Lovecraft-inspired Fiends faction from another dimension. Munchkin Steve Jackson Games 2001 A card game that features a series of parody expansion sets based on the Mythos.[40] Mythos Chaosium 1996 - 1997 Collectible card game based in the Lovecraft mythos setting and spanning the 1920s era, dreamlands and modern times via expansions. Players were investigators attempting to complete adventures and not drop to zero sanity. Pathfinder Roleplaying Game Paizo Publishing 2009 A spin-off of the 3.5 Edition of Dungeons and Dragons, Pathfinder includes several of the Outer Gods and Great Old Ones as deities that can be served by player or non-player characters. Smash Up Alderac Entertainment Group 2013 This card game features a "Smash Up: The Obligatory Cthulhu Set" expansion which adds Cthulhu cultists, Innsmouth locals, Elder Things, Miskatonic University members and "Madness" cards that each of these groups can use to various effects.[41] A Study in Emerald Treefrog Games 2013 A 2-5 player board game based on the short story by Neil Gaiman.[42] A Study in Emerald (second edition) Treefrog Games 2015 Second edition of A Study in Emerald with shorter play time and streamlined rules.[43] Trail of Cthulhu Pelgrane Press 2008 An investigative role-playing game.[44] Video games[edit] Game Title Publisher/Developer Year Notes Arcane Mystery Serial Sarbakan, PC 2002 Online serial game pitting human investigators against the creatures of the Mythos.[45] Alone in the Dark Infogrames, PC 1992 Survival horror game based on the works of H. P. Lovecraft. Anchorhead Michael Gentry 1998 Text adventure game inspired by the works of H. P. Lovecraft. Bloodborne From Software 2015 An action role-playing game on the PlayStation 4 that is heavily influenced by the Cthulhu Mythos featuring characters and supernatural beings directly based on those found in the works of H. P. Lovecraft[46] Call of Cthulhu Cyanide 2019 Survival horror role-playing game inspired by the short story and the 1981 role-playing game of the same title. Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth Bethesda Softworks/2K Games, Xbox/Microsoft Windows 2005 Loosely based on The Shadow over Innsmouth, with references to other Mythos works.[47] Call of Cthulhu: The Wasted Land Chaosium / Red Wasp Design 2012 Strategy / Role-playing game developed by Chaosium, publishers of the Call of Cthulhu role-playing game. The story is set during World War I and bases some on its narrative on the novella Herbert West–Reanimator. Call of Duty: Black Ops III Treyarch 2015 The Shadow Man, a character in the Shadows of Evil campaign, is revealed to be a manifestation of Cthulhu. The setting and gameplay itself is inspired by the Mythos.[48] Conarium Zoetrope Interactive 2017 Inspired by the novella At the Mountains of Madness. Cthulhu Chronicles MetaArcade 2018 A campaign of several interactive fiction adventures for mobile platforms, based on the Call of Cthulhu role-playing game. Cthulhu Saves the World Zeboyd Games 2010 A 2D role-playing video game where Cthulhu must become a hero to recover his dark powers. Cthulhu Saves Christmas Zeboyd Games 2019 A comedic prequel to Cthulhu Saves the World. In this game, Cthulhu teams up with Santa Claus’s granddaughter to stop Jack Frost before Christmas is cancelled forever. Along the way he fights Krampus, Mari Lwyd, and other “Christmas League of Evil villains” in turn-based combat. He also builds “R'lyehtionship” levels with his friends. Civilization VI Firaxis Games 2016 One of the achievements in Civilization VI is called "Armies of Cthulhu". It is achieved by levying the military of the city-state Nan Madol. The Council Focus Home Interactive 2018 An episodic adventure game with role-playing elements. The game's plot is centered around the search for the stolen magical grimoire Al Azif (the original name of the Necronomicon), as well as the existence or primordial, demonic entities that have manipulated mankind throughout its history, with features akin to those of the Elder Gods and the Great Old Ones. Crusader Kings II Paradox Interactive 2012 A chain of events in Crusader Kings II describes the player's character helping to summon Cthulhu. The player can choose to either sacrifice the playable character or slay Cthulhu after summoning it. Darkest Dungeon Red Hook Studios 2015 A Roguelike dungeon crawler where the player manages a group of heroes reclaiming an estate where a heavily Cthulhu-themed Old One has awakened and drove the residents mad. The player must not only make sure his group survives but also take care of their sanity and stress levels. Destiny: The Taken King Bungie 2015 Two of the raid bosses, Golgoroth and Oryx, are loosely based upon the Mythos characters Gol-Goroth and Orryx, respectively. The Elder Scrolls series Bethesda 1994 - Current Hermaeus Mora has some Lovecraftian elements to him and can be argued that he shares a similar appearance to Yog-Sothoth. Eternal Darkness: Sanity's Requiem Silicon Knights 2002 A Nintendo GameCube game inspired by Lovecraft's writings. The game is set in Rhode Island where the main character finds a tome with stories of Cthulhu-like 'ancients'. The game won the honorary "Day of the Tentacle (Cthulhu) Award" at GameSpy's Game of the Year Awards. Fallen London Failbetter Games 2009 A browser based role playing game set in a subterranean world influenced by Lovecraftian themes. Etrian Odyssey III: The Drowned City Atlus 2010 A dungeon-crawler role-playing game that draws heavily on the Cthulhu Mythos. The optional final boss, the Abyssal God, bears a heavy resemblance to Cthulhu, and its minions are known as the Deep Ones. Fate/Grand Order Delight Works 2015 A role-playing mobile game that features characters influenced by the Mythos. The characters under the Foreigner class channel the powers of Outer/Elder Gods, currently including Abigail Williams (Yog-Sothoth) and Katsushika Hokusai (Cthulhu). Hearthstone: Whispers of the Old Gods Blizzard 2016 Blizzard released an expansion on the 31st of May 2016, "Whispers of The Old Gods". This expansion's theme is largely inspired by the Cthulhu Mythos. Fallout 3: Point Lookout Bethesda 2008 Bethesda's take on Interplay's "Post-Apocalyptic Role Playing Game" features a minor location in the Capitol Wasteland, the Dunwich Building, which references loosely the short story "The Dunwich Horror". Included in the "Point Lookout" DLC is a quest inspired by the Mythos through a mysterious man's attempts to recover a doomed book. Fallout 4 Bethesda 2015 The game, set in post-apocalyptic Boston, Massachusetts, features a location named "Pickman's Gallery" and an associated side-quest, inspired by "Pickman's Model". Another location in the game called Dunwich Borers references the Dunwich Building in Fallout 3. Grim Dawn Crate Entertainment 2016 Thematically inspired by the Mythos, evident due to the in-game presence of NPCs labelled as "Chthonians", and their leader "Ch'thon". They herald from a "void", and draw visual parallels to similar Lovecraft work. Identity V NetEase Games 2018 Two hunters from the game come from Cthulhu Mythos. Hastur, or "The Feaster" and Yidhra, "The Dream Witch" are both based on the fictional deities of the same names. Knights and Dragons Gree 2013 Multiple quests are based upon Cthulhu, with Cthulhu appearing as a limited Epic Boss. Life is Strange Dontnod Entertainment 2015 An episodic graphic adventure. Although the plot is not directly connected to the Cthulhu Mythos, the game features a number of pop culture references and Easter eggs. Episode Four contains a reference to a H. West Miskatonic University in Bolton, alluding both to the fictional Miskatonic University and to the novella Herbert West–Reanimator by H. P. Lovecraft. Lost Souls 1990 Online game with direct references to the Mythos.[49] Magicka Paradox Interactive 2011 An action-adventure video game, featuring Cthulhu-themed expansion "The Stars are Left". Also there are several Mythos-themed enemies and bosses in the vanilla game.[50] Magrunner: Dark Pulse Frogwares 2013 A puzzle video game involving magnetism, leading to a world with Lovecraftian-inspired monsters, including Cthulhu. Megami Tensei Atlus 1987 - A series of Japanese role-playing games featuring creatures and figures from various mythologies, including beings from the Mythos. They serve varying roles throughout the games, sometimes as enemies, sometimes as recruitable allies. In particular, Nyarlathotep served as the chief antagonist for Shin Megami Tensei: Persona, Persona 2: Innocent Sin and Persona 2: Eternal Punishment. In Persona 5, the Necronomicon appears as Futaba Sakura's initial persona. In Persona 5 Royal, Azathoth appears as the persona of Takuto Maruki. Necronomicon: The Dawning of Darkness Wanadoo Edition 2001 A horror adventure game. The game's plot is a re-telling of The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, a novella by H. P. Lovecraft. Paradigm Jacob Janerka 2017 In the game, a Cthulhu-flavored cupcake can be acquired from the cupcake salesperson in the hallway.[51] Payday 2 Overkill Software, Starbreeze Studios 2013 A four-player cooperative shooter in which players attempt to rob a bank. Cthulhu's face is available as a cosmetic item. Phoenix Point Snapshot Games 2018 A turn-based tactics game in which Earth is infested with a strange mist mutating fauna into Lovecraftian horrors. A background story, "The Tomb of the Phoenix", identifies the planet Yuggoth as the source of an identical infestation from millions of years ago. However, as stated by one of the writers, the exact connection is yet to be determined, and it is possible knowledge of the infestation was actually Lovecraft's inspiration in-universe, since his books are mentioned.[52] Prisoner of Ice Infogrames 1995 An adventure game based on H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos, particularly At the Mountains of Madness. Quake id Software 1996 A first-person shooter computer game whose final boss was an entity named Shub-Niggurath.[53] RuneScape Jagex 2014 A Quest-based on The Shadow over Innsmouth. In the Quest, called A Shadow over Ashdale, the player must save the isle-town of Ashedale from an ancient, aquatic race called Crassians - based themselves on common images of the Deep Ones. Sam & Max: The Devil's Playhouse Telltale Games 2010 A five-episode point-and-click adventure game from the Sam & Max series. The story features a Cthulhu-like race of Elder Gods, the most notable of them named "Yog-Soggoth". Scribblenauts, Super Scribblenauts, Scribblenauts Remix, Scribblenauts Unlimited, Scribblenauts Unmasked 5th Cell 2009, 2010 (Nintendo DS), 2011 (iOS), 2013 Cthulhu and a shoggoth can be summoned during gameplay.[54] Shadow of the Comet Infogrames 1993 An adventure game based on The Shadow over Innsmouth. Sherlock Holmes: The Awakened Frogwares, Windows 2006 Features an investigation into a number of disappearances believed to be the work of a Cthulhu cult.[55] Sherlock Holmes Versus Arsène Lupin Frogwares 2007 Although the game's story is not directly related to the Cthulhu Mythos, a number of references are given, connected to the previous game (Sherlock Holmes: The Awakened). Sherlock Holmes has a Cthulhu statue in his possession. When interacted with, a growling noise can be heard. Barnes, the bookstore owner, who help Holmes translate a Cthulhu Mythos - related magical grimoire in the previous game, has become obsessed with it, to the point where it's beginning to wear upon his sanity. In a particular cut scene, Holmes goes into Watson's room and catches him in the midst of a nightmare, screaming about 'Tentacles'. Sherlock Holmes: The Devil's Daughter Frogwares 2016 Sherlock's archives contain a number of references to the Cthulhu Mythos, as well as information on one of his previous cases involving a Cthulhu Cult (Sherlock Holmes: The Awakened). The game's final antagonist, Alice Hamilton, is involved in spiritualism and the occult, and wears a talisman depicting the version of the Elder Sign appearing in the Simon Necronomicon. SMITE Hi-Rez Studios 2014 A third person MOBA with gods from different pantheons as playable characters, including ones from the Lovecraftian mythos. Cthulhu is playable as part of the game's growing roster of gods, mythical creatures, Heroes and many more. Ah-Muzen-Cab also has a purchasable skin inspired by Cthulhu, named "The Dark Whisperer". South Park: The Fractured but Whole Ubisoft 2017 A role-playing game which features Shub-Niggurath as a boss. Sunless Sea Failbetter Games 2016 A game set in the same universe as Fallen London, with a greater emphasis on exploration and Lovecraftian themes. Terraria Re-Logic 2011 Eye of Cthulhu and Brain of Cthulhu are two prominent boss characters. The final boss, the Moon Lord, bears very close resemblance to Cthulhu, as well as having True Eyes of Cthulhu. It has been joked that he is Cthulhu's brother, despite him not having a brother in any of Lovecraft's stories. It was later revealed that Moon Lord is Cthulhu himself. The Binding of Isaac, The Binding of Isaac: Rebirth Nicalis 2011, 2014 Roguelike games, both based on Biblical themes. Both games feature an item called Necronomicon, a direct reference to Lovecraft's Necronomicon.[56] The Binding of Isaac: Rebirth also contains the ability for the player to transform into the Leviathan, whose design is really inspired by Lovecraftian horror.[57] The Lost Child Crim 2017 A role-playing game where the Ancient Gods plot for world domination. Chtulu and Nyarlathotep are central antagonists of the story, and many creatures of Lovecraft's lore are common enemies or bosses. The Secret World Funcom 2012 An action-adventure MMO. Parts of the game were described by the project lead as being inspired by Lovecraft; there are locations and creatures named after Lovecraft/the Cthulhu Mythos and quests referencing/re-acting elements of it.[58] The Sinking City Frogwares 2019 An open-world survival horror game inspired by a number of works by H. P. Lovecraft and August Derleth. The Vanishing of Ethan Carter The Austronauts 2014 An open world horror adventure video game featuring a story plot reminiscing of H. P. Lovecraft's and August Derleth's works. Several Cthulhu Mythos elements also exist, including references to the Sleeper below the Sea (Cthulhu), the sunken city (R'lyeh), the Necronomicon, the One-Who-Shall-Not-Be-Named (Hastur), etc. The Witcher game series CD Projekt 2007-2015 All three games of the series feature a number of references to the Cthulhu Mythos. The Witcher includes the Vodyanoi, creatures resembling the Deep Ones that serve the sea-god Dagon, as well as human cultists worshiping and dealing with them, as a major part of its storyline. In The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings, the book De Vermis Mysteriis appears. The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt also features a number of documents with Lovecraftian themes, including a copy of the Necronomicon as well as notes written by members of the Cult of Cthulhu. The Warcraft series Blizzard Entertainment 2003 In the ancient past of the Warcraft universe, a host of Lovecraftian Old Gods—C'Thun, Yogg-saron, N'Zoth, and Y'Shaarj—ruled over the world of Azeroth as the Black Empire, enslaving its primitive species and warring with each other. First hinted at in Warcraft 3: The Frozen Throne, these beings have become increasingly important to the ongoing story of World of Warcraft and its expansions. Responsible for the corruption of many of the series' chief villains, the Old Gods and their servants have also appeared to directly confront players as bosses and enemies throughout the game. X-COM: Terror from the Deep MicroProse 1995 Features multiple aliens that bear a close resemblance to creatures from the Cthulhu Mythos, including Cthulhu himself as "The Great Dreamer". Most names have been altered. A hidden underwater city is called "T'leth" instead of Lovecraft's R'lyeh. However, some of the original names, such as Deep One, were adopted unchanged.[59] Music[edit] Band Album Song Notes 1349 Hellfire (2005) "From The Deeps" The Acacia Strain Continent (2008) "Cthulhu" Inspired by Lovecraft.[60] Adagio Dominate (2005) "R'lyeh the Dead" Inspired by R'lyeh Adam Beyer & Ida Engberg The Color out of Space (2012) "The Color out of Space", "Lovecraft" Æther The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Mountains of Madness" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. The song's title and lyrics are inspired by H.P. Lovecraft's short story "Mountains of Madness". Alkaloid The Malkuth Grimoire (2015) "Cthulhu" "[...] Cthulhu. Buried in the deep. Cthulhu. Awaken from your sleep. Cthulhu. No more in death to lie. Cthulhu. For even death may die. [...]" Altar of Dagon Rantings of Mad Men (2015) "Altar of Dagon", "Al Hazred" The band's name, as well as the identically titled song, is inspired by H.P. Lovecraft's short story "Dagon". Al Hazred, also known as the Mad Arab, is a recurring character in Lovecraft's works. Anorimoi Κώλαση (Hell) (2020) "Cthulhu" Anorimoi are a Comedy Metal band from Greece. Their song, "Cthulhu", describes a humorous situation where the titular Great Old One has been caught in the nets of a fisherman and is about to be served as dinner. The album's cover art depicts an octopus-like creature, presumably Cthulhu, rising from the ocean and drowning an airplane. Antipeewee Madness Unleashed (2015) "Rise of Cthulhu" Inspired by the Cthulhu Mythos Army of Dagon Army of Dagon (2015), Night of the Mystics (2017) Various The band's name is inspired by H.P. Lovecrafts short story "Dagon". Ars Ephemera The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Other Gods" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. The song is based on H.P. Lovecraft's short story "The Other Gods". Arzachel Arzachel (1969) "Azathoth" Atlantean Kodex The Pnakotic Demos (2010) Various (all?) Pnakotic refers to the "Pnakotic Manuscripts", the first fictional grimoire created by H. P. Lovecraft. Atlantean Kodex The White Goddess (2013) "Heresiarch" A heresiarch is the leader of a heretical sect or cult, in this case referring to Nyarlathotep. Attilio Perrone The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Topi nel muro" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. "Topi nel muro" translates to "Mice in the walls", a reference to H.P. Lovecraft's short story "The rats in the walls". Aviators Dreams of the Deep (2021) "The Wall of Sleep", "Dreams of the Deep", "Can You Hear It?" In addition to songs based on Bloodborne, itself a heavily Lovecraftian game, the album contains songs directly inspired by Lovecraft's work. "The Wall of Sleep" is based on the short story "Beyond the Wall of Sleep"; "Dreams of the Deep" is a homage to "The Call of Cthulhu"; and "Can You Hear It?" is based on the story "The Rats in the Walls". Black Sabbath Black Sabbath (1970) "Behind the Wall of Sleep" The song's title and lyrics are inspired by a short story with a similar name. Blank Manuscript The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Beast in the Cave" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. The song title refers to H.P. Lovecraft's short story with the same name. Blind Idiot God Various Various Name inspired by H. P. Lovecraft's description of Azathoth Blue Öyster Cult Curse of the Hidden Mirror (2001) "The Old Gods Return" "[...] Of a six eyed god whose wings beat; In a time so odd, so very odd; And we're all lost, all of us blessedly lost [...]" Bong of Cthulhu Various Various Named after Cthulhu Burning Shadows Into the Primordial (2010) "Haunter of the Dark", "Sarnath" Inspired by H.P. Lovecraft's short stories "Haunter of the Dark" and "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" Caravan For Girls Who Grow Plump in the Night (1973) "C'thlu Thlu" "[...] Something seemed nearly dead making me feel so cold; Even the trees seemed to fear there was something unreal [...]" Christian Muenzner Beyond the Wall of Sleep (2014) "Shadow Over Innsmouth", "Mountains of Madness", "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" Ciccada The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Statement" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Based on the H.P. Lovecraft short story "The Statement Of Randolph Carter" Cradle of Filth Midian (2000) "Cthulhu Dawn" Cradle of Filth Lovecraft & Witch Hearts (2002) Compilation album. While aside from a mention or two, few of the included tracks seem to have any central reference to the Cthulhu Mythos, the album's intricate artwork was executed by graphic artist John Coulthard, who penned a graphic-arts version of Lovecraft's "The Call of Cthulhu" for 1995's The Starry Wisdom: Fiction Inspired by H. P. Lovecraft (Ed. D. M. Mitchell & Ramsay Campbell, Creation Books). Cradle of Filth Nymphetamine (2004) "Mother of Abominations" A continuation to Cthulhu Dawn from the Midian album.[61] Cradle of Filth The Manticore and Other Horrors (2012) "The Abhorrent", "Siding with the Titans" As stated by Dani Filth in an interview, the two songs " extol tentacular Lovecraftian values".[62] Cloven Hoof Resist or Serve (2014) "Call of the Dark Ones" "[...] Nameless terror from beneath the sea. In submerged cities waiting to be free [...]" Code: Pandorum The Lovecraftian Horrors (2017) Various Consortium of Genius The Fump, Vol. 23: September - October 2010 "What a Friend We Have in Cthulhu" Parody in the style of a gospel song praising Cthulhu. Part of a compilation album series by "The Funny Music Project". Creature Feature It Was A Dark And Stormy Night (2011) "Fodder for the Elder Gods" Features the Elder Gods from the Cthulhu mythos, as implied in the title. Crystal Eyes Dead City Dreaming (2006) "Dead City Dreaming" Title and lyrics based on the sunken city R'Lyeh. "[...] In ruins aeons old beneath the sea, the Ancients long to be free. They lie dead and dreaming at this fallen site. [...]" Daal The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Call of Cthulu" (Instrumental) Title based on the similarly named short story. D'Accord The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Title and lyrics based on the short story with the same name. Dark Moor Beyond the Sea (2005) "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" (Intro), "The Silver Key" These songs are based on the like-named short stories set in the Dreamlands of H.P. Lovecraft.[63] The Darkest of the Hillside Thickets Various Various Many of the band's songs reference Lovecraft's work.[64] Deadmau5 4x4=12 (2010) "Cthulhu Sleeps" An eponymous instrumental.[65] Deadmau5 While(1<2) (2014) "Rlyehs Lament" Death Breath Stinking Up the Night (2006) "Cthulu Fhtagn!" Deathchain Cult of Death (2007) "Serpent of the Deep" Deathchain Death Eternal (2008) "Incantations of Shub-Niggurath" Deathchain Death Gods (2010) "The Crawling Chaos", "The Beyond", "Howling of the Blind", "Cthulhu Rising" Deathlike Silence Saturday Night Evil (2009) "Dagon" Defiatory Hades Rising (2018) "King in Yellow" Based on "The King in Yellow" by Robert W. Chambers, incorporated into the Cthulhu Mythos by Lovecraft. Deicide Legion (1992) "Dead but Dreaming" Describing implicitly Cthulhu's latent state, as well as the Elder Ones' Denner / Shermann Masters of Evil (2016) "Servants of Dagon" Despondent Awakening The Elder Gods (2015) "I. Awakening The Elder Gods" "II. The Madness From The Sea" "III. Succumbing To Insanity" "IV. Horrific Revelation" Inspired by Lovecraft, particularly his short story "The Call of Cthulhu" Despondent Tales of Insanity (2016) "Cthulhu: Galactic Trap Lord" Despondent The Cosmic Horror (2020 ) "Great Race of Yith", "Shoggoth", and more Dexter Ward Antarctic Dream (2010) "Antarctic Dream" The song ends with a Lovecraft quote: "Sick of this sphere, in crime and conflict old, We yearn for wonders distant and untold".[66] Also, the band's name is taken from the short story The Case of Charles Dexter Ward. Dread Sovereign All Hell's Martyrs (2014) "Cthulhu Opiate Haze" Dream Theater Systematic Chaos (2007) "Dark Eternal Night" Inspired by Lovecraft's prose-poem "Nyarlathotep", including several verbatim quotes Eben Brooks, Allison Lonsdale O R'lyeh? Iä, R'lyeh! (2009) "Hey There Cthulhu", "Bloody (Before It Eats My Face)", "Timere" "Hey There Cthulhu" is a parody song to the tune of "Hey There, Delilah" by Plain White Ts. Electric Wizard Supercoven (1998) "Supercoven" "[...] Yog Sothoth is the gate [...]" Electric Wizard Witchcult Today (2007) "Dunwich" Entombed Clandestine (1991) "Stranger Aeons" Lyrics mention "dreamquest," "lurking at the threshold," and "stranger things that eternal lie." Epilog Whispers in the Darkness (2017) "Nightmare HPL", "Whispers in the Darkness" The album title is derived from Lovecraft's "The Whisperer in Darkness" and the cover is a depiction of Cthulhu. Also, the abbreviation "HPL" in "Nightmare HPL" is a reference to H. P. Lovecraft. Epilog Ancient Ritual (2019) "The King in Yellow", "Cthulhu's Coming" The album cover is a depiction of Hastur (The King in Yellow). The Fall Dragnet (1979) "Spectre Vs. Rector" "Yog Sothoth rape me lord" Flint Glass Nyarlathotep (2006) Various Glass Hammer The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Cool Air" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Goad The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "At the Mountains of Madness" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Based on the H.P. Lovecraft short story with the same name. The Gothic Archies The Tragic Treasury: Songs from A Series of Unfortunate Events (2006) "We Are the Gothic Archies" "[...] Though gothic we are Archie, though Archie we are goth; No Satan-worshipers we, we worship Yog-Sothoth!" Grailknights Knightfall (2018) "Cthulhu" Gravemachine Heal Me Not (2010) "Haunter of the Dark" Guy LeBlanc The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Based on the H.P. Lovecraft short story with the same name. Gwar Scumdogs of the Universe (1990) "Horror of Yig" Fields of the Nephilim The Nephilim (1988) "Last Exit for the Lost" "[...] Between the spaces, along the wall; Appearing faces, that disappear at dawn; We're getting closer. I can see the door; Closer and closer; Kthulhu calls; Forever remain (x4)" High on Fire Blessed Black Wings (2005) "The Face of Oblivion", "Cometh Down Hessian" "The Face of Oblivion" is based on At the Mountains of Madness and "Cometh Down Hessian" is based on The Hound. High on Fire De Vermis Mysteriis (2015) "De Vermis Mysteriis" De Vermis Mysteriis is a fictional grimoire created by Robert Bloch and incorporated by H. P. Lovecraft into the lore of the Cthulhu Mythos. High on Fire Luminiferous (2015) "Carcosa" The song is based on the fictional extraterrestrial city "Carcosa", created by Ambrose Bierce, and later associated with the Cthulhu Mythos. H. P. Lovecraft H. P. Lovecraft (1967); H. P. Lovecraft II (1968) Various A 1960s band named for the author, with song content reflecting Lovecraft's works.[67] Iced Earth Plagues of Babylon (2014) "Cthulhu" Increate Void (2017) "Depths of R'lyeh", "The Crawling Chaos", "Blind Idiot God" Jinetes Negros The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Hypnos" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. The song is based on the short story with the same name. Karda Estra The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Haunter of the Dark" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. The song is based on the short story with the same name. Kate The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Dream-Quest to the Unknown Kadath" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. The song is based on the short story with the same name. La coscienza di Zeno The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "Colofonia" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Legion of the Damned Cult of the Dead (2008) "Black Wings of Yog-Sothoth" Lento Anxiety Despair Languish (2012) "Blind Idiot God" Manilla Road Spiral Castle (2002) "Spiral Castle" "[...]Yog Sothoth has come; And the ancient ones" The Men That Will Not Be Blamed For Nothing This May Be The Reason Why The Men That Will Not Be Blamed For Nothing Cannot Be Killed By Conventional Weapons "Margate Fhtagn" A story of a Victorian family going on a seaside holiday to Margate, which gets interrupted by Cthulhu's rising from the sea.[68] Mercyful Fate Time (1994) "The Mad Arab" Mercyful Fate Into the Unknown (1996) "Kutulu (The Mad Arab Part Two)" Metallica Ride the Lightning (1984) "The Call of Ktulu" An instrumental inspired by "The Call of Cthulhu".[69] Metallica Master of Puppets (1986) "The Thing That Should Not Be" Lovecraft-inspired, alludes to The Shadow over Innsmouth--"hybrid children watch the sea, pray for father roaming free"—and the rhyming couplet "The Nameless City"--"not dead which eternal lie, in stranger eons death might die". "[70][71][72] Metallica Death Magnetic (2008) "All Nightmare Long" Described by vocalist James Hetfield as being about the Hounds of Tindalos.[73] Metallica Hardwired... to Self-Destruct (2016) "Dream No More" "[...]Cthulhu, awaken[...]" Miskatonic Union Astral Quest (2018) "Road to the Mountains of Madness", "Miskatonic Union" Miskatonic Union The Usurper (2020) "Kamog" Morbid Angel Altars of Madness (1989) "Lord of all Fevers and Plague" Mentions 'Cthulhu' among other non-Lovecraftian entities. Morbid Angel Blessed Are the Sick (1991) "The Ancient Ones" Morbid Angel Covenant (1993) "Angel of Disease" Mr. Hurley & die Pulveraffen [de] Leviathan (2019) "Leviathan" The song's title and lyrics are inspired by H.P. Lovecraft's "Call of Cthulhu". NanowaR of Steel Stairway to Valhalla (2018) "The Call of Cthulhu" Comedy metal song about Cthulhu running an evil call center. Necromantia Black Arts Lead to Everlasting Sins E.P. (1992) "The Feast of Ghouls", "De Magia Veterum" "The Feast of Ghouls" is based on concepts from The R'lyeh Text: Hidden Leaves of the Necronomicon. "De Magia Veterum" is based partly on The Call of Cthulhu and partly on the Simon Necronomicon. Necromantia Crossing the Fiery Path (1993) "The Warlock" The Necronomicon, the Book of Eibon and De Vermis Mysteriis are referenced among other "forbidden" magical grimoires. Necromantia From The Past We Summon Thee E.P. (1994) "Faceless Gods" A song influenced by the Cthulhu Mythos and the Simon Necronomicon. Necromantia The Sound of Lucifer Storming Heaven (2007) "For the Elder Magi: I-Eibon the Necromancer", "Architecture Of Exquisite Madness" "For the Elder Magi: I-Eibon the Necromancer" is about Eibon, a figure created by Robert E. Howard and often used by H. P. Lovecraft and other Cthulhu Mythos authors. "Architecture Of Exquisite Madness" is about the Church of Starry Wisdom and describes the Non-Euclidean Geometry often referenced in H. P. Lovecraft's works. Necromantia People of the Sea E.P. (2008), ...For The Temple Of The Serpent Skull... split E.P. with Acherontas (2008) "People of the Sea" A song about the Deep Ones. Nexus The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Colour Out of Space" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Based on H. P. Lovecraft's short story with the same name. Nile Various Various Nile have written several songs about the Cthulhu mythos. Vocalist and guitarist Karl Sanders claimed Lovecraft's works were in harmony with the essence of death metal.[74] Ningen Isu Ougon no Yoake (Golden Dawn) (1992) "Kyouki Sanmyaku" (At the Mountains of Madness) Ningen Isu Taihai Geijutsu Ten (Degenerate Art Exhibition) (1998) "Dunwich no Kai" (The Dunwich Horror) Ningen Isu Mandoro (Ten Thousand Garden Lanterns) (2013) "Jikan kara no Kage" (The Shadow Out of Time) Ningen Isu Utsushiyo wa Yume (This World Is A Dream) (2014) "Uchuu kara no Iro" (The Colour out of Space) Nox Arcana Necronomicon (2004) (all songs) An album entirely about the Cthulhu Mythos.[75] On Interrupt Cosmic Drift (2016) "The Gates of Yog-Sothoth" On Interrupt Totality (EP) (2019) "Blind Idiot God" Opeth Heritage (2011) "Pyre" The lyrics contain references to the short story "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" Orange Goblin A Eulogy for the Damned (2012) "Red Tide Rising" "[...] Gods are descending, a force unrelenting. Cthulhu will rise from the sea. [...]" Persuader The Fiction Maze (2013) "Heathen", "Dagon Rising" Portal Various Various This obscure Australian Black/Death band is heavily inspired by Lovecraft's works lyrically, visually, and musically.[76] Rage Trapped! (1992) "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" Rage Black in Mind (1995) "The Crawling Chaos", "Shadow Out of Time", "In a Nameless Time" Rotting Christ Passage to Arcturo (1991) "The Forest of N'Gai", "Inside the Eye of Algond" The two songs contain references to several Great Old Ones (Azathoth, Tsathoggua, Ithaqua etc), as well as locations from Cthulhu Mythos and Dream Cycle locations (Innsmouth, Carcosa, Kandath etc). Rudimentary Peni Cacophony (1988) (all 30 songs) An album consisting entirely of songs that reference (either directly or indirectly) both Lovecraft's personal life and his literary works (mainly the Cthulhu Mythos).[77] Saille Ritu (2013) "Fhtagn" A slow, ritualistic song based on "The Call of Cthulhu" from a cultist's perspective.[78] Samael Worship Him (1992) "Rite of Cthulhu" The Samurai of Prog The Stories of H.P. Lovecraft - A Synphonic Collection (2012) "The Case of Charles Dexter Ward" Part of an H.P. Lovecraft themed compilation album with contributions from several progressive rock bands. Based on H. P. Lovecraft's short story with the same name. Seizon Various Various His whole discography is based on Cthulhu Mythos (for instance: The Great Old Ones), with the exception of "Goya Toca a Oz" and "The Amazing Journey" albums. Septicflesh Mystic Places of Dawn (1994) "Mystic Places of Dawn" The city of Sarnath from the short story "The Doom that Came to Sarnath" is referenced among Atlantis, Lemuria and other mythical sunken or destroyed cities. Septicflesh Communion (2008) "Lovecraft's Death" The song's lyrics are an amalgam of various Cthulhu Mythos story titles, including "The Call of Cthulhu", "The Whisperer in Darkness", "The Music of Erich Zann" and others. Septicflesh Codex Omega (2017) "Our Church, Below the Sea" Inspired by the Cult of Cthulhu and its beliefs, referenced in "The Call of Cthulhu", as well as the cult of the Deep Ones from The Shadow Over Innsmouth Seven Kingdoms Decennium (2017) "In the Walls" Inspired by H.P. Lovecraft's short story "The Rats in the Walls." Shub-Niggurath Le Morts Vont Vite and other albums "Yog Sothoth" and other tracks Avant-rock/zeuhl band from France which received acclaim for its development of Magma's sound. Several tracks are explicitly Cthulhu Mythos-inspired, and the name of the band is a Cthulhu Mythos deity.[79] Sulphur Aeon Various Various Their whole discography is based on Cthulhu Mythos, with each album having a different deity as its main subject (although not exclusively): Swallowed By the Ocean's Tide is about Cthulhu, Gateway To the Antishphere is mostly about Azagthoth and The Scythe of Cosmic Chaos is centered around Nyarlahotep Thergothon Stream from the Heavens (1994) and "Fhtagn-Nagh Yog Sothoth" demo (1991) Various songs Thergothon's entire catalog is rife with Lovecraftian lyrical reference and atmospheric inspiration.[80] The Vision Bleak Carpathia - A Dramatic Poem (2005) "Kutulu!" Many of the band's songs are inspired by classic horror novels and films, including H. P. Lovecraft's work.[81] Therion Beyond Sanctorum (1992) "Cthulhu" Inspired by H. P. Lovecraft's work.[82] Varathron His Majesty at the Swamp (1993) "Flowers of My Youth", "The Tressrising of Nyarlathotep" "Flowers of My Youth" is an invocation of Cthulhu (spelled Kutulu), combining the Cthulhu Mythos with elements from The Lord of the Rings (the fictional city of Cirith Ungol). In "The Tressrising of Nyarlathotep", lyrics are inspired by the prose poem Nyarlathotep. Varathron Untrodden Corridors of Hades (2014) "The Bright Trapezium" A song about the Shining Trapezohedron and the Church of Starry Wisdom. Zardonic Lovecraft Machine "Cthulhu" The first track of this release is named after Cthulhu.[83] John Zorn Magick (2004) Tracks 1-5: "Conjurations", "The Magus", "Thought Forms", "Incunabula", and "Asmodeus" These 5 tracks combine to form a work called "Necronomicon" Print[edit] Title Author Year Notes 14 Peter Clines 2012 A speculative fiction novel which explores the Cthulhu Mythos in a contemporary setting[84] The Adventures of Samurai Cat Mark E. Rogers 1984 The character Samurai Cat traverses time and space on a mission of revenge, and at one point wreaks havoc in H. P. Lovecraft's The Shadow Over Innsmouth.[85] Afterlife with Archie Archie Horror 2014 A comic series in which Sacthubrina ends up at an otherworldly asylum run by "Dr. Lovecraft" after setting off the zombie apocalypse in the series. Due to her use of the Necronomicon she has inadvertently awakened Cthulhu, who intends for her to serve as his bride. All-Consuming Fire Andy Lane 1994 This Doctor Who Virgin New Adventures novel is set on a planet called Ry'leh and features an alien claiming to be Azathoth. It also equates several pre-existing Doctor Who monsters with Mythos creatures, claiming Fenric (from The Curse of Fenric) is Hastur, the Great Intelligence is Yog-Sothoth, and the Animus (from The Web Planet) is Lloigor.[86] And Another Thing... Eoin Colfer 2009 The final installment in the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy series, and, in a humorous vignette, features Cthulhu interviewing for the position of god of the planet "Nano".[87] Astronomicon minorem Khurt Khave 2015 Main religious text of the First United Church of Cthulhu[88] Awoken Serra Elinsen 2013 A young adult paranormal romance about a girl who falls in love with Cthulhu who appears at her high school in the guise of a teenage boy. The novel was created by internet film critic Lindsay Ellis and her friends Nella Inserra and Elisa Hansen, along with their fanbase as a parody of Twilight and subsequent novels of the young adult paranormal romance genre.[89] The Book of the SubGenius and other SubGenius literature J.R. "Bob" Dobbs and The SubGenius Foundation 1983 Contains many references and allusions to the Cthulhu Mythos, such as identifying J.R. "Bob" Dobbs' real identity as Nyarlathotep and numerous mentions of the Elder Gods and Great Old Ones, who include SubGenius deities such as Jehovah 1 and the Discordian/SubGenius deity Eris Discordia, and mentioning Cthulhu as one of the common choices for a ShorDurPerSav (short-duration personal savior).[90] The Call of C'rruso Mark Shaw, Laura Shaw and Flemming Andersen 2016 In Donald Duck #16, this Disney comics adventure story is a loose parody of the Cthulhu Mythos. Wannabe star singer Donald Duck is taken to the lost city of "Sp'too," where the many-eyed monster-god "Pf'legmwad" lies sleeping—with all of our world existing only as a part of his dream. "Mr. C'rruso", a humanlike manifestation of Pf'legmwad's mind, thinks that Donald's quacky singing voice will wake the monster up, as it eventually does.[91] A Colder War Charles Stross 1997 A novella that blends the political fiction and technothriller genres with the Mythos.[92] The Crawlin' Chaos Blues Edward Michael Erdelac 2010 A blues singer in 1964 who makes a deal with Nyarlathotep for fame and fortune.[93] Crouch End Stephen King 1980 A short story concerning a young couple lost in the London suburb, featuring several references to the Mythos.[94] Darkwing Duck A story arc of the comic book series involves the criminal organization F.O.W.L. unleashing "Duckthulu", an obvious parody of Cthulhu. Destiny: The Sacred City Andrew Lawrenson 2016 The conclusion in the Brotherhood of the Star trilogy, in which the protagonists must face a final battle against the dark cult and their plans to raise an ancient evil.[95] Discworld (series) Terry Pratchett 1983 - Numerous allusions exist throughout the series; the most explicit of these is the Necrotelecomnicon, after Lovecraft's iconic Necronomicon grimoire.[96] The Dream-Quest of Vellitt Boe Kij Johnson 2016 A novella set in the dreamlands and featuring an appearance by Raymond Carter, a former lover of the protagonist, in a subtly feminist re-imagining of Lovecraft's The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath.[97] The Dresden Files (series) Jim Butcher 2000 - Frequently alluded to throughout the series, in terms of the 'Outsiders', beings from beyond 'the Outer Gates' at the edge of reality and knowledge of them is eradicated wherever possible by the White Council of Wizards and the Venatori. One, He-Who-Walks-Behind, is an important part of the series' backstory. Several examples are explicitly included, such as a Shoggoth and Cthulhu, the latter being referred to as 'the Sleeper' and having an active cult. Lovecraft himself is referenced. Famous Monsters of Filmland A variant cover for issue #281 featured Cthulhu locked in battle with Godzilla. Green Lama Unbound Adam Lance Garcia 2010 The Green Lama, a pulp hero from the 1940s, battles Nazis as they attempt to raise Cthulhu. Features strong elements from the Mythos.[98] Good Omens Terry Pratchett & Neil Gaiman 1990 Hastur appears as one of the Dukes of Hell. I, Cthulhu Neil Gaiman 1986 A short story on Gaiman's website featuring Cthulhu dictating an autobiography to a human slave.[99] The Illuminatus! Trilogy Robert Anton Wilson and Robert Shea 1975 Features several Mythos references. "Jerusalem's Lot" Stephen King 1978 A short story published in 1978 as a part of the collection Night Shift. It serves as a prequel to 'Salem's Lot. Johannes Cabal: The Fear Institute Jonathan L. Howard 2011 The third novel in the Johannes Cabal series is set primarily in Lovecraft's Dreamlands and features many Lovecraftian references, locations, and Elder Gods.[100] Carter & Lovecraft, After the End of the World Jonathan L. Howard 2015 2017 In this series set in a world where Randolph Carter and H. P. Lovecraft once changed reality, a former homicide detective turned private investigator, Daniel Carter, and a knowledgeable and talented book store manager, Emily Lovecraft, have to protect reality from being distorted back to a world with Arkham, Innsmouth, Dunwich, and unspeakable magic. The Laundry Files Charles Stross 2004 - 2018 Influenced by Lovecraft's visions of the future, and set in a world where a computer and the right mathematical equations is just as useful a toolset for calling up horrors from other dimensions as a spellbook and a pentagram on the floor. Legacy: Shadow Watch Andrew Lawrenson 2015 A mystery/thriller set against a backdrop of the Cthulhu Mythos, where the protagonists must face a dark cult who worship the Great Old Ones.[101] The Long War A.J. Smith (author) 2013 (launched) A series of dark fantasy novels described as "Martin meets Lovecraft".[102] Shub-Nillurath, or "the Black God of the forests with a thousand young", is a primary antagonist as are the Dark Young. The first novel The Black Guard, contains several references to the Cthulhu Mythos.[103] The Midnight Eye Files: The Amulet William Meikle 2008 Set in modern-day Glasgow, the worshippers of Cthulhu attempt to revive the god.[104] Move Under Ground Nick Mamatas, Nightshade Books 2004 A pastiche of the work of Jack Kerouac, William S. Burroughs, Neil Cassady and other authors of the Beat Generation milieu, juxtaposed with the Cthulhu Mythos transposed into the late 50s/early 60s within California.[105] The Philosopher's Stone Colin Wilson 1969 Two scientists, now possessing heightened consciousness, discover mankind is the creation of Lovecraft's Old Ones.[106] Practical Demonkeeping The Lust Lizard of Melancholy Cove The Stupidest Angel Christopher Moore 1992 1999 2004 Eggs Sothoth are a popular breakfast at HP's Cafe in Pine Cove, the setting of these and other Moore novels. The owner of HP's has been driven to drink by his encounters with supernatural creatures and other monsters. Prophecy: The Dreamlands Andrew Lawrenson 2016 The sequel to Legacy, continuing the protagonist's struggle against a dark cult who worship the Great Old Ones.[107] Resume With Monsters William Browning Spencer 1996 A humorous novel about a worker who battles a series of bad jobs and Lovecraft's Elder Gods.[108] Salem’s Lot Stephen King The original congregation of the town worships Yogsoggoth, as seen in the epilogue when the chapel at Salem’s Lot is visited. "Shoggoth's Old Peculiar" Neil Gaiman 1998 A short story, in Smoke and Mirrors, where an American tourist happens upon Innsmouth, an English seaside town, and its elderly Cthulhu followers who explain about their master, whilst getting drunk on an odd local beer.[109] "Some Notes Concerning a Green Box" Alan Dean Foster 1971 A short story, in With Friends Like These..., a book of short stories published in 1977. Story documents an expedition somehow related to H. P. Lovecraft and Cthulhu.[110] Soul Eater Atsushi Ōkubo 2004 The Black Mass that resides within The Book of Eibon is most likely a nod to H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu.[111] The Stand Stephen King 1978 An evil sorcerer named Randall Flagg who has many aliases, including "Nyarlathotep". "A Study in Emerald" Neil Gaiman 2003 A Sherlock Holmes/Lovecraft cross-pastiche.[112] Tales of the Plush Cthulhu: Time Wasted[113] Jon Hansen[114] accessed 2014 Online photo story, featuring plush animals and household objects. That Which Should Not Be Brett J. Talley 2011 Set in the early 20th century, concerning a quest for an ancient book that can restore the Lovecraft deities to power.[115] Unspeakable Vault (of Doom) François Launet 2003 (launched) A humorous web-comic strip featuring the Lovecraft deities and monsters. Anders Sandberg noted this comic as an example of the trend of poking fun at formerly horrifying concepts.[116] The Unthinkable[117] Bruce Sterling 1994 Discusses the consequences of the U.S. developing the "Azathoth Bomb" during World War II. The Secret Memoir of the Missionary Hirofumi Tanaka 2002 (Japanese) 2006 (English) A retelling of the arrival of St. Francis Xavier in Japan as influenced by the Cthulhu Mythos.[118] Winter Tide Ruthanna Emrys 2017 The Mythos from the other side, told from the viewpoint of one of the survivors of Innsmouth's "disappearance".[119] Television[edit] Title Notes A.N.T. Farm In "performANTS" Sunshine, an employee at a store where Chyna and her friends to go, tells Cameron that she meditates to "Cthulhu, Dark Lord of the Underworld". She later mistakes Angus, dressed as OctoPanda, for Cthulhu. Angus tricks her in believing he is and demands macarons, which he did not get in the green room of the store. Ben 10: Ultimate Alien The main antagonist of the third season, Diagon, is loosely based on Dagon and Cthulhu. Bungo Stray Dogs A character in the organization the Guild is named H. P. Lovecraft and holds an ability called "The Old One". Cast a Deadly Spell (1991) TV movie. The movie is very much an homage to the works of H. P. Lovecraft. Though not based on any one particular story by Lovecraft, the film features many Lovecraftian tropes, and can be considered to take place against the unified backdrop which has come to be known as the Cthulhu Mythos. The nightclub is called Harry Bordon's Dunwich Room. Frequent references are made to the Necronomicon, the Great Old Ones, Cthulhu and Yog-Sothoth throughout the film. Chilling Adventures of Sabrina Part 3 of the series contains a number of influences from the Cthulhu Mythos. References to the Old Ones and "Eldritch Terrors" (a term often used by H. P. Lovecraft to describe Cthulhu Mythos deities) are used throughout the season. In the episode "Chapter Twenty-Two: Drag Me to Hell", Father Blackwood summons a Deep One, offering his two children as blood sacrifice and is given a mystical egg containing a fish-like embryo. The main antagonist is a leader of a group of Pagans and uses the pseudonym "Carcosa" (a name used in stories by Ambrose Bierce, as well as The King in Yellow by Robert W. Chambers); he is later revealed to be the Great God Pan. The Old Ones, referred to as the "Eldritch Terrors" are the main antagonists of Part 4. A total of eight Eldritch Terrors appear in the series; although they are not directly named after any deities from the Cthulhu Mythos, they adopt many of their characteristics. One of the season's minor antagonists, Father Blackwood, establishes a church worshipping the Eldritch Terrors using the pseudonym "Reverend Lovecraft". H.P. Lovecraft himself is referenced as a writer of weird fiction, as well as a source of information for The Weird, an Eldritch Terror with features similar to Cthulhu. In the same episode, the town of Innsmouth is also mentioned. The final episode of the series is titled At the Mountains of Madness (after the novella of the same name) and takes place on the eponymous location. Dark Shadows Episodes 885 to 980 of the Gothic soap opera, a storyline commonly known as 'The Leviathans', was inspired by the Cthulhu Mythos.[120] Digimon At the end of Episode 13 of Adventure 02, "The Call of Dagomon", the silhouette of Dagomon appears rising from the sea, bearing a striking resemblance to Cthulhu. In the same episode, Digimoji (a fictional alphabet featured in the Digimon franchise) translating to Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn and Innsmouth appears. The title of this episode, ダゴモンの呼び声 ("Dagomon no Yobigoe"), is a reference to "The Call of Cthulhu". Doctor Who In the episode "The Snowmen", an evil being known as "The Great Intelligence" (also known as "Yog-Sothoth" and voiced by Ian McKellen) has been possessing a 19th-century London doctor named Walter Simeon (played by Richard E. Grant) since his childhood, even after his death. The classic serials: "The Seeds of Doom" & "Image of the Fendahl" also have much work inspired by Lovecraftian writings. Earthworm Jim In one episode, the primary antagonist searches for the Nameless Snowglobe, to use the Nameless Key, which in turn releases the Nameless Beast; all of which alludes to "The Nameless City". The Nameless Beast has an appearance based on Cthulhu. Fanboy & Chum Chum Though no allusion to Cthulhu or any of the Lovecraftian gods are made, a talking version of the Necronomicon is utilized by the aspiring young wizard Kyle Bloodworth-Thomason as a regular grimoire. Fate/Zero Caster can summon monsters with the chant Cthulhu fhtagn, and in Episode 13, Caster summons a giant sea monster by chanting Ph'nglui mglw'nafh wgah'nagl fhtagn. The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy The season 1 episode "Big Trouble in Billy's Basement" and the season 5 episode "Prank Call of Cthulhu" feature Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu, respectively. Haiyore! Nyaruko-san The entire light novel series was based on the Cthulhu Mythos, for it features many of Lovecraft's characters such as Nyarlathotep (depicted in girl form under the name of Nyaruko). Despite the fact that the series has been based on the Mythos, it is a humor/parody series that makes references to a lot of different media. House Season 6, Episode 18, "Knight Fall", features the Necronomicon, predominantly as a plot piece. Justice League The double episode "The Terror Beyond" (Season 2, episodes 15-16) has as the main antagonist a creature inspired by Cthulhu, called Icthultu. The episode itself draws heavily from the Mythos. The Librarians The episode "And the Cost of Higher Education" takes place at Wexler University, a fictional college that Lovecraft used as the inspiration for Miskatonic University. A student named Lucy accidentally summons an entity referred to as the Hydra-Stat, which appears as a large octopus and devours people engaged in displays of hubris or ego. Overlord In the episode "Massacre", Ainz Ooal Gown utilizes "Super Tier Magic" to sacrifice 70,000 opposing army troops in a spell called "Iä! Shub-Niggurath!". The bodies are sacrificed and used as tribute to summon massive goat monsters called "The Dark Young" (whose appearance is identical to "The Dark Young" of the Shub-Niggurath mythos). The Real Ghostbusters The episode "The Collect Call of Cathulhu" references the Necronomicon and an attempt to revive the so-called "Cathulhu", described as one of the "Great Old Ones". Lovecraft is also mentioned by name.[121] The Old Ones were again mentioned in the episode "Russian About". Rick and Morty The show's opening title sequence features a huge Cthulhu-like creature chasing the titular characters, who appear to have stolen its baby. Rod Serling's Night Gallery The season 2 episodes "Pickman's Model"[122][123] and "Cool Air"[122][124] are based on the original 1926 Lovecraft short stories of the same name, while "Professor Peabody's Last Lecture" heavily references the Mythos.[122] Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated The episodes "The Shrieking Madness" and "Pawn of Shadows" guest-star Professor H. P. Hatecraft, author of otherworldly horror stories, whose name is a play on Lovecraft's. Mythos symbolism abounds, and Hatecraft's character Char Gar Gothakon closely resembles Cthulhu.[125] In the series finale, the gang is invited to attend Miskatonic University. South Park Features Cthulhu as a character in the 2010 season 14 3-episode saga "Coon 2: Hindsight", "Mysterion Rises", and "Coon vs. Coon and Friends", along with the sunken city of R'lyeh, with many mentions of the Cthulhu Mythos, the Goth kids at South Park being revealed to be members of the Cult of Cthulhu and the reason for Kenny McCormick's constant death and resurrection being a ritual Kenny's parents did when Kenny's mom was first pregnant with Kenny and they joined the Cult of Cthulhu.[126] Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go! The cosmic-scale antagonists of the show are inspired by the Lovecraftian mythos, with a Cthulhu Expy that's revealed to be the eye of Skeleton King (the main villain of the show) whose plan is to release the "Dark Ones", the show's equivalent of the Great Old Ones to cause a universal apocalypse as their emissary makes him the setting's equivalent of Nyarlathotep. The title of season 2's episode "Shadow Over Shuggazoom" directly homages Shadow Over Innsmouth. Supernatural In season 6, episode 21 "Let it Bleed", Lovecraft and six others performed a ritual to pierce the veil between worlds, opening a door into Purgatory on March 10, 1937. A creature of Purgatory came through and killed Lovecraft a few days later on March 15.[127] In season 7, it would become clear that the 'Old Ones' of the Cthulhu Mythos are Leviathans, which were the first beings created by God before being locked into Purgatory so that they would not be a threat to later creations. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles In the Season 3 episode "The Darkness Within", the Turtles confront a Cthulhu-like alien monster underneath Manhattan. True Detective Hastur is vaguely mentioned as the "Yellow King" and Carcosa is also featured. Musaigen no Phantom World In episode 8 of the series, Haruhiko summons Cthulhu using a spell called Abramelin's Finger in order to defeat an evil primate. Lovecraft Country Lovecraft Country is a 2020 limited-run series produced by HBO. Based on the novel of the same name, it is set in the 1950s. It tells the story of several characters who take a road trip and end up confronting Lovecraftian monsters, along with the racism of the Jim Crow era.[128] Comics[edit] Fall of Cthulhu Kodoja Neonomicon Providence The Marvel universe includes lovecraftian horrors based on the Cthulu mythos such as Shuma Gorath who is a part of the Many Angled ones. The DC universe also includes lovecraftion horrors such as Starro, Anti-Monitor, and Nekron. The Hellboy Universe also had some lovecraftian horrors Like the Ogdru-Jahad and its offspring Ogdru-Hem Witchblade and The Darkness also have the titular Darkness and its counterpart the Angeleus who mated to make the Witchblade. In the Image Comics series Spawn combines this with Religious Horror (and virtually every other horror subgenre): Humans are just pawns to a war between Heaven and Hell. It's mere chance, not the way you lived your life, that determine if you will go to one or the other. Also, going to Heaven isn't exactly a good thing because God and Satan Are Both Jerks; while there is a benevolent entity that is even more powerful than both of them combined, she's too busy taking care of the whole Multiverse to pay attention to the comics' main setting. Also, the Spawn franchise as a whole deals a lot with Fatalism (a heavy element of Lovecraftian stories) and the idea that fighting Evil is pointless. Some of the deities even resemble lovecraftian like Urizen who existed before Heaven and Hell. 邪神伝説 クトゥルフの呼び声/Jashin densetsu Cthulhu no yobigoe is a Japanese manga illustrated by Yousuke Miyazaki. November 2009 Leviathan, written by Ian Edgington and drawn by D'Israeli, published in 2000AD in 2003, tells of ship's architect William Ashbless who holds Hastur's soul imprisoned and uses it to power the huge ocean liner he has designed and built. Richard Corben's Neverwhere (1978) has a god Uhluhtc, Cthulhu spelled backwards. Other[edit] The 153rd episode of the Thrilling Adventure Hour podcast features an episode titled "When Cthulu Cthalls", which was recorded on September 7, 2013 and released on February 17, 2014. The episode is part of the "Beyond Belief" series and features stars Frank and Sadie Doyle protecting their friend's baby from chipper cultists and an entity only referred to as "The Old One". The Old One/Cthulu is voiced by Parks and Recreation star Jim O'Heir. Miskatonic Brewing Company is a brewpub in Darien, Illinois. It is named after the Miskatonic River and Miskatonic University in Arkham, Massachusetts, which are fictional settings for some of Lovecraft's stories.[129][130] See also[edit] Cthulhu Mythos anthology References[edit] ^ Kaye, Don (October 12, 2015). "31 Days of Halloween: 16 Films Adapted from Horror Giant H. P. Lovecraft". SyFy. Archived from the original on June 2, 2018. ^ Lamssies, Dominique (October 24, 2012). "Lovecraft by Any Other Name: Why The Haunted Palace Is Great". Lovecraft eZine. Archived from the original on December 29, 2012. ^ Macek, J.C. III (January 23, 2014). "Die, Monster, Die!". PopMatters. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. ^ Unsworth, Martin (November 10, 2016). "Cult of the Witch House – An Appreciation of Curse of the Crimson Altar". Starburst Magazine. Retrieved August 17, 2020. ^ Green, Zak (May 25, 2015). "Cult Corner: The Dunwich Horror (1970)". Wicked Horror. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. ^ Maslin, Janet (October 18, 1985). "Screen: Stuart Gordon Directs Re-Animator". New York Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. ^ Kaye, Don (October 28, 2016). "30 Years Later, From Beyond Is Lovecraft at His Kinkiest". SyFy. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. ^ Allen, Tracy (September 12, 2014). "This Week in Horror Movie History – The Curse (1987)". Cryptic Rock. Archived from the original on March 21, 2015. ^ Muir, Nathaniel (November 12, 2018). "The Unnamable (Movie) Review: Great Special Effects Help Lovecraft Adaptation Exceed Expectations". Adventures In Poor Taste. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. ^ "Bride of Re-Animator". Variety. December 31, 1990. Retrieved August 15, 2020. ^ Large, Victoria (October 11, 2011). "Bride of Re-Animator". Not Coming to a Theater Near You. Retrieved August 15, 2020. ^ Coffel, Chris (August 13, 2015). "Blu-ray Review: The Resurrected". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. ^ Fisher, Kieran (May 23, 2020). "H.P. Lovecraft Meets Raymond Chandler in 'Cast a Deadly Spell'". Film School Rejects. Retrieved April 10, 2021. ^ Massie, Mike (March 10, 1993). "The Unnamable II: The Statement of Randolph Carter". Gone with the Twins. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. ^ Dr. Zombie (July 24, 2006). "Movie Review: Necronomicon". Dr. Zombie's Midnight Theater of Terror. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. ^ Brehmer, Nat (April 5, 2019). "Hideous, Hungry and Loose: A Brief History of Castle Freak". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on April 8, 2019. ^ Anderson, Kyle (July 24, 2018). "Fish People and Mad Scientists: Lovecraft on Film". Nerdist. Archived from the original on August 6, 2019. ^ Holland, Jonathan (August 4, 2003). "Beyond Re-Animator". Variety. Retrieved August 15, 2020. ^ Eder, Bruce. "The Call of Cthulhu". AllMovie. Archived from the original on May 23, 2013. ^ Jones, Scott R. (July 5, 2014). "Dan Gildark's Cthulhu Is the Best Lovecraftian Film You Didn't Watch..." Martian Migraine Press. Archived from the original on March 27, 2016. ^ McKnight, Brent (March 14, 2011). "'The Last Lovecraft: Relic of Cthulhu' Wallows in Unabashed Geekiness". PopMatters. Retrieved August 17, 2020. ^ Ognjanovic, Dejan (March 26, 2011). "The Whisperer in Darkness Review". Screen Anarchy. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. ^ McLevy, Alex (January 28, 2019). "Maybe Don't Turn Real-Life Racist H. P. Lovecraft into the Cuddly Star of an Animated Kids' Movie?". The A.V. Club. Retrieved August 15, 2020. ^ Sims, Tony (April 26, 2012). "Interview with Bruce Brown, Author of the Howard Lovecraft Graphic Novel Series". Wired. Retrieved August 15, 2020. ^ Murray, Noel (January 22, 2020). "Review: An Over-the-Top Nicolas Cage Wigs Out in H. P. Lovecraft's Color Out of Space". Los Angeles Times. ^ Lewis, Shannon (January 17, 2020). "Underwater Movie's Monster Is Cthulhu". Screen Rant. Retrieved November 8, 2020. ^ "Arkham Horror | Board Game". BoardGameGeek. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "News - Home". Chaosium.com. Archived from the original on 2013-09-28. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ Fantasy Flight Games. "Fantasy Flight Games [Call of Cthulhu LCG] - Leading publisher of board, card, and roleplaying games". Fantasyflightgames.com. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Chaos of Cthulhu". Imp House Game Company. Retrieved 2013-09-03. ^ "Chez Cthulhu". Steve Jackson Games. Retrieved 2013-09-03. ^ "Cthulhu Fluxx". Looney Labs. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Steve Jackson Games". Cthulhu Dice. Retrieved 2014-07-02. ^ "Deities & Demigods, Legends & Lore". The Acaeum. Retrieved 2010-05-10. ^ "Elder Sign | Board Game". BoardGameGeek. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Eldritch Horror | Board Game". BoardGameGeek. Retrieved 2014-01-21. ^ "Why Should Criminals Have All the Fun?". Sjgames.com. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ Wizards of the Coast (2010-03-29). "On the Rise, Part I". Retrieved 2013-03-17. ^ Fantasy Flight Games. "Fantasy Flight Games [News] - Know the Unknowable". Fantasyflightgames.com. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ McElroy, Matt (May 12, 2008). "Munchkin Cthulhu Review". Flames Rising. Retrieved 2010-10-31. ^ "Alderac Entertainment Group » Smash Up: The Obligatory Cthulhu Set". Alderac.com. 2013-04-27. Retrieved 2014-07-02. ^ "A Study in Emerald | Board Game". BoardGameGeek. Retrieved 2015-10-22. ^ "A Study in Emerald (second edition) | Board Game". BoardGameGeek. Retrieved 2015-10-22. ^ "Pelgrane Press Ltd » Trail of Cthulhu". Pelgranepress.com. 2011-04-27. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Arcane Online Mystery Serial for PC". GameZone. Archived from the original on 2011-08-10. Retrieved 2011-09-13. ^ "How Bloodborne honors the legacy of H. P. Lovecraft". Eurogamer. Retrieved 2015-03-24. ^ "Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth - PC Review at IGN". Au.pc.ign.com. 2006-04-26. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ Kain, Eric (July 9, 2015). "'Call Of Duty: Black Ops 3' Film Noir Zombie Mode Revealed, And It Looks Amazing". Forbes. Retrieved February 7, 2021. ^ "The Inside Scoop on Gaming - RPGnet". Rpg.net. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Magicka: The Stars are Left DLC adds new campaign levels, robes and monsters". PC Gamer. 2011-11-30. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Paradigm". VGFacts. Retrieved 2017-05-18. One of the cupcakes you can get from the cupcake salesperson in the Hallway is the Cthulhu flavored cupcake, a reference to Cthulhu, one of the great old ones from the Cthulhu Mythos created by early 20th century writer H. P. Lovecraft. ^ "r/PhoenixPoint - Is it set in the Chtuluh mythos 'verse?". reddit. ^ "Quake Mission Pack: Scourge of Armagon". id Software. Archived from the original on 2013-08-27. Retrieved 2013-09-25. ^ "Summon a cuddlesome cowlike Cthulhu in "Super Scribblenauts" | Bloody Good Horror - Horror movie reviews, podcast, news, and more!". Bloody Good Horror. 2010-10-08. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Sherlock Holmes: The Awakened Review - PC Review at IGN". Au.pc.ign.com. 2007-09-13. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "The Necronomicon". Binding of Isaac: Rebirth Wiki. ^ "Leviathan (Transformation)". Binding of Isaac: Rebirth Wiki. ^ Walker, John (2011-07-06). "Ragnar Tørnquist On The Secret World: Part 1". Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Retrieved 2011-08-27. ^ "Overviews of Aliens (TFTD)". ufopaedia.org. ^ Rivadavia, Eduardo (2008-08-19). "Continent - The Acacia Strain : Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Road Runner Records Australia". web.archive.org. 2004-08-06. Retrieved 2020-12-27. ^ Blabbermouth (2012-08-18). "CRADLE OF FILTH: New Album Cover Artwork, More Details Revealed". BLABBERMOUTH.NET. Retrieved 2020-12-27. ^ Dark Moor Interview, Lords Of Metal metal E-zine - Issue 48: May 2005 ^ "Don't Tell the Jocks: GeekDad Interviews Toren Atkinson". Wired. 10 September 2008. Retrieved 2011-09-24. ^ "Deadmau5 Hits SB Bowl". Dailynexus.com. 2011-11-03. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "To Edward John Moreton Drax Plunkett, Eighteenth Baron Dunsany". hplovecraft.com. Retrieved 2020-09-18. ^ Unterberger, Richie (1968-05-11). "H. P. Lovecraft - Music Biography, Credits and Discography". AllMusic. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "The Men That Will Not Be Blamed For Nothing - Margate Fhtagn Lyrics". Retrieved 2014-06-29. ^ "Metallica Lyrics Index - MetalliNote: Cthulhu". Sodabob.com. Archived from the original on 2011-07-16. Retrieved 2011-07-30. ^ Crocker, Chris (1993). Metallica: The Frayed Ends of Metal. p. 77. ^ Larson, Bob (1989). Satanism: The Seduction of America's Youth. ^ Guitar World Magazine (2010). Metallica. p. 71. ^ "CANOE - JAM! Music - Artists - Metallica: Interview with James Hetfield". Jam.canoe.ca. 2008-12-08. Retrieved 2009-09-08. ^ "An Intimate Chat With Karl Sanders of Nile". seaoftranquility.org. 2013-03-24. Retrieved 2013-11-21. ^ "Nox Arcana's Necronomicon". Noxarcana.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Discography on Encyclopaedia Metallum". Retrieved 2012-01-09. ^ "Album information from Deathrock.com". Archived from the original on 2001-01-09. Retrieved 2012-06-28. ^ "Album tracklist on Encyclopaedia Metallum". Retrieved 2012-12-01. ^ "Shub-Niggurath reviews on Pitchfork". Retrieved 2013-09-07. ^ "Thergothon on Encyclopaedia Metallum". ^ "Album tracklist on Encyclopaedia Metallum". Retrieved 2012-04-20. ^ "Lyrics on Encyclopaedia Metallum". Retrieved 2013-10-21. ^ "Zardonic - Lovecraft Machine EP at Discogs". Retrieved 2011-09-24. ^ "14 by Peter Clines - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "The Samurai Cat Page". People.eku.edu. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "The Doctor Who Reference Guide: All-Consuming Fire". Archived from the original on 2012-10-12. Retrieved 2013-01-11. ^ "And another thing". BBC News. 2008-09-17. ^ Khave, Khurt (2015), Astronomicon minorem, First United Church of Cthulhu, ISBN 978-1515165194 ^ "Awoken by Serra Elinsen - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-09-23. ^ "The Book of the SubGenius by SubGenius Foundation — Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2015-03-22. ^ "Sales page for Donald Duck #16". IDW Publishing. Retrieved 2016-09-27. ^ "Review of A Colder War by Charles Stross". SFFaudio. 2006-01-09. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ — IFP (2011-01-21). "Review: Crawling Chaos Blues". Innsmouth Free Press. Retrieved 2013-07-04.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ "Crouch End". StephenKing.com. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ "Pyrian Publishing". www.pyrian.co.uk. Retrieved 2017-03-05. ^ Pratchett, Terry & Briggs, Stephen (2003) [1st. Pub. 1994]. The New Discworld Companion. London: Victor Gollancz Ltd. p. 294. ISBN 978-0-575-07555-9. ^ Johnson, Kij (2016) [1st. Pub. 2016]. The Dream-Quest of Vellitt Boe. New York: Tom Doherty Associates, LLC. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-7653-9141-4. ^ Fortier, Ron (2010-07-27). "The Pulp Factory: The Green Lama Unbound". Pulpfactory.blogspot.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ Nick @ Lions and Men (2010-09-23). "Lions and Men: I Cthulhu, by Neil Gaiman". Scififantasyhorror.blogspot.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Johannes Cabal: The Fear Institute (Johannes Cabal, #3) by Jonathan L. Howard - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Legacy: Shadow Watch". Pyrian Publishing. Pyrian Publishing. Retrieved 2016-04-09. ^ The Black Guard (The Long War 1) eBook: A.J. Smith: Amazon.co.uk: Kindle Store. Head of Zeus. July 2013. Retrieved 23 September 2014. ^ "A.J. Smith". Goodreads. Retrieved 23 September 2014. ^ "Undergoing Redesign! :: ChiZine Publications". Chizine.com. Archived from the original on 2013-09-30. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Move Under Ground by Nick Mamatas". Moveunderground.org. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ Wilson, Colin. "The Philosopher's Stone by Colin Wilson - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Prophecy: The Dreamlands". Pyrian Publishing. Pyrian Publishing. Retrieved 2016-04-09. ^ "Résumé with Monsters by William Browning Spencer - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Shoggoth's Old Peculiar". neilgaiman.info. 2007-07-06. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "With Friends Like These... by Alan Dean Foster - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Soul Eater". Danbooru. Retrieved 2013-12-30. ^ "A Study in Emerald by Neil Gaiman - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2012-06-12. ^ Hansen, Jon. Tales of the Plush Cthulhu: Time Wasted. Logical Creativity. Archived from the original on October 29, 2011. Retrieved September 29, 2014. ^ "About: Jon". Logical Creativity. ^ "That Which Should Not Be by Brett J. Talley - Reviews, Discussion, Bookclubs, Lists". Goodreads.com. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ Sandberg, Anders. "Andart: Death, Be Afraid, Very Afraid!". Retrieved 2008-09-01. ^ Sterling, Bruce (1994). Globalhead. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 9780553562811. Retrieved September 2, 2016. ^ Asamatsu, Ken (2006), Straight to Darkness (Lairs of the Hidden Gods), Kurodahan Press, ISBN 978-4-902075-13-7 ^ Emrys, Ruthanna (2017), Winter Tide, Tom Doherty Associates, ISBN 978-0-7653-9090-5 ^ Leigh Scott, Kathryn; Jim Pierson (ed.), Dark Shadows Almanac. Pomegranate Press, 1995. pp. 134. ISBN 0-938817-18-3. ^ "Spook Central - The Real Ghostbusters Episode Guide: "The Collect Call Of Cathulhu"". Theraffon.net. 1987-10-27. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ a b c https://web.archive.org/web/20090413025700/http://www.nightgallery.net/index.html?title.html&0. Archived from the original on April 13, 2009. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ "Pickman's Model". Cthulhucoffee.com. 1971-12-01. Retrieved 2013-07-04. ^ "Cool Air". Cthulhucoffee.com. 1971-12-08. Retrieved 2013-09-08. ^ "Scooby-Doo! and the Shrieking Madness with H. P. Hatecraft". Grim Reviews. 2010-10-29. Retrieved 2013-07-12. ^ "H. P. Lovecraft's Cthulhu Rises on South Park Part 1 of 3". CthulhuWho1's Blog. 2010-10-29. Retrieved 2011-08-07. ^ TV.com. "Supernatural - Season 6, Episode 21: Let It Bleed". TV.com. Retrieved 2013-09-08. ^ Phillips, Michael (August 7, 2020). "'Lovecraft Country' Review: The Wild Side of 'Green Book', Pulled from the Guts of American Racism". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved August 7, 2020. ^ Kukulka, Alexandra (August 14, 2015). "Darien Company Brewing New Business". Pioneer Press. Retrieved July 3, 2020. ^ "Catching Up with the Folks at Miskatonic". Daily Journal. September 6, 2016. Retrieved July 3, 2020. v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category Associated subjects v t e Cthulhu Mythos Writers H. P. Lovecraft Robert Bloch Clark Ashton Smith Robert E. Howard Frank Belknap Long August Derleth Fritz Leiber Stephen King Deities Azathoth Cthulhu Hastur Nyarlathotep Shub-Niggurath Tsathoggua Species Deep Ones Elder Things Hounds of Tindalos Mi-Go Serpent Men Shoggoth Related Cthulhu Mythos anthology List of Cthulhu Mythos books List of Cthulhu Mythos characters Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Elements of the Cthulhu Mythos (cults) Alan Moore's The Courtyard Neonomicon Providence v t e H. P. Lovecraft's "The Call of Cthulhu" (1926) Film The Call of Cthulhu Call Girl of Cthulhu Underwater Games Role-playing game The Card Game Dark Corners of the Earth The Wasted Land Call of Cthulhu Related Mythos Cthulhu Mythos anthology in popular culture Other Lovecraftian horror v t e H. P. Lovecraft's At the Mountains of Madness (1931) Characters Elder Thing Shoggoth Adaptations The Mountains of Madness Sequel works Prisoner of Ice A Colder War Related At the Mountains of Madness and Other Novels Necronomicon: The Best Weird Tales of H. P. Lovecraft: Commemorative Edition v t e H. P. Lovecraft's The Shadow over Innsmouth (1931) Universe Deep One Innsmouth Film Cthulhu (2000) Dagon (2001) Cthulhu (2007) Innsmouth (2015) Underwater (2020) Literature Shadows over Innsmouth (1994) Weird Shadows Over Innsmouth (2005) The Litany of Earth (2014) Video games Shadow of the Comet (1993) Innsmouth no Yakata (1995) Anchorhead (1998) Demonbane (2003) Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth (2005) v t e Media based on H. P. Lovecraft works Films The Haunted Palace (1963) Die, Monster, Die! (1965) The Shuttered Room (1967) The Dunwich Horror (1970) Re-Animator (1985) From Beyond (1986) The Curse (1987) The Unnamable (1988) Pulse Pounders (segment: "The Evil Clergyman") (1988) Bride of Re-Animator (1990) Cast a Deadly Spell (1991) The Resurrected (1992) The Unnamable II: The Statement of Randolph Carter (1993) Necronomicon (1993) In the Mouth of Madness (1994) The Lurking Fear (1994) Witch Hunt (1994) Castle Freak (1995) Bleeders (1997) Out of Mind: The Stories of H. P. Lovecraft (1998) Cool Air (1999) Cthulhu (2000) Dagon (2001) Beyond Re-Animator (2003) The Call of Cthulhu (2005) H. P. Lovecraft's Dreams in the Witch-House (2005) Cthulhu (2007) The Tomb (2007) Chill (2007) In Search of Lovecraft (2008) The Last Lovecraft: Relic of Cthulhu (2009) The Whisperer in Darkness (2011) The Cabin in the Woods (2012) Call Girl of Cthulhu (2014) Innsmouth (2015) Color Out of Space (2019) Underwater (2020) Castle Freak (2020) Comic books Alan Moore's The Courtyard (2003) Alan Moore's Yuggoth Cultures and Other Growths (2003) Unspeakable Vault (of Doom) (2003–present) Neonomicon (2010) Nyaruko: Crawling with Love (2011–2014) Providence (2015–2017) Role-playing games Call of Cthulhu (1981) Cthulhu Live (1997) Delta Green (1997) Trail of Cthulhu (2008) CthulhuTech (2008) Card games Mythos (1996) Cthulhu 500 (2004) Call of Cthulhu: The Card Game (2004) Elder Sign (2011) Arkham Horror: The Card Game (2016) Board games Arkham Horror (1987) Cthulhu Dice (2010) Mansions of Madness (2011) Eldritch Horror (2013) Video games The Lurking Horror (1987) The Hound of Shadow (1989) Daughter of Serpents (1992) Alone in the Dark (1992) Shadow of the Comet (1993) Prisoner of Ice (1995) Innsmouth no Yakata (1995) Quake (1996) Anchorhead (1998) Necronomicon: The Dawning of Darkness (2001) Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth (2005) Sherlock Holmes: The Awakened (2006) Call of Cthulhu: The Wasted Land (2012) Eldritch (2013) Bloodborne (2015) Darkest Dungeon (2016) Sundered (2017) Call of Cthulhu (2018) Dusk (2018) The Sinking City (2019) Novels A Night in the Lonesome October (1993) Neil Gaiman's Only the End of the World Again (2000) Move Under Ground (2004) Alhazred (2006) Nyaruko: Crawling with Love (2009–2014) Lovecraft Country (2016) The Ballad of Black Tom (2016) Other The Mountains of Madness (2005) Demonbane (2006) Re-Animator: The Musical (2011) Lovecraft Country (TV series) (2020) See also: Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture