"Iconic" redirects here. For other uses, see Icon (disambiguation). Artifact that is recognised by members of a culture or sub-culture as representing some aspect of cultural identity Apple pie, baseball, and the flag of the United States are three American cultural icons. A cultural icon is an artifact that is identified by members of a culture as representative of that culture. The process of identification is subjective, and "icons" are judged by the extent to which they can be seen as an authentic proxy of that culture. When individuals perceive a cultural icon, they relate it to their general perceptions of the cultural identity represented.[1] Cultural icons can also be identified as an authentic representation of the practices of one culture by another.[2] In the media, many items and persons of popular culture have been called "iconic" despite their lack of durability, and the term "pop icon" is often now used synonymously. Some commentators believe that the word is overused or misused.[3] The values, norms and ideals represented by a cultural icon vary both among people who subscribe to it, and more widely among other people who may interpret cultural icons as symbolising quite different values. Thus an apple pie is a cultural icon of the United States', but its significance varies among Americans. National icons can become targets for those opposing or criticising a regime, for example, crowds destroying statues of Vladimir Lenin in Eastern Europe after the Revolutions of 1989[4] or burning the American flag to protest American actions abroad.[5] Religious icons can also become cultural icons in societies where religion and culture are deeply entwined, such as representations of the Madonna in societies with a strong Catholic tradition.[6] Contents 1 Examples 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Examples[edit] A red telephone box is a British cultural icon.[7] A web-based survey was set up in 2006 allowing the public to nominate their ideas for national icons of England,[8] and the results reflect the range of different types of icons associated with an English view of English culture. One example is the red AEC Routemaster London double decker bus.[9][10][11][12] Matryoshka dolls are seen internationally as cultural icons of Russia.[13] In the former Soviet Union, the hammer and sickle symbol and statues of Vladimir Lenin instead represented the country's most prominent cultural icons. The values, norms and ideals represented by a cultural icon vary both among people who subscribe to it, and more widely among other people who may interpret cultural icons as symbolising quite different values. Thus an apple pie is a cultural icon of the United States, but its significance varies among Americans. National icons can become targets for those opposing or criticising a regime, for example, crowds destroying statues of Lenin in Eastern Europe after the fall of communism[14] or burning the American flag to protest US actions abroad.[15] Criticism[edit] Describing something as iconic or as an icon has become very common in the popular media. This has drawn criticism from some. For example, a writer in Liverpool Daily Post calls "iconic" "a word that makes my flesh creep", a word "pressed into service to describe almost anything."[16] Mark Larson of the Christian Examiner labeled "iconic" as an overused word, finding over 18,000 uses of "iconic" in news stories alone, with another 30,000 for "icon".[17] See also[edit] Category:Lists of cultural icons List of cultural icons of England List of cultural icons of France List of cultural icons of Germany List of cultural icons of Italy List of cultural icons of the Netherlands List of cultural icons of Northern Ireland List of cultural icons of Portugal List of cultural icons of Russia List of cultural icons of Scotland List of cultural icons of Spain List of cultural icons of Wales Pop icon Horror icon References[edit] ^ Grayson, Kent; Martinec, Radan (2004-09-01). "Consumer Perceptions of Iconicity and Indexicality and Their Influence on Assessments of Authentic Market Offerings". Journal of Consumer Research. 31 (2): 296–312. doi:10.1086/422109. ISSN 0093-5301. ^ Motley, Carol M.; Henderson, Geraldine Rosa (2008-03-01). "The global hip-hop Diaspora: Understanding the culture". Journal of Business Research. Cross-Cultural Business Research. 61 (3): 243–253. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.06.020. ^ "Heard about the famous icon? We have – far too often". The Independent. London. January 27, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. ^ Jones, Jonathan (December 9, 2013). "Why smashing statues can be the sweetest revenge". Guardian. ^ Laessing, ulf (September 14, 2012). "Anti-American fury sweeps Middle East over film". Reuters. ^ Anthony B Pinn; Benjamin Valentin, eds. (2009). Creating Ourselves, African Americans and Hispanic Americans on popular culture and religious expression. Duke University Press. ^ Odone, Cristina (11 March 2013). "The trashing of the iconic red phone box is one bad call". The Daily Telegraph. ^ "Our Collection". icons.org.uk. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 16, 2014. ^ Jenkins, Simon (October 2005). Godson, Dean (ed.). "Replacing the Routemaster" (PDF). p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 27, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2012. ^ British Postal Museum & Archive: Icons of England Archived 2014-12-05 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 15 December 2012. ^ Culture24: Icons of England. Retrieved 15 December 2012. ^ Parker, Mike (2012). Cultural Icons: A Case Study Analysis of their Formation and Reception (PhD Thesis). Chapter 5: The Spitfire Aircraft. University of Central Lancashire. pp. 123–167. ^ Bobo, Suzanna (25 December 2012). "Scuttlebutt: Wooden toy tells a story of love and industry". Kodiak Daily Mirror. Retrieved 9 April 2013. ^ Jones, Jonathan (December 9, 2013). "Why smashing statues can be the sweetest revenge". Guardian. ^ Laessing, ulf (September 14, 2012). "Anti-American fury sweeps Middle East over film". Reuters. ^ Let's hear it for the Queen's English, Liverpool Daily Post ^ Modern word usage amazingly leaves us yearning for gay, old times Archived 2010-12-25 at the Wayback Machine, Christian Examiner Bibliography[edit] Biedermann, Hans (1994). Dictionary of Symbolism: Cultural Icons and the Meanings Behind Them. Meridan. Brooker, Will (2001). Batman Unmasked: Analysing a Cultural Icon. Continuum. Edwards, Peter; Enenkel, Karl; Graham, Elspeth, eds. (2011). The Horse as Cultural Icon: The Real and the Symbolic Horse in the Early Modern World. Brill. Foudy, Julie; Leslie Heywood; Shari L Dworkin (2003). Built to Win: The Female Athlete as Cultural Icon. University of Minnesota Press. Gilbert, Erik (2008). The Dhow as Cultural Icon. Boston University.* Heyer, Paul (2012). Titanic Century: Media, Myth, and the Making of a Cultural Icon. Praeger. Heyer, Paul (2012). Titanic Century: Media, Myth, and the Making of a Cultural Icon. Praeger. Meyer, Denis C. (2010). Cles Pour la France en 80 Icones Culturelles. Hachette. Nelkin, Dorothy; M Susan Lindee (2004). The DNA Mystique: The Gene as a Cultural Icon. University of Michigan Press. Reydams-Schils, Gretchen J (2003). Plato's Timaeus as Cultural Icon. University of Notre Dame Press. External links[edit] Our New Icons by The Daily Telegraph Nothing and no one are Off Limits in an Age of Iconomania by The Age British Postal Museum & Archive: Icons of England Culture24: Icons of England v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Security culture Neuroculture Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Internet culture Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Low culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Urban Primitive culture Subculture Alternative culture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural behavior Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Print culture Protoculture Safety culture Small country syndrome Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural encoding Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Culture speculation Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Emotions and culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category Commons WikiProject Changes Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125