El Cuélebre. Woodcarving by Lise. Cuélebre (Asturian) or Culebre (Cantabrian), is a giant winged serpent-dragon of the Asturian and Cantabrian mythology, that lives in a cave, guards treasures and keeps anjanas (also known as xanas) as prisoners. Although they are immortal, the cuélebre age, and their scales become thick and impenetrable, and bat wings grow in their bodies. They must eventually flee Asturias and fly to the Mar Cuajada, a paradise located beyond the sea. They do not usually move, but when they do it, it is in order to eat cattle and people. One could kill the cuélebre by giving team a red-hot stone or a bread full of pins to consume. It's spit it is said to turn into a magic stone, which heals many diseases. In Midsummer, which is a magical night in Asturian and Cantabrian folklore, it is possible for brave men to defeat the cuélebre, whose spells don't take effect that night, and marry the xana and get the treasure. However, in Cantabrian areas it is said the night of Saint Bartholomew is a period in which the creature increases his power and unleashes all his fury against people in revenge. See also[edit] La Guita Xica v t e Cantabrian mythology Divinities Cantabrian deities Cabuniaegius Candamus Cantabria Epane Erudinus Mater Deva Adopted Roman gods Janus Jupiter Mars Neptune Heroes Cantabri Corocotta Larus  Creatures Alicorniu Anjana Arquetu Basiliscu Bichu amarillu Brujas de Ongayu Caballucos del Diablu Cuegle Cuines de Silió Culebre Duende zahorí Enanucos bigaristas Espumeros Fish-man Gallu de la muerte Guajona Hechiceras del Ebro Ijana Las Lavanderas Mengues Monuca Mozas del Agua Musgosu Nuberu Ojáncana Ojáncanu Osa de Andara Pájaru de la alegría Pájaru de ojos amarillos Pecu Ramidreju Reina Mora Sierpe de Peñacastillu Sirenuca Sun of the Dead Tentiruju Trasgu Trastolillu Trenti Ventolín Viejuca de Vispieres Locations Deva River Fuentes Tamáricas Mons Vindius Montehano Mozagro Mount Cildá Peña Amaya Peña Sagra Peña Santa Pico Dobra Dates La Vijanera Antruíu Marzas La Maya Midsummer / St John's Eve Sun of the Dead Samhain / All Saints Midwinter Others Cantabrian Steles Cantabrum / Lábaru Patera of Otañes Cantabrian Neptune This article related to Asturias, Spain is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article related to Cantabria, Spain is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a legendary creature is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article relating to a Celtic myth or legend is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article relating to a European folklore is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e