This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2016) This article is missing information about the film's release and reception. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Cyclops DVD cover Written by Frances Doel Directed by Declan O'Brien[1] Starring Eric Roberts Kevin Stapleton Frida Farrell Theme music composer Tom Hiel Country of origin United States Original language English Production Producers Julie Corman Roger Corman Cinematography Emil Topuzov Editors Vikram Kale Olena Kuhtaryeva Running time 90 minutes Distributor Syfy Universal Release Original release 6 December 2008 (2008-12-06) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Cyclops is a 2008 television monster film about the mythological cyclops. Here the cyclops is the last survivor of species who once fought the Roman Army and ends up in the Circus Maximus. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] The film is set in Ancient Rome during the reign of Emperor Tiberius. In the countryside, a group of travelers come across some sheep and kill some for food. They are interrupted by their owner, a ferocious cyclops, the last of his kind, which kills them all but one who escapes back to Rome. There he sends word to the Emperor that a cyclops has been sighted. He sends his best commander Marcus Romulus (played by Kevin Stapleton) to capture the mankiller. Though it costs him some of his men, Marcus succeeds and takes the cyclops back to Rome. Emperor Tiberius needs a new beast for his circus. When he sees how much attention the cyclops attracts, the emperor decides to use him instead of expensive lions. A group of defiant slaves learn they are about to become cyclops fodder. They flee but in spite of all efforts the fugitives are caught rather soon. Although Marcus leads the contingent which captures them, he is against slavery and argues with the emperor's main consultant Falco (Craig Archibald). The infuriated Tiberius Caesar punishes Marcus for his insubordination by sporting him as a gladiator. Marcus does well in the arena and discovers he can teach the cyclops words and simple ideas while the swift giant is in his cell. Finally the emperor promises the cyclops freedom in return for killing Marcus. Yet the cyclops decides otherwise and kills the emperor, only to be killed in return by Falco. Marcus avenges the cyclops and becomes the liberator of Rome. Cast[edit] Eric Roberts as Emperor Tiberius Caesar Kevin Stapleton as Marcus Frida Farrell as Barbara Craig Archibald as Falco Mike Straub as Gordian David McFarland as Severus See also[edit] Hydra (film) Sharktopus References[edit] ^ Armstead, Christopher. "director Declan O'Brien paced his film well enough that it never felt tedious or boring". Film Critics United. Retrieved 2012-06-06. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Cyclops at IMDb Cyclops at AllMovie Cyclops at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Films directed by Declan O'Brien Rock Monster (2008) Monster Ark (2008) Cyclops (2008) Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead (2009) Sharktopus (2010) Wrong Turn 4: Bloody Beginnings (2011) Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines (2012) Joy Ride 3: Roadkill (2014) This article related to an American TV movie is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a science-fiction horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e