This article consists almost entirely of a plot summary. It should be expanded to provide more balanced coverage that includes real-world context. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Daimajin Theatrical release poster Directed by Kimiyoshi Yasuda Produced by Masaichi Nagata[1] Screenplay by Tetsuro Yoshida[1] Starring Miwa Takada Yoshihiko Aoyama Jun Fujimaki Ryutaro Gomi Music by Akira Ifukube[1] Edited by Hiroshi Yamada[1] Production company Daiei Film[1] Distributed by Daiei Film Release date April 17, 1966 (1966-04-17) (Japan) Running time 84 minutes[1] Country Japan Language Japanese Daimajin (大魔神) is a 1966 Japanese film directed by Kimiyoshi Yasuda,[1] the first film in the Daimajin trilogy. Its musical score is composed by Akira Ifukube. The film had a brief stateside theatrical release in 1968. Reportedly, it was shown both in Japanese with English subtitles and dubbed into English. The English dubbed version was later released directly to TV by American International Television under the title Majin the Monster of Terror.[2] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Release 5 References 5.1 Footnotes 5.2 Sources 6 External links Plot[edit] In a remote village in the province of Tanba, a household of peasants cowers during a series of earth tremors that are interpreted as the escape attempts of Arakatsuma (阿羅羯磨), also known as Daimajin (大魔神 'Great Demon God'), a violent divine spirit said to be trapped within the nearby mountain held in fear and reverence by the locals. As the village gathers at the local shrine to perform an ancient ritual to pacify Daimajin, Ōdate Samanosuke (Ryūtarō Gomi), chamberlain to the local lord Hanabusa Tadakiyo (Ryūzō Shimada), stages a coup d'état. He and his henchmen slaughter Hanabusa and his wife, but their son and daughter escape, aided by the heroic samurai Kogenta (Jun Fujimaki). Back at the shrine, Samanosuke's men break up the ceremony, forbidding all such gatherings in the future. The elderly priestess, Shinobu (Otome Tsukimiya), issues a dire warning, but the men ignore her. Kogenta takes the two children to his aunt Shinobu's house. The priestess takes them up the mountain, into forbidden territory, where a gigantic stone idol of the mountain god who had sealed Daimajin long ago stands half-buried atop a waterfall. Near this idol is an ancient temple - safe as only Shinobu knows of its existence. The children grow to adulthood. The son, Tadafumi (Yoshihiko Aoyama) reaches his 18th birthday. The years have been miserable on the villagers. Samanosuke is a brutal leader (in one scene, he gouges out an old woman's eye with a red-hot iron hook) who is using every man in the starving village as slave labor. The place is ripe for revolution, and surviving Hanabusa retainers are starting to return. Kogenta journeys to the village to try to gather the old retainers, but gets himself captured. A boy, Take-bō, gets word to Tadafumi and his sister, Kozasa (Miwa Takada) that their friend is a prisoner. Tadafumi tries to rescue him, only to discover it is a trap. With both awaiting execution, Shinobu tries to talk to the tyrant, warning him that the god of the mountain's curse will befall him should he continue his evildoing ways. Samanosuke, refusing to heed Shinobu's words, kills her and orders the idol demolished. With her dying breath, Shinobu curses Samanosuke to die a harsh, merciless death and declares that if he attempts to destroy the idol, the wrathful Arakatsuma sealed inside it will come out. The crew that travels up the mountain to smash the idol accidentally discovers Kozasa and Take-bō, and force them to take them to the statue. The soldiers bring out an enormous chisel and proceed to hammer it into the idol's head; they stop when they see blood beginning to drip from it. Horrified, the men attempt to flee, but the earth cracks open and swallows them. Kozasa begs the god of the mountain to save her brother and Kogenta and punish the wicked Samanosuke. At the fortress, Tadafumi and Kogenta are tied to large crosses, awaiting their fates. Kozasa offers her life to the god and attempts to throw herself over the nearby waterfall, but the rock and earth covering the lower half of the idol fall away, and it comes to life. As it walks out into the clearing, Kozasa prostrates herself before it; the idol, animated by the reawakened Daimajin Arakatsuma, assumes a terrifying appearance and goes to Samanosuke's stronghold. Daimajin rescues both Kogenta and Tadafumi and proceeds to utterly destroy the fortress. After impaling Samanosuke with the chisel on its forehead, Daimajin now turns its wrath upon everyone in sight. Take-bō unsuccessfully begs Daimajin to stop; as the boy was about to get trampled on by the idol, Kozasa steps in and saves him. Kozasa tearfully pleads Daimajin to cease its rampage, letting her tears fall on its stone feet. Its anger now quelled, Daimajin's spirit leaves the idol, restoring it to its former appearance before it collapses into a heap of rubble. Cast[edit] Miwa Takada as Hanabusa Kozasa (花房小笹) Masako Morishita as Young Kozasa Yoshihiko Aoyama as Hanabusa Tadafumi (青山良彦) Hideki Ninomiya as Young Tadafumi Jun Fujimaki as Sarumaru Kogenta (猿丸小源太) Otome Tsukimiya as Shinobu (信夫) Ryūtarō Gomi as Ōdate Samanosuke (大舘左馬之助) Ryūzō Shimada as Hanabusa Tadakiyo (花房忠清) Tatsuo Endō as Inugami Gunjūrō (犬上軍十郎) Saburō Date as Chūma Ippei (中馬逸平) Shosaku Sugiyama as Kajiura Yūsuke (梶浦有助) Hideo Kuroki as Harada Magojūrō (原田孫十郎) Shizuhiro Izoguchi as Take-bō (竹坊) aka The Boy Gen Kimura as Mosuke (茂助), Take-bō's father Keiko Kayama as Haruno (悠乃) Eigorō Onoe as Gosaku (吾作) Chikara Hashimoto as Daimajin (uncredited) Production[edit] The cinematographer on Daimajin is sometimes credited to Yoshiyuki Kuroda and sometimes to Fujio Morita.[1] Release[edit] Daimajin was released theatrically in Japan on April 17, 1966 [1] on a double feature with Gamera vs. Barugon. The film was released simultaneously in the United States with English subtitles by Daiei International Films and in an English-language dub by Bernard Lewis.[1] References[edit] Footnotes[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Galbraith IV 1994, p. 307. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGalbraith_IV1994 (help) ^ Galbraith IV, Stuart. Monsters Are Attacking Tokyo! The Incredible World of Japanese Fantasy Films Venice, California: Feral House. 1998. pg. 165 Sources[edit] Galbraith IV, Stuart (1994). Japanese Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films. McFarland. ISBN 0-89950-853-7. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) Fischer, Dennis (2011). Science Fiction Film Directors, 1895-1998. McFarland. ISBN 978-0786485055. External links[edit] API at IMDb v t e Films directed by Kimiyoshi Yasuda The Young Swordsman (1954) The Dancer and Two Warriors (1955) The Young Lord (1955) 29-nin no Kenka-jō (1957) Hanataro Jumon (1958) Kaidan Kasane-ga-fuchi (1960) Zatoichi on the Road (1963) Adventures of Zatoichi (1964) Daimajin (1966) Zatoichi's Cane Sword (1967) Zatoichi and the Fugitives (1968) Yokai Monsters: Along with Ghosts (1969) Kaidan Kasane-ga-fuchi (1970) Zatoichi Meets the One-Armed Swordsman (1971) Zatoichi's Conspiracy (1973)