This article is about the illustrator. For the telecommunications executive, see David Dorman. API Dave Dorman with his Captain America v. Darth Vader painting 2011 Born 1958 (age 62–63) Michigan, U.S. Nationality American Area(s) Writer, Penciller, Artist, Inker, Colourist Notable works Star Wars: The Art of Dave Dorman, Rolling Thunder: The Art of Dave Dorman Awards Eisner Award, 1993 Inkpot Award, 2010[1] davedorman.com Dave Dorman (born 1958 in Michigan[2]) is a science fiction, horror and fantasy illustrator best known for his Star Wars artwork. Contents 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Awards 4 Personal life 5 Selected works 6 References 7 External links Early life[edit] Dorman's parents are Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Jack N. Dorman and Phyllis Dorman. Both parents are deceased. Dorman is married to award-winning TV/video producer, writer and publicist Denise (McDonald) Dorman of WriteBrain Media.[3] He has a son, Jack, who was born in 2004.[2] Dorman's father Jack Dorman was renowned for his work and awards in the field of radio-controlled airplanes. Jack Dorman created historically accurate interiors for the planes and was an expert at model building. Dorman attributes his attention to detail to his father and credits both parents with giving him emotional and financial support early in his career. Together, Dorman and his father won numerous awards for their model building projects. Dorman attended Saint Mary's Seminary and University in Maryland and The Kubert School in New Jersey. Dorman also taught a week-long seminar at the art department of Savannah College of Art and Design in the mid-1990s. The head of the art department at the time was Durwin Talon. Dorman has been asked to teach workshops at Flashpoint Academy and the American Academy of Art, both in Chicago, Illinois. He is also a co-founder of Comix Academy, along with Durwin Talon, Scott Hampton and Christopher Moeller and John van Fleet. This is a master class in comic book illustration. Career[edit] Dorman attended a graphic arts program at St. Mary's College in Maryland, but left after a year because it did not have an illustration component. Next, he attended The Kubert School in New Jersey, but left after one year because their curriculum only taught black and white illustration and Dorman wanted to be a cover artist.[2] As an illustrator, he describes himself as self-taught.[4] Dorman began his professional career in 1979, and has done illustration for comic book companies Marvel, DC, and Dark Horse,[5] but his break came in 1983, when his artwork first appeared on the cover of Heavy Metal magazine.[4][6] Hasbro commissioned Dorman to paint over 100 pieces realistic artwork for its 3-inch series of G.I. Joe action figures in the mid-1980s.[7] In 1994, Dorman was commissioned to do the artwork for a series of 90 trading cards for the Ultraverse comic book setting.[8] In 1996, Hasbro asked Dorman to create more artwork for its 12-inch G.I. Joe collector series.[7] Although he has produced art based on such characters as Indiana Jones, Batman, and Superman, he became most well known for his Star Wars artwork.[5] The Star Wars Art of Dave Dorman was published in 1996 by Random House/FPG. Dorman won a poll of the readers of The Official Best of Star Wars Magazine in 1998, as "Best Star Wars Artist".[4] Dorman won an Eisner Award in 1993 for his paintings in the book Aliens: Tribes.[2] In 2010 he won the prestigious Inkpot Award[9] at San Diego Comic-Con, where he was a featured guest that year.[10] During that show, he also launched his new career retrospective book, ROLLING THUNDER: The Art of Dave Dorman, which is published by IDW Publishing and Desperado Publishing.[11] Dorman began his roleplaying game (RPG) work beginning with Pacesetter Ltd in 1985, and began freelancing for TSR in 1987, producing cover art for Dungeons & Dragons books as Gargoyle and the original Draconomicon, among others. Dorman also did artwork for the games Shadowrun (FASA), Torg (West End Games, or WEG), Champions (Hero Games), Mayfair Games' "Role Aids", Rifts (Palladium Books), and Blood of Heroes. Dorman also produced all the art for some of West End Games' Star Wars role-playing game supplements in the 1990s.[12] He did some illustrations for the Micronauts toy line in the early 2000s.[13] Dorman has been known for more than 20 years because of his photo-realistic style of oil painting. Dorman's Star Wars: The Art of Dave Dorman cocktail table art book was the top-selling art book in 1996 for Ballantine Books and became the textbook of choice for illustration courses at Northern Illinois University in DeKalb, Illinois.[14] He was also voted "The #1 Star Wars Artist of All Time" by Star Wars Galaxy Magazine in 1996.[citation needed] Star Wars creator George Lucas is a fan of Dorman's work and has purchased dozens of Dorman's original oil paintings.[2] Dorman held a license with Lucasfilm for many years to do limited edition prints.[2] Dorman's own proprietary work, Wasted Lands, written by science fiction author Del Stone Jr., is currently making the rounds in Hollywood for a film adaptation. This action/adventure film is heavily influenced by Dorman's appreciation of directors like Jean-Pierre Jeunet (Whom he met on the Alien: Resurrection film set), Akira Kurosawa and Leone, as well as writers Joe Lansdale, Stephen King and F. Paul Wilson. Dorman is in development with Hollywood actor Dan Roebuck (River's Edge, Lost, Desperate Housewives) for a fictional children's book authored by Roebuck. Dorman is also in development with Dave Elliott's Atomeka Press for a Wasted Lands publishing project. Dorman has been featured in interviews for the Dennis Miller Radio Show, Mancow's Morning Madhouse, Sci Fi Channel, Turner Network Television's Southern Living Presents magazine program, and WEAR-TV in Pensacola, an ABC affiliate. Dorman is an avid supporter of Tom Roush's Pensacola Film Festival and the Baytowne Film Festival and he creates the artwork for their annual event posters. Dorman can be found annually at his Comic-Con booth in San Diego with his contemporaries, Scott Hampton, Christopher Moeller, and John Van Fleet. In 2010, Dorman was a "special guest" at San Diego Comic-Con International. Dorman exhibited for the very first C2E2 in Chicago in April 2010. Dorman also regularly attends the Wizard World Chicago, HeroesCon, and Detroit's Motor City Comic Con, and is often the featured guest artist at numerous Magic: The Gathering tournaments. Dorman's own company, Rolling Thunder, publishes art books and limited edition litho prints. In 2010, IDW Publishing, now partnered with Desperado Publishing, is putting out the new book "Rolling Thunder: The Art of Dave Dorman." A special edition issue will launch at San Diego Comic-Con International, where Dorman is a "special guest." Dorman estimates this book shows about half of his artwork, many of it personal work and pieces never before seen by the general public. In the book, Dorman speaks candidly and personally for the very first time about his mid-life crisis and how he survived it. In 2009, Dorman was a judge for the SPECTRUM Annual, the fantasy world's bible for illustrators. In 2009, Dorman also made history by creating entirely digital art, for his very first time, during Reverie '09, sponsored by MassiveBlack.com and ConceptArt.org. Also in 2010, Dorman launched the podcast "Wednesday is Comic Book Day" with his wife, Denise Dorman – a mash-up of comic book industry insider news, pop culture news and interviews. The podcast is a free download on iTunes and is available via Farpoint Media, the producers of the show. Awards[edit] Dorman has been the guest of honor at Comic-Con in San Diego three times. It was there that he earned the Eisner Award in 1993 for his art work on Alien: Tribes.[15] Personal life[edit] He has been a longtime resident of Shalimar, Florida[4] and of Mill Creek, Illinois. He moved to Geneva, Illinois in 2005.[2] In 2006, Dorman offered to create an original 3' x 6' oil painting worth US$50,000 for anyone that would buy his home in Shalimar Pointe, Florida.[15] As of mid-2011, Dorman had attended Comic-Con twenty-seven years in a row.[16] Selected works[edit] Covers of Heavy Metal magazines. Artwork in comics such as Batman, Spider-Man, Superman, G.I. Joe, Alien, Predator, Indiana Jones, King Kong and Alien vs. Predator (including toy design for Hasbro of the Alien action figures.) Harry Potter (Trading cards) Magic: The Gathering (Gaming Cards) Atomic Chili: The Illustrated Joe R. Lansdale Creating the first artwork of the Predalien. References[edit] ^ Inkpot Award ^ a b c d e f g Hitzeman, Harold (July 23, 2007). "Beauty beyond the stars: Even George Lucas owns suburban artist's Star Wars paintings". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2012. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) ^ [1] ^ a b c d Logan, Casey (October 5, 1998). "Shalimar man voted best Star Wars artist", Northwest Florida Daily News, p. E6. ^ a b Walker, Greg (December 8, 2006). "Local artists get a chance to learn from the (Jedi) master". The Sun. Naperville. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved October 15, 2012. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) ^ Dorman, Dave. ROLLING THUNDER: The Art of Dave Dorman. ^ a b Wolf, Karen (December 5, 1996). "GI Joe still a man of action despite 30-plus years and a variety of incarnations". Knight Ridder/Tribune News Service. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) ^ Reysen, Frank, Jr. (June 1, 1994). "Sports cards take a hit, survey shows". Playthings. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) ^ "Dave Dorman Wins 2010 Inkpot Award". Archived from the original on December 29, 2009. ^ The Official Blog of Dave Dorman ^ http://www.davedorman.com ^ "Dave Dorman at Pen & Paper". Archived from the original on August 26, 2007. ^ Szadkowski, Joseph (January 4, 2003). "Elektra joins new lineup of action comic figures". The Washington Times. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) ^ Rahm, Julie (2011). Military Kids Speak. America's Mindset Mechanic. p. 238. ISBN 978-1452872162. ^ a b Ricketts, Dusty (June 4, 2006). "A Unique Buyer Incentive". Northwest Florida Daily News. Fort Walton Beach, Florida. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) ^ Goodale, Gloria (July 21, 2011). "How Comic-Con went from geek to Hollywood megabucks". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2012. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dave Dorman. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Official website The Wasted Lands The Official Blog of Dave Dorman Interview with Dave Dorman[permanent dead link] on Slice of SciFi Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond v t e Eisner Award for Best Painter/Digital Artist Dave Dorman (1993) Alex Ross (1994) Jon J. Muth (1995) John Bolton (1996) Alex Ross (1997) Alex Ross (1998) Alex Ross (1999) Alex Ross (2000) Jill Thompson (2001) Charles Vess (2002) George Pratt (2003) Jill Thompson (2004) Teddy Kristiansen (2005) Ladronn (2006) Jill Thompson (2007) Eric Powell (2008) Jill Thompson (2009) Jill Thompson (2010) Juanjo Guarnido (2011) Juanjo Guarnido (2013) Fiona Staples (2014) J. H. Williams III (2015) Dustin Nguyen (2016) Jill Thompson (2017) Sana Takeda (2018) Dustin Nguyen (2019) Christian Ward (2020) v t e Inkpot Award (2010s) 2010 Peter Bagge Brian Michael Bendis Berkeley Breathed Kurt Busiek Dave Dorman Moto Hagio Charlaine Harris Stuart Immonen Phil Jimenez Jenette Kahn Keith Knight Milo Manara Andy Manzi Larry Marder Tom Palmer Drew Struzan James Sturm Carol Tyler Anna-Marie Villegas Al Wiesner 2011 Anina Bennett Jordi Bernet Joyce Brabner Chester Brown Seymour Chwast Alan Davis Dick DeBartolo Dawn Devine Tony DeZuniga Eric Drooker Joyce Farmer Tsuneo Gōda Paul Guinan John Higgins Jamal Igle Peter Kuper Richard A. Lupoff Pat Lupoff Steve Sansweet Bill Schelly Steven Spielberg Frank Stack Jeff Walker 2012 Charlie Adlard Bill Amend Alison Bechdel Tim Bradstreet Mike Carey Peter Coogan Geof Darrow Randy Duncan Ben Edlund Gary Gianni Larry Hama Peter F. Hamilton Mario Hernandez Klaus Janson Joe Jusko Robert Kirkman Erik Larsen Rob Liefeld Andy Mangels Rudy Nebres Whilce Portacio James Robinson Lou Scheimer Arnold Schwarzenegger Jim Silke Marc Silvestri Michael E. Uslan Trevor Von Eeden Mark Waid Thomas Yeates 2013 Jon Bogdanove Alan Campbell Gerry Conway Denys Cowan Michael Davis Gene Deitch José Delbo Derek T. Dingle Paul Dini Ellen Forney Gary Frank Tony Isabella Dan Jurgens Sam Kieth Jack Larson Elliot S! Maggin Leonard Maltin Jeff Mariotte Val Mayerik Dean Mullaney Martin Pasko Fred Perry Ruth Sanderson Romeo Tanghal Bruce Timm 2014 Ray Billingsley June Brigman Mark Brooks Amanda Conner Brian Crane Chuck Dixon Jane Espenson Bill Finger Drew Friedman Michael T. Gilbert Brian Haberlin Willie Ito Kelley Jones Katherine Morrison Julie Newmar Graham Nolan Michelle Nolan Jimmy Palmiotti Benoît Peeters John Picacio Mimi Pond Joe Quesada Sam Raimi Don Rosa Brian Stelfreeze Burt Ward 2015 Jerry Beck Greg Capullo Mike Catron Carlos Ezquerra Andrew Farago Dave Garcia Tom Grummett Jackson Guice Chip Kidd Steve Lieber Laura Martin Dave McCaig Bill Mumy Kevin Nowlan Joe Philips Hilary B. Price Humberto Ramos Jimmie Robinson Luis Royo Jen Sorensen Richard Starkings Kazuki Takahashi Jill Thompson Jhonen Vasquez Craig Yoe 2016 Jason Aaron Derf Backderf Michael Barrier Luc Besson Peggy Burns Peter David Jim Davis Tom Devlin Ben Dunn Matt Fraction William Gibson Kieron Gillen Mike Judge Hidenori Kusaka Ed McGuinness Jamie McKelvie Tsutomu Nihei Christopher Priest Phil Roman Alex Sinclair John Trimble Satoshi Yamamoto 2017 Andrew Aydin Jon Bogdanove Alan Burnett Joyce Chin Kevin Feige Robin Hobb John Lewis Jeph Loeb Jonathan Maberry Glenn McCoy Keith Pollard Nate Powell Brian Selznick R. Sikoryak Alex Simmons Gail Simone R. L. Stine Ron Wilson 2018 Yoshitaka Amano Marc Bernardin Cory Doctorow Brian Fies Richard Friend Alex Grecian Deborah Harkness Elizabeth Hand Larry Houston David Mack Nichelle Nichols Liniers Brian Pulido Randy Reynaldo Eric Reynolds Kevin Smith Peter Tomasi Shannon Wheeler Rafael Albuquerque 2019 Wendy All Leigh Bardugo Jon B. Cooke Mary Fleener Gene Ha Jonathan Hickman Arvell Jones Charlie Kochman Craig Miller Paco Roca Scott Snyder Billy Tucci Chris Ware Maryelizabeth Yturralde Complete list 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s