Deep Shock Promotional image Written by Paul Joshua Rubin Jeff Rank Brian Mammett Directed by Paul Joshua Rubin Starring David Keith Simmone Jade Mackinnon Theme music composer Rich McHugh Country of origin United States Original language English Production Producers Jeffery Beach Phillip Roth Cinematography Todd Barron Editor David Flores Running time 93 minutes Release Original network Syfy Original release 2003 (2003) (United States) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Deep Shock is a 2003 American science-fiction-horror film that debuted as a Sci Fi Pictures TV-movie on the Sci Fi Channel. Its plot concerns an unknown underwater object that disables an American nuclear-powered submarine and attacks a submerged Arctic research complex. The monsters of the movie are giant intelligent electric eels. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] The US Navy nuclear-powered attack submarine USS Jimmy Carter is attacked by a mysterious underwater object that stalks and disables the Seawolf-class super-sub with a powerful electromagnetic pulse. The underwater Arctic research complex Hubris witnesses the attack and reports a rapid rise in the temperature of the Polaris Trench which threatens to melt the ice cap and flood the world's land surface. At an emergency United Nations scientific conference, Hubris director Dr. Ann Fletcher is dismissed when she urges caution and her archrival Dr. Chomsky pushes through a far more aggressive plan to deal with the crisis. When Chomsky's plan fails and contact with the Hubris complex is lost, Dr. Fletcher is asked to participate in a follow-up expedition, which also includes Chomsky, by her ex-husband, Navy Captain Andy Raines. Once at the North Pole, the expedition finds that the Hubris complex is completely intact, but its personnel have been incinerated. Cast[edit] David Keith as Capt. Andy Raines, USN Simmone Jade Mackinnon as Dr. Anne Fletcher Mark Sheppard as Dr. Chomsky Sean Whalen as Arciero Armando Valdés as Protas Robert Zachar as Michael (as Bob Zachar) Richard Gnolfo as Rodgers Todd Kimsey as Hurst Tyrone Pinkham as Beach Velizar Binev as Dr. Pashe Ivaylo Geraskov as Russian G-8 representative Anatoly Nechev as French G-8 representative Production[edit] Deep Shock was produced by DEJ Productions, Unified Film Organization and Eel Productions, LLC in association with Media Entertainment GMBH & CO 1. Filmproduktions KG. References[edit] External links[edit] Deep Shock official site (Sci Fi Channel. Archived from the original on June 7, 2004 "Keith Feels Deep Shock". Sci Fi Wire (Sci Fi Channel). August 8, 2003. Archived from the original on October 9, 2003. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) API at IMDb API at AllMovie Deep Shock film trailer at YouTube