Animal that stands or walks on its digits/toes A digitigrade (/ˈdɪdʒɪtɪˌɡreɪd/)[1] is an animal that stands or walks on its digits, or toes. Digitigrades include walking birds (what many assume to be bird knees are actually ankles), cats, dogs, and many other mammals, but not plantigrades or unguligrades. Digitigrades generally move more quickly and quietly than other animals. There are anatomical differences between the limbs of plantigrades, like humans, and both unguligrade and digitigrade limbs. Digitigrade and unguligrade animals have relatively long carpals and tarsals, and the bones which would correspond to the human ankle are thus set much higher in the limb than in a human. In a digitigrade animal, this effectively lengthens the foot, so much so that what are often thought of as a digitigrade animal's "hands" and "feet" correspond only to what would be the bones of the human finger or toe. Humans usually walk with the soles of their feet on the ground, in plantigrade locomotion. In contrast, digitigrade animals walk on their distal and intermediate phalanges. Digitigrade locomotion is responsible for the distinctive hooked shape of dog legs. Unguligrade animals, such as horses and cattle, walk only on the distal-most tips of their digits, while in digitigrade animals, more than one segment of the digit makes contact with the ground, either directly (as in birds) or via paw-pads (as in dogs). Examples[edit] Skeleton of a wolf, showing a typical digitigrade arrangement of leg and foot bones Mesonychids Dinosaurs (digitigrade and semi-digitigrade) Birds (except for loons and grebes which are plantigrade) Pigs (semi-digitigrade) Hippos (semi-digitigrade) Pakicetus Indohyus Thylacine Cats Hyenas Mongooses Canids Elephants (semi-digitigrade)[2] Capybaras (semi-digitigrade) Trucidocynodon (semi-digitigrade at least in the forelimbs) References[edit] ^ "Digitigrade". Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House. ^ APPEARANCE/ MORPHOLOGY: LEGS, SPINE AND TRACKS with literature reports for the Asian Elephant - Elephas maximus (editorial comment) External links[edit] Yes, the Shin Bone Is Connected to the Ankle Bone v t e Animal locomotion on land Gait class Legged Arboreal locomotion (Brachiation) Hand-walking Jumping Knuckle-walking Running Walking Legless Concertina movement Undulatory locomotion Rectilinear locomotion Rolling Sidewinding Other modes Anatomy Comparative foot morphology Arthropod leg Digitigrade Plantigrade Unguligrade Uniped Biped (Facultative) Triped Quadruped Specific Canine gait Horse gait Human gait Animal locomotion on the water surface Fish locomotion Volant animals