This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dinosaur from the Deep Directed by Norbert Moutier Produced by Norbert Moutier Starring Jean Rollin Tina Aumont Sylvaine Charlet Guy Godefroy Norbert Moutier Norbert Moutier Tina Aumont Christophe Bier Music by Sylvaine Charlet Edited by N.G. Mount Distributed by N.M. International Release date 1993 Running time 78 minutes Country France Language French Dinosaur from the Deep is a 1993 French horror science-fiction B movie by filmmaker Norbert Moutier and starring Jean Rollin, Tina Aumont and Sylvaine Charlet. Produced to capitalize on the success of Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park, the project was filmed with a minuscule budget and has become notorious for its poor special effects. Contents 1 Plot 2 Production 3 Cast 4 Release 5 Reception 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] After the death penalty has been abolished in 2004, and not knowing how to deal with an abominable criminal recidivist, the FBI's experts and lawyers decide to send the condemned on a journey through time to a time when the sentence still applied. For financial reasons, this expedition is coupled with a scientific mission charged with tracing the first dinosaurs. They find they did exist, and the crew is in pursuit of the prisoner now at large. Production[edit] The film was produced to capitalize on the success of Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park. It was filmed with a low budget and the dinosaurs were made of clay and papier-mâché, and in some scenes moved in stop-motion. Cast[edit] Jean Rollin as Professeur Nolan Tina Aumont as Nora Sylvaine Charlet as Mme Nolan Guy Godefroy as Murder N.G. Mount as Kruger (as Bert Goldman) Quelou Parente as Cave Girl Christophe Bier as Lawyer Cécile Letargat as Nurse Gérard Stum as Avocado Man Christian Letargat as Photographer Release[edit] The film was not released theatrically in France, but only in VHS in 1994. Reception[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (February 2016) References[edit] External links[edit] Monster Bis• Official site Dinosaur From the Deep on IMDb France portal This article related to a French film of the 1990s is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a science-fiction horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e