Dinosaurs! - A Fun-Filled Trip Back in Time! VHS cover Produced by Will Vinton Dick Baka Jim Bousa Written by Susan Shadburne Virginia Theimer Clapper Starring Fred Savage Music by Charmer Cinematography Rich Ball Charles Peich Edited by Suzanne Rosen Production companies Will Vinton Productions Pyramid Films [1] Distributed by GoldenVision Release date July 18, 1980 (1980-07-18) (Claymation) November 20, 1987 (1987-11-20) (Live action) Running time 30 minutes Country United States Language English Dinosaurs! – A Fun-Filled Trip Back in Time! is a short film released by Golden Book Video in 1987 under their "GoldenVision" series. It stars Fred Savage playing a grade school student named Philip who gives a class report on dinosaurs, with the help of an animated chalkboard and Will Vinton's claymation dinosaurs. [2] Originally created in 1980, when it was known more simply as Dinosaur, the 17-minute claymation short by Vinton Studios [3] would later be used for this 1987 video. The popular short is also played at the Smithsonian Museum and has won numerous awards. This film is also played BOB's request in Rocky Hill, Connecticut at the museum in Dinosaur State Park. Dinosaurs! was designed as an educational film for young children new to the world of prehistoric life; the video slipsleeve describes the film with "Discover the real monsters who dominated the earth for millions of years!" The cartoon animation of the chalkboard is used to elaborate on attributes such as the extinction of the dinosaurs as well as their brain capacity, while the Vinton claymation illustrates, in a colorful and simplistic manner, the brutal lives of the many dinosaurs. The movie also introduces a music video for the song "Mesozoic Mind" by Charmer, featuring cartoon dinosaurs performing it. Contents 1 Plot 2 Awards 3 References 4 See also 5 External links Plot[edit] The video—with beginning scenes filmed in 1987—begins with a young boy named Phillip (played by Fred Savage) sitting in his bedroom, listening to loud music, and struggling to find an idea for a class report on a science topic. While struggling to find some ideas, and irking his mother (who threatens to get his father if he does not turn off the music and go to bed) with his loud music, he plays a song on his boom box (titled "Mesozoic Mind"). And the song provides him with an inspiration for his report: DINOSAURS! Philip then goes to sleep and has a dream, where he discovers that the search for the truth about these magnificent animals and their astonishing 160-million-year success on Earth is probably the most fascinating speculation there is. Phillip then finishes his report and presents it to the class. The class report is then covered through the 1980 claymation short Dinosaur by Will Vinton Productions. [4] Awards[edit] Chicago International Film Festival, 1980 Gold Hugo Gold Award, Houston International Film Festival, 1980 [5] References[edit] ^ An excerpt of Dinosaur at Pyramid Films channel on YouTube ^ "Oddball Films: Will Vinton's Claymation Marvels - Thur. June 12 - 8PM". Oddball Films. Retrieved 2020-01-03. ^ Beck, Jerry (December 18, 2017). "Cartoons Considered For An Academy Award – 1980 -". cartoonresearch.com. ^ Will Vinton Productions (1980), Dinosaur, Internet Archive, Santa Monica, Calif. : Pyramid Films, retrieved 2020-01-03 ^ DataBase, The Big Cartoon. "Dinosaur (Will Vinton Productions, Pyramid Films)". Big Cartoon DataBase (BCDB). Retrieved 2020-01-03. See also[edit] Dinosaur! External links[edit] MesozoicMind.com—Give me a Mesozoic Mind... Dinosaurs!—A Fun-Filled Trip Back in Time! at IMDb Overview of the Dinosaur Documentary The complete film on YouTube This article related to a short animated film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e