Dungeons & Dragons fictional campaign setting Dragonlance The original Dragonlance logo Designer(s) Margaret Weis and Laura and Tracy Hickman Publisher(s) TSR, Inc. Wizards of the Coast Publication date 1984–2011, 2021- Genre(s) Fantasy Language(s) English System(s) SAGA System Advanced Dungeons & Dragons D&D v3.5 Random chance Dice rolling Media type Novels, game accessories, film, audiobooks Dragonlance is a shared universe created by Laura and Tracy Hickman, and expanded by Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weis under the direction of TSR, Inc. into a series of fantasy novels. The Hickmans conceived Dragonlance while driving in their car on the way to TSR for a job interview. At TSR Tracy Hickman met Margaret Weis, his future writing partner, and they gathered a group of associates to play the Dungeons & Dragons role-playing game. The adventures during that game inspired a series of gaming modules, a series of novels, licensed products such as board games, and lead miniature figures. In 1984, TSR published the first Dragonlance novel, Dragons of Autumn Twilight. It began the Chronicles trilogy, a core element of the Dragonlance world. While the authoring team of Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weis wrote the setting's central books, numerous other authors contributed novels and short stories to the setting. Over 190 novels have used the Dragonlance setting, and have been accompanied by supplemental Dungeons & Dragons campaign setting material for over a decade. In 1997, Wizards of the Coast LLC purchased TSR, and licensed Dragonlance to Sovereign Press, Inc in 2001 to produce game materials; this licensing agreement expired in 2007. The fictional Dragonlance world of Krynn contains numerous characters, an extensive timeline, and a detailed geography. The history of Krynn consists of five ages. The novels and related game products are primarily set in the fourth age, The Age of Despair. Since the publication of Dragonlance: Fifth Age in 1996, the fifth age, the Age of Mortals, has been used.[1] The Heroes of the Lance, created by Weis and Hickman, are the popular protagonists of the Chronicles trilogy. Along with D&D's world of the Forgotten Realms, Dragonlance is one of the most popular shared worlds in fiction. Contents 1 Publication history 1.1 Creation 1.2 Further development 2 Media 2.1 Novels 2.2 Campaign setting 2.3 Other 3 World 3.1 Setting 3.2 Fictional history 3.3 Dragonlances 3.4 Characters 3.5 Locations 3.6 Races 4 Reception 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Publication history[edit] Creation[edit] Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weis at Gen Con 2008. Hickman developed his world creation technique by writing and self-publishing with his wife Laura the adventure modules Rahasia (1979) and Pharaoh (1980), and writing TSR's Ravenloft module (1983). He was unemployed in 1982, and TSR offered him a job based on his submission of several modules.[2] That year, while driving from Utah to Wisconsin to start a job with TSR, Hickman and his wife created the Dragonlance universe concept. During the trip, Hickman and his wife discussed two ideas they had had for several years: an entire world used to support a storyline, and a world dominated by dragons.[3] Their ideas were well received by TSR, whose marketing department felt they had enough dungeons, but not enough dragons. Hickman suggested a series of twelve modules, each featuring a different dragon. TSR employee Harold Johnson suggested that Hickman should try to get additional support from other TSR staff members and, after a period of months, Hickman had the support of Jeff Grubb, Larry Elmore, Roger Moore, Doug Niles, Michael Williams, and others with whom they discussed ideas for the project. Meanwhile, Weis was editing and writing various Endless Quest books for TSR. The Dragonlance group decided that novels should accompany the game modules; TSR reluctantly agreed and hired a writer.[3] Hickman became the design coordinator for Project Overlord, the cover name for what would later be known as the Dragonlance saga.[4] TSR decided to create a franchise, including modules, board games, lead figures, and—for the first time—novels. Weis had been hired as an editor; with Hickman, she began working with the author hired to write the novels. They weren't satisfied with the author, and decided they should be the ones to write the books.[2] They collaborated over a weekend, writing the prologue for the first five chapters of the first novel,[2] Dragons of Autumn Twilight, based on the module Dragons of Despair.[5] TSR liked their treatment and gave them the assignment, firing the author. After two years of development, TSR released Dragons of Autumn Twilight as a supplement to the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons game.[6] TSR had doubts about the finished novel's sales potential, and attempted to order thirty thousand copies, ultimately ordering the minimum print run of fifty thousand. The success of the novel prompted TSR to publish more copies to meet demand.[2] Dragonlance eventually received ancillary products such as novels, calendars, computer games, and books of artwork.[7] Further development[edit] The second Dragonlance logo, used on most of the books and supplements since 1995 with the 5th Age. In the mid to late 1980s, a rift developed between TSR and the authors. Weis and Hickman were feeling under-appreciated and, when TSR turned down their Darksword series of novels, they went to Bantam Books. Bantam made them an offer, which they accepted, and they stopped writing Dragonlance novels for TSR.[2] They returned to write Dragons of Summer Flame for TSR in 1995, thinking it would be their final Dragonlance novel. At the time, Dragonlance gaming had been converted to the SAGA System, with limited success, and that, combined with TSR's general financial troubles, put the setting's future in doubt. Wizards of the Coast bought the troubled TSR in 1997, and Weis and Hickman then proposed the War of Souls trilogy, which was published in 2000–2002. All three novels made the New York Times bestseller list, and the setting was commercially revitalized.[3] By 1998, the original Dragonlance trilogy had sold well over three million copies worldwide and spawned dozens of sequels.[8] The central books of the Dragonlance series were written by the authoring team of Weis and Hickman; however, many other writers have made contributions, including Richard A. Knaak, Douglas Niles, Roger E. Moore, Don Perrin, Jean Rabe, Paul B. Thompson, Tonya C. Cook, Michael Williams, Nancy Varian Berberick, and Chris Pierson. In 2001, Wizards of the Coast licensed Sovereign Press to publish further Dragonlance game materials. This began with the newly revised Dragonlance Campaign Setting in 2003, which used the new Dungeons & Dragons 3rd Edition rules.[3] On April 23, 2007, Weis announced Wizards of the Coast had not renewed Sovereign's license, and that Dragonlance RPG game supplements and accessories would only be released through the end of the year.[9] In October 2020, Weis and Hickman filed suit against Wizards of the Coast for breaching a licensing deal with Weis and Hickman for a new Dragonlance novel trilogy.[10][11] Boing Boing reported that "according to the lawsuit, Weis and Hickman agreed with Wizards of the Coast to produce the new novels in 2017, capping off the series and giving fans a final sendoff. But the company pulled the plug in August 2020".[12] In December 2020, Weis and Hickman filed to voluntarily dismiss without prejudice their lawsuit,[13] and "the filing noted that Wizards of the Coast had not formally answered their lawsuit, nor had they filed for a summary judgement".[14] Weis and Hickman's publishing agent affirmed a few weeks following this that a new trilogy of Dragonlance novels is in the works with plans for publication in 2021.[15] Media[edit] Novels[edit] Main article: List of Dragonlance novels The main storyline of the original Dragonlance series has been written by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman, with multiple books written by other authors, covering years between and sometimes during the main events. The Chronicles trilogy relates the events since the meeting of the Companions until the end of the War of the Lance and the defeat of the Dragon armies of Ansalon. The Legends trilogy covers the Blue Lady's War, as well as the past adventures of Raistlin and Caramon Majere, culminating in Raistlin's attempt to achieve godhood. The books feature time travel, and focus on events in Istar before the Cataclysm, as well as the ensuing Dwarfgate Wars. The Second Generation is a single compilation book which picks the most important tales from the Tales series and details the children of the Companions, all of whom become players in the later story. This book is considered to be part of the main storyline, as it must be read to understand the events that happened between the War of the Lance and the Chaos War. This novel develops characters that would later be seen in the War of Souls trilogy. Dragons of Summer Flame covers the Chaos War, also known as the Second Cataclysm. The gods and mortals join forces to defeat Chaos in his attempt to destroy Krynn. The war ends with the withdrawal of Chaos and the gods of Krynn in a divine agreement to keep the world safe. Dragons of a New Age describes the rise of the Dragon Overlords and introduces the Fifth Age of Dragonlance. It leads into the War of Souls trilogy. The War of Souls trilogy begins as a strange storm courses through Krynn, heralding the War of Souls. The end of the war brings the return of the gods, Takhisis's death, and the departure of Paladine as head of the good gods in order to maintain the balance between Good and Evil. The Dark Disciple trilogy follows the death of Takhisis and the departure of Paladine, when the lesser gods strive to maintain dominance. The Lost Chronicles trilogy is a companion to the original Chronicles. Each book of the trilogy fills in sections of the story previously left untold. It tells the story surrounding the recovery of the Hammer of Kharas,[16] how the Companions retrieve the dragon orb from Ice Wall, how Kitiara Uth Matar and Lord Soth became allies, and how Raistlin Majere took the Black Robes in Neraka. Campaign setting[edit] Main article: List of Dragonlance modules and sourcebooks Dragonlance Adventures, the first Dragonlance campaign setting sourcebook TSR created Dragonlance as a campaign setting for the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D) roleplaying game in 1982, publishing the first of a series of modules, Dragons of Despair, in March 1984. They published the first world-spanning sourcebook, Dragonlance Adventures, in 1987. When AD&D was updated to the 2nd edition in 1989, the Dragonlance campaign setting was updated as well. However, in 1996, Dragonlance was converted to use the new SAGA System, which uses cards to determine the effects of actions, with the publication of the Dragonlance: Fifth Age roleplaying game.[6] When the 3rd edition of Dungeons & Dragons was released, Dragonlance was again updated with a new sourcebook (Dragonlance Campaign Setting), although no new adventures were published by Wizards of the Coast. Wizards of the Coast also turned over all responsibility for maintaining the Dragonlance setting in the 3rd edition to Margaret Weis's home company, Sovereign Press. Other[edit] Dragonlance video games 1988 Heroes of the Lance (Silver Box) 1989 Dragons of Flame (Silver Box) War of the Lance 1990 Champions of Krynn (Gold Box) DragonStrike 1991 Death Knights of Krynn (Gold Box) Shadow Sorcerer (Silver Box) 1992 The Dark Queen of Krynn (Gold Box) Eight video games are set in the Dragonlance world. Apart from those, the MUSH game DragonLance is based on Krynn during the final stage of the War of the Lance.[17] The series has inspired mention in music as well, including "Wishmaster", a song by Nightwish based partially on the master and apprentice relationship between Raistlin Majere and Dalamar. The Swedish metal band Lake of Tears also recorded a song called "Raistlin and the Rose" on their 1997 album Crimson Cosmos, while the German group Blind Guardian wrote "The Soulforged", another song inspired by Raistlin's story, which appeared on the band's 2002 album A Night at the Opera.[18] Also Danish/American band Pyramaze recorded in their 2008 album Immortal song "Caramon's Poem".[19] Another German metal band, Evertale, released The Chronicles Chapter I EP in 2008 and the full album Of Dragons And Elves in 2013 - both releases were composed entirely of songs inspired by and relating to Dragonlance.[citation needed] In 2008, Dragonlance: Dragons of Autumn Twilight, an animated movie based on the first Dragonlance book of the same name, was released direct-to-video. The animation was produced by Toonz Animation, and featured the voices of Lucy Lawless, Kiefer Sutherland, Michael Rosenbaum, and Michelle Trachtenberg.[20] In late 2011, Holysoft Studios Ltd. released the first part of a German audio adaption of the Chronicles Trilogy, with subsequent releases of the later trilogies being announced.[21] In comics, Krynn has been represented on the 1988 Dragonlance series by DC Comics and TSR.[22] More recently, Devil's Due Publishing and Wizards of the Coast have also produced a number of comic book series: The Legend of Huma (2003),[23] Chronicles (2005) and Legends (2008).[24] World[edit] The Dragonlance world is described in dozens of books and novels. The setting contains numerous characters, an extensive timeline, and a detailed geography. Setting[edit] Map of Ansalon, where the majority of the novels take place Dragonlance is set on the world of Krynn. The majority of the novels take place in the various regions of Ansalon, a small continent, though some have taken place on the continent of Taladas, located northeast of Ansalon. The world's major gods are the High God and his children: good Paladine, neutral Gilean, and evil Takhisis. The gods are opposed by Chaos, who seeks to destroy Krynn. Depending on the time period, the evil chromatic and the good metallic dragons are rare or plentiful. Humans are Krynn's most common humanoid race, but elves, dwarves, kender, gnomes, and minotaurs occupy the world as well. Clerics derive magical powers from their gods, and wizards derive their power from the three moon gods, good Solinari, neutral Lunitari, and evil Nuitari. Hickman had previously served as a Mormon missionary in Java for two years, and uses Indonesian in Dragonlance spells.[2] During Krynn's various wars, armies of draconians are used as troops. Draconians are created by corrupting a dragon egg, thereby creating a reptilian humanoid. Any dragon egg can be used to make a draconian, although the ones most commonly used are good dragon eggs because the evil kings want more evil dragons to hatch. Other gods of the setting include the gods of good Branchala, Habbakuk, Kiri-Jolith, Majere, and Mishakal; the gods of neutrality Chislev, Reorx, Shinare, Sirrion, and Zivilyn; and the gods of evil, Chemosh, Hiddukel, Morgion, Sargonnas, and Zeboim. Fictional history[edit] The history of the world of Krynn, and thus the settings for both the novels and gaming supplements, is roughly split into five separate ages. The first age is the time of creation, when the gods are born and Krynn is formed. The Age of Dreams, the second age, is marked by the rapid growth of the world's first great civilizations and the appearance of myriad new races. This era is also marked by three great wars between dragons and their minions. Following the Third Dragon War, in the Age of Might, the Cataclysm obliterates the great empire of Istar and changes almost the entire surface of Krynn. A three-hundred year depression follows this event, in what is called the Age of Despair. This period also marks the War of the Lance. When Dragonlance was first introduced to Dungeons & Dragons, events such as the Lost Wars happened during The Age of Despair.[25] Later Age of Mortals novels and game supplements took Krynn into the Fifth Age (the Age of Mortals).[1][26] Dragonlances[edit] Dragonlances are weapons first created in the Third Dragon War, designed with the purpose of killing evil dragons, and are the only weapons with which mortals who cannot use magic can kill dragons.[citation needed] Dragonlances have this power because of the way in which they are created, which requires the use of "two god-blessed artifacts".[citation needed] Dragonlances are rare and not commonly traded. There are lesser dragonlances, which are made when only one of the artifacts is used to create them, and greater dragonlances, which are made when both artifacts are used to make them. Greater dragonlances are blessed with the power of Good, unlike lesser dragonlances.[27] There are two sizes of dragonlance. The smaller footman's dragonlance is around eight feet long and functions as a pole weapon, while the larger mounted dragonlance is around sixteen feet long and most commonly used when mounted on a dragon.[28][29] Characters[edit] Main article: List of Dragonlance characters The Heroes of the Lance: from left Raistlin, Caramon, Tanis, Tasslehoff, Flint, Goldmoon, Riverwind, Sturm, Tika, and Laurana. Tracy Hickman keeps this Larry Elmore painting on the wall in his office.[30] The Heroes of the Lance are the protagonists of the Chronicles trilogy, the first series of Dragonlance books. They were created by Weis and Hickman, then fleshed out as player characters in gaming sessions of Dungeons & Dragons at Hickman's apartment. One player at this initial gaming session was game designer Terry Phillips, who was playing as Raistlin. According to Hickman in the foreword to The Soulforge, "[we] were just settling in to the game when I turned to my good friend Terry Phillips and asked what his character was doing. Terry spoke...and the world of Krynn was forever changed. His rasping voice, his sarcasm and bitterness all masking an arrogance and power that never needed to be stated suddenly were real. Everyone in the room was both transfixed and terrified. To this day Margaret [Weis] swears that Terry wore the black robes to the party that night."[31] In a "Traveling Road Show" put on to publicize the novels, the Heroes of the Lance were played by various people. Authors Gary and Janet Pack played the half-elf Tanis Half-Elven and the kender Tasslehoff Burrfoot, respectively. Author Douglas Niles played the dwarf Flint Fireforge. TSR employee Harold Johnson played the Solamnic knight Sturm Brightblade. The rest of the Heroes are the barbarians Goldmoon and Riverwind, elf Laurana Kanan, and humans Caramon Majere (Raistlin's brother) and Tika Waylan. Weis played Fizban the Fabulous.[3] In the beginning, Margaret Weis had problems depicting Tanis Half-Elven in the novels. Tracy Hickman finally told her "He's James T. Kirk of the Starship Enterprise." After that explanation, Margaret had no more difficulty writing about Tanis.[32] Other noteworthy antagonists, and sometimes protagonists, are the Death Knight Lord Soth and Kitiara Uth Matar, the half-sister of Raistlin and Caramon, and leader of one of the Dragonarmies of Ansalon. According to Hickman, Lord Soth is the most unpredictable character to write about, saying "Every time that character made an appearance in one of our books he would try to run off with the story."[33] Locations[edit] The world of Dragonlance is set on the planet of Krynn, with most of the action taking place on the continent of Ansalon. Some of the key countries and areas on Ansalon are the Plains of Dust, the Blood Sea Isles, the Empire of Ergoth, Istar, and Sancrist, as well as Thorbardin. Important cities and towns and other locations include Solace (location of the Inn of the Last Home, and Sad Town), the High Clerist's Tower, Kendermore, Port Balifor (location of the Pig and Whistle Tavern), and the various Towers of High Sorcery. Races[edit] Like in many Dungeons & Dragons campaign settings, the fictional world of the Dragonlance campaign is shaped by the division by race, with white humans as central focus, but also including elves, goblins and many others.[34][35] With the species in many cases clearly assigned towards "good" and "evil",[36] some critics have suggested that the setting had the potential to raise racist expectations.[35] The authors take an active stance against racist ideology by thematizing wars,[34] and ensure that a "fascistic genocidal campaign to wipe-out species that are considered 'impure'" have catastrophic consequences. In contrast, the need of tolerance and cooperation between the races is emphasized.[35] Reception[edit] Dragonlance is one of the most popular shared worlds, worlds in which writers other than those that created them place adventures.[37] The first Dragonlance trilogy, Chronicles, launched the Dungeons & Dragons line of novels, with many of its characters spun off into other novels.[38] Along with Forgotten Realms, Dragonlance is TSR's most popular series of novels. According to The 1990s by Marc Oxoby, what is most notable about the series is that "what may at one time been considered disposable, escapist literature" found "unprecedented popularity" in the 1990s.[39] All of the Dragonlance novels remained in print during the decade, turning Weis and Hickman into literary stars and boosting sales of their non-Dragonlance novels. Although the series was initially published in paperback, its success led to hardcover printings. The hardcover version of Dragons of Summer Flame had an "impressive" first printing of 200,000 books.[39] Every Dragonlance novel by Weis and Hickman since 1995 has been released in hardcover, and some previous novels have been re-released in hardcover collector's editions.[40] Dragonlance made TSR one of the most successful publishers of science fiction and fantasy in the 1990s.[41] By 2008, there were more than 190 novels in the Dragonlance franchise.[5] Weis and Hickman's Dragonlance novels have made over twenty bestseller lists, with sales in excess of 22 million.[41] The pair's novels have been translated into German, Japanese, Danish, Finnish, Spanish, French, Italian, Hebrew, Portuguese, Greek and Turkish and have sold well in the United States, Britain, and Australia.[2] Not all critics have praised Dragonlance and its creators. According to author Stephen Hunt, Wendy Bradley of Interzone magazine does not think highly of their work. Hunt feels that it is unusual for authors to receive such loathing among "fantasy's literary mafia", saying, "Behind every critic's scorn laden insult, there lays [sic] that unsaid thought at the end: 'But I could have written that!'"[2] Visions of Wonder, edited by David G. Hartwell and Milton T. Wolf, and published by the Science Fiction Research Association, argues that Dragonlance is published under the "omnivore theory" of publishing. In this theory, the readership is made up of teenagers, and completely replaces itself every three to five years. This allows publishers to release subpar novels and still reach a small yet profitable audience.[42] See also[edit] Dungeons & Dragons portal References[edit] ^ a b Cook, Sue Weinlein (1996). "Foreword". Dragonlance: Fifth Age - Book Two, Dusk or Dawn. TSR, Inc. ^ a b c d e f g h Hunt, Stephen (January 2002). "Dragon' On". SFCrowsnest.com. Archived from the original on February 11, 2008. Retrieved 2009-02-20. ^ a b c d e Archer, Peter (2004). "Dragonlance". 30 Years of Adventure: A Celebration of Dungeons & Dragons. Wizards of the Coast. pp. 64–75. ISBN 0-7869-3498-0. ^ Hickman, Tracy (April 1987). "TSR Profiles". Dragon. Lake Geneva, Wisconsin: TSR, Inc. (#120): 90. ^ a b Nahrung, Jason (June 27, 2008). "Hickmans write fantasy on a wing and a prayer". The Courier-Mail. Archived from the original on June 30, 2008. Retrieved 2009-02-19. ^ a b "The History of TSR". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on 2008-09-24. Retrieved 2005-08-20. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons FAQ". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on 2008-10-02. Retrieved 2008-10-03. ^ Varney, Allen (January 1998). "ProFiles: Margaret Weis". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#243): 120. ^ Margaret Weis (April 23, 2007). "Articles: Dragonlance License". Archived from the original on May 26, 2007. Retrieved 2007-06-26. ^ Hoffer, Christian (October 19, 2020). "Dungeons & Dragons Publisher Sued by Dragonlance Co-Writers Over Scrapped Book Trilogy". ComicBook.com. Retrieved 2020-10-19. ^ Hall, Charlie (2020-10-19). "Dragonlance authors sue Dungeons & Dragons publisher Wizards of The Coast". Polygon. Retrieved 2020-10-19. ^ Beschizza, Rob (2020-10-19). "Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman sue Wizards of the Coast after it abandons new Dragonlance trilogy". Boing Boing. Retrieved 2020-10-19. ^ Hall, Charlie (2021-01-11). "Dragonlance authors drop $10M lawsuit against Wizards of the Coast". Polygon. Retrieved 2021-01-11. ^ Hoffer, Christian (December 20, 2020). "Dragonlance Writers End Lawsuit Against Dungeons & Dragons Maker". ComicBook.com. Retrieved 2020-12-28. ^ Gilliam, Ryan (January 25, 2021). "New Dragonlance novel trilogy is back on after authors dismiss lawsuit". Polygon. Retrieved January 25, 2021. ^ Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman. "Dragons of the Dwarven Depths". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved 2006-07-18. ^ Maloni, Kelly; Baker, Derek; Wice, Nathaniel (1994). Net Games. Random House / Michael Wolff & Company, Inc. p. 107. ISBN 0-679-75592-6. ^ "Dragonlance Inspired Music and Musicians". Dragonlance-Movie.com. Retrieved 2009-03-14. ^ "Discography". Archived from the original on 2011-10-23. Retrieved 2011-09-26. ^ Winkelspecht, Dean (January 13, 2008). "DragonLance: Dragons of Autumn Twilight (DVD)". DVDTown.com. Archived from the original on February 8, 2009. Retrieved 2009-03-15. ^ Ltd., Holysoft Studios. "Drachenlanze - Das Hörspiel". www.drachenlanze-hoerspiel.de. Retrieved 2017-12-12. ^ "Dragonlance (1988) comic books". www.mycomicshop.com. Retrieved 2019-09-03. ^ "Dragonlance The Legend of Huma (2004) comic books". www.mycomicshop.com. Retrieved 2019-09-03. ^ "Dragonlance Legends Time of the Twins (2008) comic books". www.mycomicshop.com. Retrieved 2019-09-03. ^ Hickman, Tracy; Weis, Margaret (1987). Dragonlance Adventures. TSR, Inc. ISBN 0880384522. ^ Weis, Margaret; Chambers, Jamie; Coyle, Christopher (2003). "Foreword". Age of Mortals: Dragonlance Campaign Setting Companion. Sovereign Press, Inc. ^ Weis, Margaret; Perrin, Don (August 2003). "Chapter 3, Magic of Krynn, "Dragonlances".". Dragonlance Campaign Setting (1st ed.). Wizards of the Coast. p. 288. ISBN 0-7869-3086-1. ^ Hickman, Tracy; Weis, Margaret (1987). "The World That Was, Magical Items of Krynn, "Weapons".". Dragonlance Adventures (1st ed.). TSR, Inc. p. 94. ISBN 0-88038-452-2. ^ Johnson, Harold; Terra, John (1992). "Special Artifacts of Ansalon, Magic Weapons". Tales of The Lance: World Book of Ansalon. TSR, Inc. p. 156. ISBN 9781560763383. ^ Whiteman, Trampas. "Articles: Tracy Hickman Interview: Lost Chronicles Book Tour and Journeys Beyond!". Dragonlance.com. Archived from the original on 2008-09-19. Retrieved 2009-02-22. ^ Weis, Margaret (2003) [1998]. The Soulforge. The Raistlin Chronicles. Renton, WA, USA: Wizards of the Coast. Forward. ISBN 0-7869-1314-2. ^ Weis, Margaret; Hickman, Tracy (November 1999). The Annotated Chronicles (1st ed.). Wizards of the Coast. p. 74. ISBN 0-7869-1870-5. Retrieved 2006-07-01. ^ Patrick (May 21, 2006). "Interview with Tracy Hickman". SFFWorld.com. Archived from the original on September 10, 2007. Retrieved 2009-02-20. ^ a b D'Ammassa, Don (2006). Encyclopedia of Fantasy and Horror Fiction. New York: Facts On File. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-4381-4063-6. ^ a b c Young, Hellen (2016). Race and Popular Fantasy Literature: Habits of Whiteness. New York, Oxon: Routledge. p. 42-43, 93. ISBN 978-1-138-85023-1. ^ Clements, Philip J. (December 2019). Dungeons & Discourse: Intersectional Identities in Dungeons & Dragons (Thesis). p. 113. Retrieved 2020-10-08. ^ Saricks, Joyce G. (2001). The Readers' Advisory Guide to Genre Fiction. ALA Editions. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-8389-0803-7. ^ Slavicsek, Bill; Baker, Rich; Grubb, Jeff (2006). Dungeons & Dragons For Dummies. Wiley Publishing. p. 373. ISBN 978-0-7645-8459-6. Retrieved 2009-02-12. ^ a b Oxoby, Marc (2003). The 1990s. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 148. ISBN 978-0-313-31615-9. dragonlance. ^ Maas, John-Michael (April 19, 2004). "Rival Fantasy Publishers Rally Around Star Author". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved 2009-02-19. ^ a b Hall, Melissa Mia (June 7, 2004). "Dragon Lady Keeps Flying". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved 2009-02-19. ^ Hartwell, David G.; Milton T. Wolf (1996). Visions of Wonder. MacMillan. ISBN 978-0-312-85287-0. Sources[edit] Wolf, Nadine (2010). Religious Concepts in Fantasy Literature. GRIN Verlag. ISBN 978-3640661428. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Dragonlance.com (Official Gaming Site) Dragonlance - Official The Fifth Age Online Comic Dragonlance Movie Site - official site for news about movies based on Dragonlance. v t e Dragonlance Fictional elements Characters Novels (main storyline) Chronicles Dragons of Autumn Twilight Dragons of Winter Night Dragons of Spring Dawning Legends Time of the Twins War of the Twins Test of the Twins The Second Generation Dragons of Summer Flame The War of Souls Dragons of a Fallen Sun Dragons of a Lost Star Dragons of a Vanished Moon Dark Disciple Amber and Ashes Amber and Iron Amber and Blood The Lost Chronicles Dragons of the Dwarven Depths Dragons of the Highlord Skies Dragons of the Hourglass Mage (entire list) By series name Chronological by author RPG-related DL series DL1 DL2 DL3 DL4 DL5 DL6 DL11 DL12 DL14 Dragonlance Adventures Leaves from the Inn of the Last Home Time of the Dragon (Taladas) Player's Guide to the Dragonlance Campaign (2E) Dragonlance Campaign Setting (3E) Modules and sourcebooks Major authors Margaret Weis works Tracy Hickman works Stan! Don Perrin Jean Rabe Other Comics Film Fifth Age SAGA System The New Adventures v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond