Dragon Bridge Crosses Ljubljanica River Locale Ljubljana, Slovenia Characteristics Design Arch bridge Longest span 33.34 metres (109.4 ft) History Opened 1901 The Dragon Bridge (Slovene: Zmajski most, historically also Zmajev most)[1] is a road bridge located in Ljubljana,[2] the capital of Slovenia. It crosses the Ljubljanica River.[3][4] between Kopitar Street (Kopitarjeva ulica) and Ressel Street (Resljeva cesta),[5] to the north of the Ljubljana Central Market at Vodnik Square.[6] It was built in the beginning of the 20th century, when Ljubljana was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. As one of the best examples of reinforced concrete bridges and of the Vienna Secession style, the bridge is today protected as a technical monument.[7] It is intended primarily for motorised traffic. Contents 1 Name 2 History 3 Architecture 4 Legend 5 References 6 External links Name[edit] The bridge was originally named The Jubilee Bridge of the Emperor Franz Josef I (German: Franz Josef I. Jubiläumsbrücke, Slovene: Franca Jožefa I. jubilejni most). In July 1919, it was renamed to Dragon Bridge.[5] History[edit] The Butchers' Bridge and Ressel Square before 1882 A postcard with a photograph of the unveiling of the Dragon Bridge in October 1901 Dragon statue on the bridge The bridge was built as part of a wider urban renovation of the town during the administration of the mayor Ivan Hribar.[2] It replaced an old oak bridge named the Butchers' Bridge (Mesarski most),[1] which was constructed in 1819[3] and damaged by a severe earthquake in 1895.[2] The new bridge was constructed of reinforced concrete.[3] Janez Koželj, a professor of urban design, expressed in 2010 his opinion that the new technology of reinforced concrete and new static calculations were used in Ljubljana instead of Vienna, because it meant minor consequences if they had not worked.[8] The new bridge was constructed upon the plans of Vienna company Pittel+Brausewetter based on a patent by Austrian engineer Josef Melan and the design by the company's architect Giorgio Zaninovich [sl], the graduate of Otto Wagner's school.[9] The works started on 1 July 1900 and were at first led by Austrian engineer Alexander Zabokrzycky, assisted by Filip Supančič from Ljubljana. After a dispute, the works were in April 1901 taken over by the architect Ciril Metod Koch, also from Ljubljana. The bridge was solemnly opened for traffic on 4 October 1901 by Anton Bonaventura Jeglič [sl], the Bishop of Ljubljana, in the presence of many distinguished guests, including Zaninović, Melan and Brausewetter.[9] The final works were completed until 1907. The dragons were designed by Zaninović and produced in the Vienna factory A. M. Beschorner. When the bridge was completed, it was dedicated to Franz Joseph I of the Habsburg Dynasty to commemorate forty years of his rule from 1848 to 1888.[7] In 1983 and 1984, the Dragon Bridge was renovated with lightweight concrete,[10] and its centenary was celebrated in 2001.[7] Architecture[edit] The Dragon Bridge, although significantly modelled after the Nußdorf weir,[9] is often regarded as the most beautiful bridge produced by the Vienna Secession.[7] It was one of Europe's earliest reinforced concrete bridges and the first such bridge in Ljubljana. It was the first bridge in Slovenia to be paved with asphalt.[3] When opened in 1901, it had the third largest arch in Europe at that time. The bridge is built to the "Melan System'"' invented by Josef Melan, which gained popularity particularly in the United States and Germany because the bridges could be built without a supporting stage.[7] Rigid truss arches made of iron are set into the reinforced concrete bridge.[7] The load-bearing core of the bridge was the truss iron framework during construction. After concreting this became a part of the supporting structure. Dragon Bridge is a triple-hinged arch bridge and has a span of 33.34 metres (109 ft 5 in).[7] Its style was designed by Jurij Zaninović.[3] He envisaged the concrete covering, the balustrades and the sheet-copper dragon statues of the bridge,[11] which is now a symbol of the city.[3] The chief attraction of the bridge are these four dragon statues standing on pedestals at its four corners.[12] In addition, the bridge is decorated by sixteen smaller dragon statues.[11] Legend[edit] There is a legend that Jason was the founder of Ljubljana, and he and his Argonauts killed a dragon.[13] This is one of the four dragon statues in the bridge.[13] According to local legends, when a virgin crosses the bridge, the dragons will wag their tails.[12][14] Some local people have nicknamed this structure "mother-in-law" because of its fiery nature.[12] References[edit] ^ a b Potočnik, A. (June 1927). "Ljubljana: b) Ljubljanski mostovi". Zvonček. 28 (10): 229. ISSN 1855-7287. ^ a b c Zmajski most at Structurae ^ a b c d e f The Dragon Bridge, the city's official tourist site. ^ Ljubljana – A lively city, safe under the wings of a dragon Archived 2008-04-10 at the Wayback Machine International Associations of Business Communicators (IABC) ^ a b "Kako so Ljubljančani pospravili za Habsburžani in se prikupili novim oblastnikom" [How the Residents of Ljubljana Cleaned After the Habsburgs and Won the New Authority Over]. MMC RTV Slovenija. RTV Slovenija. 10 March 2012. ^ Fallon, Steve (2010). Slovenia (6th ed.). Lonely Planet. p. 76. ISBN 9781741048575. ^ a b c d e f g Humar, Gorazd (September 2001). "World Famous Arch Bridges in Slovenia: The Dragon Bridge in Ljubljana (1901)". In Charles Abdunur (ed.). Arch'01: troisième Conférence internationale sur les ponts en arc Paris. Paris: Presses des Ponts. pp. 124–125. ISBN 2-85978-347-4. ^ Grujičić, Petra (11 September 2010). "Mostovi ne povezujejo samo rečnih bregov" [Bridges Do Not Only Link River Banks]. Delo. p. 20. ^ a b c Prelovšek, Damjan (1975). "Ljubljanski mostovi v drugi polovici 19. in v začetku 20. stoletja" [The Bridges of Ljubljana in the Second Half of the 19th Century and the First Half of the 20th Century]. Kronika: časopis za slovensko krajevno zgodovino [The Chronicle: The Newspaper for the Slovenian History of Places] (in Slovenian). Association of Slovenian Historical Societies, Section for the History of Places. 23 (1): 29–37. ISSN 0023-4923. ^ "Architectural Heritage: Ljubljana, Dragon Bridge". www.slovenia.info. Slovenian Tourist Board. Retrieved 2 April 2012. ^ a b "Med mostovi slovenske prestolnice" [Among the Bridges of the Slovenian Capital]. MMC RTV Slovenia (in Slovenian). RTV Slovenia. 28 March 2008. ^ a b c McKelvie, Robin; McKelvie, Jenny (2008). "What To See". Slovenia: The Bradt Travel Guide. Bradt Travel Guides. p. 75. ISBN 978-1-84162-119-7. ^ a b Walter Cummins; Thomas E. Kennedy (2005). The Literary Traveler. Del Sol Press. p. 62. ISBN 0-9748229-3-0. ^ Fallon, Steve (2004). Slovenia. Lonely Planet. p. 65. ISBN 1-74104-161-9. External links[edit] Media related to Dragon Bridge Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons Coordinates: 46°03′07″N 14°30′37″E﻿ / ﻿46.051947°N 14.510241°E﻿ / 46.051947; 14.510241 v t e Bridges in Slovenia Ljubljana Butchers' Bridge Cobblers' Bridge Črnuče Bridge Dragon Bridge Fabiani Bridge Fužine Bridge Grain Bridge Hradecky Bridge Jek Bridge Kavšek Bridge Ljubljanica Sluice Gate Prule Bridge Rooster Bridge St. James's Bridge St. Peter's Bridge Triple Bridge Trnovo Bridge Maribor Old Bridge List of bridges in Maribor Elsewhere Črni Kal Viaduct Kandija Bridge Puch Bridge Solkan Bridge Stampetta Bridge v t e City Municipality of Ljubljana Administrative centre Ljubljana Districts Bežigrad Center Črnuče Dravlje Golovec Jarše Moste Polje Posavje Rožnik Rudnik Šentvid Šiška Šmarna Gora Sostro Trnovo Vič Economy and transport BTC City Central Market Emonika Exhibition and Convention Centre Ljubljana Castle funicular Ljubljana Passenger Transport Ljubljana railway station Ljubljana Ring Road Ljubljana Stock Exchange Nama Trams Landmarks Bridges Butchers' Bridge Cobblers' Bridge Črnuče Bridge Dragon Bridge Fabiani Bridge Fužine Bridge Grain Bridge Hradecky Bridge Jek Bridge Kavšek Bridge Ljubljanica Sluice Gate Prule Bridge Rooster Bridge St. James's Bridge St. Peter's Bridge Triple Bridge Monuments, memorials and fountains General Maister Monument (Brdar) Monument to the Victims of All Wars Prešeren Monument Robba Fountain Tomb of National Heroes Trail of Remembrance and Comradeship Vodnik Monument Palaces and houses Casino Building Cekin Mansion Central Pharmacy Courthouse Crystal Palace Government Building and President's Office Grand Hotel Union Gruber Mansion Kresija Building Ljubljana Castle Mladika Complex National Assembly Building Nebotičnik Philip Mansion Selo Mansion Souvan House Stična Mansion Tivoli Castle Town Hall Zois Mansion Churches and places of worship Franciscan Church Ljubljana Mosque St. Bartholomew's Church St. Florian's Church St. James's Church Ljubljana Cathedral St. Peter's Church St. Rosalia's Church (former) Sts. Cyril and Methodius Church Ursuline Church Visitation of Mary Church Cemeteries Navje Memorial Park Žale Parks, ponds, squares, and streets Parks Argentina Park Navje Memorial Park Tivoli Park Ponds Koseze Pond Tivoli Pond Squares Congress Square Prešeren Square Republic Square Town Square Vodnik Square Streets Čop Street Protected areas Landscape parks Ljubljana Marshes Tivoli–Rožnik–Šiška Hill Landscape Park Nature reserves Mostec Natural monuments Castle Hill Little Rožnik Pod Turnom Designed nature monuments Tivoli City Park Trail of Remembrance and Comradeship Hills and valleys Kucja Valley Mount Saint Mary Rožnik Culture, science, and education Anton Melik Geographical Institute Archives of the Republic of Slovenia Biennial of Graphic Arts Botanical Garden Cankar Centre Rog factory International Centre of Graphic Arts Jakopič Pavilion Jožef Stefan Institute Ljubljana International Film Festival Kiberpipa Križanke Ljubljana Slovene National Theatre Drama Ljubljana Slovene National Theatre Opera and Ballet Ljubljana Opera House Ljubljana Summer Festival Metelkova Museum of Contemporary History Museum of Modern Art The Naked Stage National Gallery National and University Library National Museum Poligon Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts Natural History Museum Slovenian Philharmonic Orchestra Slovenian Railway Museum St. Stanislaus Institute University of Ljubljana Zoo Sports Events Ljubljana Marathon Clubs ACH Volley HK Olimpija KD Ilirija KD Slovan KK Cedevita Olimpija KK Olimpija KK Parklji ŽKD Ježica Ljubljana Matica Alpine Club ND Ilirija 1911 ND Slovan NK Bravo NK IB 1975 Ljubljana NK Krim NK Olimpija Ljubljana NK Svoboda Ljubljana NK Šmartno RD Slovan RK Krim RK Olimpija ŽNK Olimpija Ljubljana Venues Bežigrad Stadium Tivoli Hall Kodeljevo Sports Park Ljubljana Hippodrome Štefan Bele Sports Park Stožice Sports Park: (Stožice Stadium Arena Stožice) Tacen Whitewater Course Ljubljana Sports Park Health-related institutions Medical Centre Lists of people related to Ljubljana List of people from Ljubljana List of University of Ljubljana people Settlements besides the administrative centre Besnica Brezje pri Lipoglavu Češnjica Črna Vas Dolgo Brdo Dvor Gabrje pri Jančah Janče Javor Lipe Mali Lipoglav Mali Vrh pri Prežganju Malo Trebeljevo Medno Pance Podgrad Podlipoglav Podmolnik Prežganje Rašica Ravno Brdo Repče Sadinja Vas Selo pri Pancah Šentpavel Spodnje Gameljne Srednje Gameljne Stanežiče Toško Čelo Tuji Grm Veliki Lipoglav Veliko Trebeljevo Vnajnarje Volavlje Zagradišče Zgornja Besnica Zgornje Gameljne Former settlements Bizovik Bokalce Brod (Črnuče District) Brod (Šentvid District) Črnuče Dobrava pri Črnučah Dobrunje Dolnice Dravlje Fužine Glince Glinica Gmajna Grič Gunclje Hradeckega Vas Hrastje Jarše Ježa Ježica Kamna Gorica Kleče Koseze Kozarje Laze Mala Vas Moste Nadgorica Obrije Podboršt Podgora Podgorica pri Črnučah Podutik Poljane (Šentvid District) Polje Pržan Rožna Dolina Rudnik Savlje Selo Šentjakob ob Savi Šentvid Slape Šmartno ob Savi Šmartno pod Šmarno Goro Sneberje Sostro Soteska Spodnja Hrušica Spodnja Šiška Spodnja Zadobrova Spodnji Kašelj Štepanja Vas Stožice Studenec Tacen Tomačevo Trata Vevče Vič Vižmarje Vodmat Vrhovci Zadvor Zalog Zapuže Zavoglje Zgornja Hrušica Zgornja Šiška Zgornja Zadobrova Zgornji Kašelj History Timeline