For other uses, see Dragonslayer (disambiguation). Saint George slaying the dragon, as depicted by Paolo Uccello, c. 1470 A dragonslayer is a person or being that slays dragons. Dragonslayers and the creatures they hunt have been popular in traditional stories from around the world: they are a type of story classified as type 300 in the Aarne–Thompson classification system.[1] They continue to be popular in modern books, films, video-games and other entertainments. Dragonslayer-themed stories are also sometimes seen as having a chaoskampf theme - in which a heroic figure struggles against a monster that epitomises chaos. Contents 1 Description 2 Dragonslayer characters 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Description[edit] Andromeda Chained to a Rock by Gustave Doré (1869). A dragonslayer is often the hero in a "Princess and dragon" tale. In this type of story, the dragonslayer kills the dragon in order to rescue a high-class female character, often a princess, from being devoured by it. This female character often then becomes the love interest of the account. One notable example of this kind of legend is the story of Ragnar Loðbrók, who slays a giant serpent, thereby rescuing the maiden, Þóra borgarhjörtr, whom he later marries. There are, however, several notable exceptions to this common motif. In the legend of Saint George and the Dragon, for example, Saint George overcomes the dragon as part of a plot which ends with the conversion of the dragon's grateful victims to Christianity, rather than Saint George being married to the rescued princess character. In a Norse legend from the Völsunga saga, the dragonslayer, Sigurd, kills Fafnir - a dwarf who has been turned into a dragon as a result of guarding the cursed ring that had once belonged to the dwarf, Andvari. After slaying the dragon, Sigurd drinks some of the dragon's blood and thereby gains the ability to understand the speech of birds. He also bathes in the dragon's blood, causing his skin to become invulnerable. Sigurd overhears two nearby birds discussing the heinous treachery being planned by his companion, Regin. In response to the plot, Sigurd kills Regin, thereby averting the treachery.[2] Mythologists such as Joseph Campbell have argued that dragonslayer myths can be seen as a psychological metaphor:[3] "But as Siegfried [Sigurd] learned, he must then taste the dragon blood, in order to take to himself something of that dragon power. When Siegfried has killed the dragon and tasted the blood, he hears the song of nature. he has transcended his humanity and re-associated himself with the powers of nature, which are powers of our life, and from which our minds remove us. ...Psychologically, the dragon is one's own binding of oneself to one's own ego." [4] Dragonslayer characters[edit] Susanoo slaying the Yamata no Orochi, by Kuniteru The dragonslayer (Copper door 1974) by German artist Klaus Rudolf Werhand Antiquity Enki Ninurta Inanna Marduk Ra Teshub Indra Baal El (deity) Yahweh Archangel Michael Apollo Zeus Jupiter Perseus Heracles Saint George Vahagn Tarḫunz Cadmus Rostam Fereydun Garshasp Yu the Great Erlang Shen Li Ji Eurybarus Mwindo Medieval and early Modern legend Guy of Warwick Baldr Beowulf Sigurd or Siegfried Tristan Margaret the Virgin Heinrich von Winkelried Gawain Dobrynya Nikitich Skuba Dratewka/Krakus Drangue Susanoo Nezha Lancelot Făt-Frumos Fráech Bayajidda Bahrām Gūr Iovan Iorgovan Haymon Tokoyo Wada Heita Tanenaga John Lambton Mamadi Sefe Dekote (Africa) Benzaiten aka Saraswati Teodosio de Goñi Tolkien's legendarium Túrin Turambar Eärendil Fram Bard the Bowman References[edit] ^ Thompson, Stith. The Folktale. University of California Press. 1977. p. 27. ISBN 0-520-03537-2 ^ Byock, Jesse L. (1990). Saga of the Volsungs: The Norse Epic of Sigurd the Dragon Slayer. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-23285-2. ^ The Power of Myth, Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyes, Anchor Books 1988 ISBN 978-0-307-79472-7 ^ The Power of Myth, Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyes, Anchor Books 1988 ISBN 978-0-307-79472-7 Further reading[edit] Davis, S. "Argeiphontes in Homer--The Dragon-Slayer." Greece & Rome 22, no. 64 (1953): 33-38. www.jstor.org/stable/640827. d'Huy, Julien. (2013). Le motif du dragon serait paléolithique : mythologie et archéologie. Préhistoire du Sud-Ouest. 21. pp. 195–215. d'Huy, Julien. (2014). Mythologie et statistique. Reconstructions, évolution et origines paléolithiques du combat contre le dragon. In: Mythologie française. pp. 17–23. Hart, Donn V., and Harriett C. Hart. "A Philippine Version of "The Two Brothers and the Dragon Slayer" Tale." Western Folklore 19, no. 4 (1960): 263-75. doi:10.2307/1497353. Järv, Risto. "“The Three Suitors of the King's Daughter": character roles in the Estonian versions of the Dragon Slayer (AT 300)". In: Folklore 22 (2002). pp. 33-48. https://www.folklore.ee/folklore/vol22/dragons.pdf Márkus-Takeshita, Kinga Ilona. "From Iranian Myth to Folk Narrative: The Legend of the Dragon-Slayer and the Spinning Maiden in the Persian Book of the Kings." Asian Folklore Studies 60, no. 2 (2001): 203-14. doi:10.2307/1179054. Ramsey, Jarold. "Ti-Jean and the Seven-headed Dragon: Instances of Native American Assimilation of European Folklore." In Reading the Fire: The Traditional Indian Literatures of America, 222-36. Seattle; London: University of Washington Press, 1999. www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvcwn26j.18. Róheim, Géza. "THE DRAGON AND THE HERO." American Imago 1, no. 2 (1940): 40-69. www.jstor.org/stable/26300857. Róheim, Géza. "THE DRAGON AND THE HERO (Part Two)." American Imago 1, no. 3 (1940): 61-94. www.jstor.org/stable/26300866. Simpson, Jacqueline. "Fifty British Dragon Tales: An Analysis." In: Folklore 89, no. 1 (1978): 79-93. www.jstor.org/stable/1260098. SMITH, KAREN P. "SERPENT-DAMSELS AND DRAGON-SLAYERS: OVERLAPPING DIVINITIES IN A MEDIEVAL TRADITION." In Christian Demonology and Popular, edited by Klaniczay Gábor and Pócs Éva, by Csonka-Takács Eszter, 121-38. Central European University Press, 2006. www.jstor.org/stable/10.7829/j.ctt2jbmrh.10. VAN DER SCHAAF, BAUKJE FINET, Ruth Ditzel, and Erik Kooper. "The "Lai De Tyolet" and "Lancelot and the Whitefooted Stag": Two Romances Based on a Folktale Motif." Arthuriana 4, no. 3 (1994): 233-49. Accessed June 16, 2020. www.jstor.org/stable/27869068. Vaz Da Silva, Francisco. "Iberian Seventh-Born Children, Werewolves, and the Dragon Slayer: A Case Study in the Comparative Interpretation of Symbolic Praxis and Fairytales." Folklore 114, no. 3 (2003): 335-53. www.jstor.org/stable/30035123. Witzel, Michael. (2008). Slaying the Dragon across Eurasia. In: In Hot Pursuit of Language in Prehistory. pp. 263–286. 10.1075/z.145.21wit. External links[edit] Media related to Dragonslayers Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Stock characters By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Supersoldier Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Harlequin Zanni Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Social Darwinist Dark Lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer toy Skeleton Swamp monster Vampires Zombies Other Alazon Archenemy Igor Masked Mystery Villain Miser By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Magical Negro Young Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Himbo Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Moleman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent cliques Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Pop icon Redshirt Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Village idiot White savior Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125