This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) For the Tang dynasty pagoda in Shandong province, see Dragon-and-Tiger Pagoda. Dragon and Tiger Pagodas 龍虎塔 Location Location Zuoying, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Architecture Type Temple Completed 1976 The Dragon and Tiger Pagodas (Chinese: 龍虎塔; pinyin: Lónghǔ Tǎ) is a temple located at Lotus Lake in Zuoying District, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. The temple was built in 1976. One of the towers is the Tiger Tower, the other one being the Dragon tower.[1] The seven story tower has yellow walls, red pillars and orange tiles. The front connects to the shore with a bridge.[which?] There are paintings inside the temple depicting Ksitigarbha. In the Tiger Tower, there are paintings of twelve Magi and the Jade Emperor's thirty palaces as well as paintings of Confucius. The towers have a double spiral staircase, one each for ascending and descending visitors. This building is representative of traditional Kaohsiung culture. Overlooking the towers are the Small Tortoise mountains, Spring and Autumn Pavilions, 5-mile Pavilion and Pei Chi Pavilion, as well as a surrounding lake. See also[edit] List of tourist attractions in Taiwan References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dragon and Tiger Pagodas. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) ^ http://eng.taiwan.net.tw/m1.aspx?sNo=0002121&id=R157 v t e Kaohsiung City Districts Alian Cianjhen Cianjin Ciaotou Cijin Cishan Daliao Dashu Dashe Fongshan Gangshan Gushan Hunei Jiasian Lingya Linyuan Liouguei Lujhu Meinong Maolin¹ Mituo Namasia¹ Nanzih Neimen Niaosong Qieding Renwu Sanmin Shanlin Siaogang Sinsing Taoyuan¹ Tianliao Yancheng Yanchao Yong'an Zihguan Zuoying Attractions Historical sites Former British Consulate at Takao Holy Rosary Cathedral Museums Chung Li-he Museum Cijin Shell Museum Kaohsiung Astronomical Museum Kaohsiung Hakka Cultural Museum Kaohsiung Harbor Museum Kaohsiung Museum of Fine Arts Kaohsiung Museum of History Kaohsiung Museum of Labor Meinong Hakka Culture Museum National Science and Technology Museum Republic of China Air Force Museum Soya-Mixed Meat Museum Taiwan Sugar Museum Takao Railway Museum YM Museum of Marine Exploration Kaohsiung Others 85 Sky Tower Chang-Gu World Trade Center Cijin–Gushan ferry Dragon and Tiger Pagodas Dream Mall Kaohsiung Fisherman's Wharf Kaohsiung International Airport Liuhe Night Market Lotus Pond Love River Pratas Islands Shou Shan Zoo Urban Spotlight Arcade Education Public universities National Kaohsiung University of Science and Technology National Kaohsiung Normal University National Kaohsiung University of Hospitality and Tourism National Sun Yat-sen University National University of Kaohsiung Other schools Chung Shan Industrial and Commercial School Kaohsiung American School Kaohsiung Japanese School Kaohsiung Medical University Municipal Kaohsiung Girls' Senior High School Municipal Kaohsiung Senior High School ¹ — Mountain indigenous district Coordinates: 22°40′50″N 120°17′33″E﻿ / ﻿22.68056°N 120.29250°E﻿ / 22.68056; 120.29250 This article about a religious building or structure in Taiwan is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e