One of the two original statues from the Coal Exchange, relocated to Victoria Embankment. Wikimedia Commons has media related to City of London Dragon boundary marks. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) The dragon boundary marks are cast iron statues of dragons on metal or stone plinths that mark the boundaries of the City of London. The dragons are painted silver, with details of their wings and tongue picked out in red. The dragon stands on one rear leg, the other lifted against a shield, with the right foreleg raised and the left foreleg holding a shield which bears the City of London's coat of arms, painted in red and white. This stance is the equivalent of the rampant heraldic attitude of the supporters of the City's arms. Contents 1 Design 2 Locations 3 Gallery 4 References Design[edit] The design is based on two large dragon sculptures, 7 feet (210 cm) high, which were mounted above the entrance to the Coal Exchange on Lower Thames Street,[1][2] designed by the City Architect, J. B. Bunning, and made by the London founder Dewer in 1849. The dragons were preserved when the Coal Exchange was demolished in 1962–3. The two original statues were re-erected on 6 feet (180 cm) high plinths of Portland stone at the western boundary of the City, by Temple Gardens on Victoria Embankment, in October 1963. The Corporation of London's Streets Committee selected the statues as the model for boundary markers for the city in 1964, in preference to the fiercer dragon by C. B. Birch at Temple Bar on Fleet Street. Locations[edit] There are thirteen Dragons around the City of London.[3] Half-size replicas of the original pair of dragons made by Birmingham Guild Limited were erected at main entrances to the City of London in the late 1960s. [4] In addition to the Birch dragon at Temple Bar, and the two original Coal Exchange statues on Victoria Embankment, there are two replicas of the Coal Exchange dragon at the south end of London Bridge, two on High Holborn near Gray's Inn Road, and single replicas on Aldgate High Street, Bishopsgate, Byward Street, Moorgate, Goswell Road (north of Aldersgate Street), Farringdon Street, and at the south end of Blackfriars Bridge. Outside London, there is also a replica at Lake Havasu City, Arizona, where the 19th century London Bridge was reconstructed in 1971. Gallery[edit] One of the two original statues from the Coal Exchange Smaller replica version on Holborn Dragon at Temple Bar, to a different design Example in Lake Havasu City, Arizona References[edit] This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (March 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Public sculpture of the city of London; Philip Ward-Jackson; Liverpool University Press, 2003; ISBN 0-85323-977-0, pp. 422–3 ^ London, Emm in. "City of London Boundary Dragons | Emm in London". Retrieved 2020-04-23. ^ Christopher Hibbert; Ben Weinreb; Julia Keay (2008). The London Encyclopaedia. John Keay. Macmillan. p. 974. ISBN 978-1-4050-4924-5. ^ "City of London Boundary Dragons". www.seiryu.org.uk. Retrieved 2020-04-23. ^ "City Dragon". Save our Statues. Public Monuments and Sculpture Association. Archived from the original on 2004-11-12. Retrieved 2020-04-23. v t e Public art and memorials in London Portrait sculpture British/English royalty Boudica Richard I Queen Eleanor (Charing Cross) Edward VI Thomas Cartwright Peter Scheemakers Charles I Charles II Chelsea Soho Stocks Market James II William III Anne St Paul's Westminster George III George IV King's Cross Trafalgar Square Duke of York Duke of Cambridge Victoria Kensington Palace Victoria Memorial Prince Albert Albert Memorial Memorial to the Great Exhibition George V George VI Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother See also: Oliver Cromwell Arts John Betjeman Marc Bolan Robert Burns Charlie Chaplin Geoffrey Chaucer Agatha Christie John Donne Henry Irving John Milton George Orwell Joshua Reynolds William Shakespeare Heminges and Condell Memorial Leicester Square Park Lane Arthur Sullivan Oscar Wilde Amy Winehouse Explorers James Cook Yuri Gagarin Merchants John Cass Thomas Guy Quintin Hogg Robert Milligan Hugh Myddelton Military Lord Alanbrooke Lord Baden-Powell Ferdinand Foch Charles George Gordon Earl Haig Henry Havelock Lord Kitchener Lord Montgomery Lord Mountbatten Charles James Napier Admiral Lord Nelson (Nelson's Column) James Outram Lord Roberts Viscount Slim Duke of Wellington City Hyde Park Corner George Stuart White Lord Wolseley Nurses Edith Cavell Florence Nightingale Mary Seacole Politics British Prime ministers George Canning Winston Churchill Lord Derby Benjamin Disraeli David Lloyd George Lord Palmerston Robert Peel Other politicians Robert Clayton Robert Clive Duke of Devonshire Charles James Fox Henry Bartle Frere Sidney Herbert Marquess of Westminster Social reformers and humanitarians Thomas Barnardo Millicent Fawcett Wilfrid Lawson Margaret MacDonald Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst Sylvia Pankhurst Robert Raikes Raoul Wallenberg International Simón Bolívar Mahatma Gandhi Bloomsbury Westminster Haile Selassie John F. Kennedy Abraham Lincoln Nelson Mandela José de San Martín Karl Marx Jan Smuts Trajan Volodymyr George Washington Religion Thomas Becket John Henry Newman John Wesley St Paul's Shoreditch Science and engineering Joseph Bazalgette Isambard Kingdom Brunel Sigmund Freud James Henry Greathead Nigel Gresley Edward Jenner Joseph Lister Isaac Newton Robert Stephenson Sport Bobby Moore Upton Park—with Geoff Hurst, Martin Peters and Ray Wilson Wembley Fictional characters Paddington Bear Peter Pan Sherlock Holmes See also Talking Statues Statues in London on Wikimedia Commons Other monuments and memorials 7 July bombings Queen Alexandra Anti–Air War Bali bombings Lady Burdett-Coutts Lord Cheylesmore Cleopatra's Needle Conscientious Objectors COVID-19 pandemic Michael Faraday Firefighters W. G. Grace Great Fire of London Golden Boy of Pye Corner The Monument Heroic Self-Sacrifice Journalists Police Queen Elizabeth Gate Silver Jubilee Crystal Crown Star and Garter Home Stratford Martyrs Suffragettes Wellington Arch Wellington Monument Whittington Stone Mary Wollstonecraft War memorials Pre-C20 Animals in War Guards Brigade (Crimean War) Gurkhas (1816–) Marble Arch New Zealand Campaign (1863–1864) Siege of Cádiz Westminster School Boer Wars 61st Battery Royal Field Artillery (Woolwich) Barnet Boys School Royal Artillery (The Mall) Royal Marines WWI · WWII Primary: Cenotaph Africa and the Caribbean Australia Battle of Britain Belgium Blood Swept Lands and Seas of Red Burma Railway Canada La Délivrance Flanders Fields Memorial Garden Malta Memorial Gates Merchant Navy Ships named on the memorial New Zealand Poland South Africa Submarines Women of World War II Regimental 24th East Surrey Division Cavalry Chindits Civil Service Rifles Eagle Squadrons Fleet Air Arm Guards Brigade Imperial Camel Corps Machine Gun Corps Rifle Brigade Royal Air Force RAF Bomber Command Royal Artillery Royal Fusiliers Royal Naval Division Royal Tank Regiment Local Primary: London Troops Arkley Bromley parish Chingford Chipping Barnet Cockfosters Croydon East Barnet Enfield Town (3 memorials) Finchley Friern Barnet (parish) Fulham Golders Green Hampstead Hampton Wick Hendon Hornsey Islington Kingston Monken Hadley New Barnet Paddington Poplar Rainham Richmond St Michael, Cornhill (parish) St Saviour, Southwark (parish) Silvertown Streatham Twickenham Wood Green Corporate Baltic Exchange Bank of England British Medical Association Dulwich College Old New Great Eastern Railway Great Western Railway Lincoln's Inn London and North Western Railway London, Brighton and South Coast Railway South Suburban Gas Company Holocaust Primary: Victoria Tower Gardens (planned) Hyde Park Kindertransport Post-WWII Victims of Communism Korean War Iraq and Afghanistan Blue plaques Camden Kensington and Chelsea City of Westminster Other works Sculptures ArcelorMittal Orbit Atalanta The Barbican Muse Bellerophon Taming Pegasus The Bermondsey Lion Big 4 Bull The Burghers of Calais Christ Child Crystal Palace Dinosaurs The Diver Dolphin lamp standards Dragon boundary marks Elfin Oak Father Time Fourth plinth, Trafalgar Square Fulcrum The Gold Smelters Gorilla Homage to Leonardo Icarus Labyrinth London Noses London Pride The Meeting Place The Messenger Millennium Dial The Naked Ladies The Neighbours Nike Paternoster Vents Physical Energy Platforms Piece Pope's Urn Putney Sculpture Trail Quantum Cloud The Queen's Beasts The Rush of Green St Paul's Cross A Slice of Reality Slipstream South Bank Lion Still Water Traffic Light Tree Union (Horse with Two Discs) The Watchers The World Turned Upside Down The Young Lovers Elisabeth Frink Blind Beggar and His Dog Horse and Rider Paternoster Barbara Hepworth Meridian Single Form (Memorial) Two Forms (Divided Circle) Winged Figure Henry Moore The Arch 1979–1980 Draped Seated Woman 1957–58 Knife Edge Two Piece 1962–65 Large Standing Figure (Knife Edge) Locking Piece Three Standing Figures 1947 Eduardo Paolozzi The Artist as Hephaestus Piscator Fountains Buxton Memorial Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fountain Diana Fountain, Bushy Park Diana Fountain, Green Park Edward VII Jewish Memorial Fountain Henry Fawcett Memorial The Horses of Helios Guilford Place Matilda Fountain Poets' Fountain Readymoney Drinking Fountain Revolving Torsion Roehampton St Lawrence Jewry and St Mary Magdalene Shaftesbury Memorial ("Eros") Lady Henry Somerset Memorial Victoria Park Murals Brixton Cable Street Dulwich Old Kent Road National Covid Memorial Wall Poplar Rates Rebellion Poured Lines Sutton twin towns Sutton Heritage Mosaic Banksy Girl with Balloon One Nation Under CCTV Pulp Fiction Slave Labour Land art Northala Fields See also Art on the Underground Tube map covers London Mural Preservation Society Metropolitan Drinking Fountain and Cattle Trough Association By location City of Westminster Belgravia1 Covent Garden2 Green Park Hyde Park Kensington1 Kensington Gardens1 Knightsbridge1 Mayfair Millbank Paddington Pimlico St James's St Marylebone Soho Strand Trafalgar Square Victoria Victoria Embankment3 Westminster Whitehall 1 Partly in Kensington and Chelsea 2 Partly in Camden 3 Partly in the City of London City of London Barking and Dagenham Barnet Bexley Brent Bromley Camden Croydon Ealing Enfield Greenwich Hackney Hammersmith and Fulham Haringey Harrow Havering Hillingdon Hounslow Islington Kensington and Chelsea Kingston Lambeth Lewisham Merton Newham Redbridge Richmond Southwark Sutton Tower Hamlets Waltham Forest Wandsworth Key: No longer extant, on public display or in London (see List of public art formerly in London)