Look up Dragon, dragon, dragón, or drag on in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. A dragon is a legendary creature, typically with reptile-like traits. Dragon may also refer to: Contents 1 Places 1.1 Extra-terrestrial 1.2 Terrestrial 2 People 3 Arts and entertainment 3.1 Characters and fictional entities 3.2 Films 3.3 Gaming 3.4 Literature 3.4.1 Periodicals 3.5 Music 3.5.1 Groups 3.5.2 Labels 3.5.3 Albums 3.5.4 Songs 3.6 Roller coasters 3.7 Television 3.8 Other arts and entertainment 4 Biology 5 Brands and enterprises 6 Education 7 Mathematics and computing 8 Military 9 Nobility and royalty 10 Sports teams 10.1 Africa 10.2 Asia 10.3 Europe 10.4 North America 10.5 Oceania 11 Transport 11.1 Air 11.2 Land 11.3 Space 11.4 Water 12 Other uses 13 See also Places[edit] Extra-terrestrial[edit] Draco (constellation) (Latin for Dragon), a constellation in the far northern sky The Dragon, a grouping of galaxies in the field of Abell 370 Terrestrial[edit] Dragon, Utah, United States, a ghost town Dragon Cone, a volcano in the British Columbia, Canada Dragon Hill, Uffington, a mountain in England "The Dragon", a section of U.S. Route 129 between Deals Gap, North Carolina and Punkin Center, Tennessee, in the United States People[edit] Vlad II Dracul (1390–1447), duke of Wallachia, nicknamed "Vlad the Dragon" Goran Dragić (born 1986), Slovenian basketball player Carmen Dragon (1914–1984), American conductor and composer Daryl Dragon (1942–2019), American musician, one half of the duo Captain & Tennille; son of Carmen Dragon Tatsumi Fujinami (born 1953), Japanese professional wrestler, nicknamed "The Dragon" Bruce Lee (1940–1973), Chinese actor and martial artist, nicknamed "The Dragon" Lyoto Machida (born 1978), Brazilian martial artist, nicknamed "The Dragon" Ricky Steamboat (born 1953), American professional wrestler, nicknamed "The Dragon" Matthew Stevens, Welsh snooker player nicknamed "The Welsh Dragon" Don "The Dragon" Wilson (born 1954), American champion kickboxer and actor Ryuji Kumita (born 1967), Japanese racing driver who uses the pseudonym "Dragon" Arts and entertainment[edit] Characters and fictional entities[edit] Dragon (Dungeons & Dragons), a monstrous creature Dragon (Middle-earth), a type of fictional character in J. R. R. Tolkien's books Dragon (Shrek), a character in Shrek Dragon, a member of Gen13 Dragon, the leading character in the Image Comics title Savage Dragon Dragons (Dragon Prince), mythical beasts Dragons (Pern), by Anne McCaffrey The Dragon (Beowulf) Richard Dragon, a DC Comics character Dragon Shiryū, a Saint Seiya character Dragon (One Piece) Films[edit] The Dragon (1916 film), directed by Harry A. Pollard Dragon (2006 film), an action/fantasy film Dragon (2011 film), a Hong Kong-Chinese martial arts thriller Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story, a 1993 biographical film Dragons 3D, a 2013 IMAX film starring Max von Sydow Dragons: Fire and Ice (2004 film), animated Mega-Blocks film Gaming[edit] Dragon, a version of the video game Mega Man Star Force Dragon tiles, a type of honor tile in mahjong Sicilian Defence, Dragon Variation, a chess opening Literature[edit] Dragon (Brust novel), a 1998 novel by Steven Brust Dragon (Cussler novel), a 1990 novel by Clive Cussler Dragon (fantasy series), fantasy novels by Laurence Yep (1982–1992) "Dragon" (Kalapugama short story), by Anandasiri Kalapugama (1975) Dragon (poem), by Aleksey Tolstoy (1875) "The Dragon" (poem), by Abd al-Wahhab Al-Bayyati (1996) "Dragon: the Old Potter's Tale", a short story by Ryūnosuke Akutagawa (1919) The Dragon (fairy tale), an Italian fairy tale "The Dragon" (short story), by Ray Bradbury (1955) The Dragons, a 1996 fantasy novel by Douglas Niles Periodicals[edit] Dragon (magazine), a Dungeons & Dragons magazine Dragon Magazine (Fujimi Shobo), a Japanese light novel magazine (1988-current) Music[edit] Groups[edit] Dragon (band), a New Zealand/Australian rock group Dragons (band), an English group The Dragons (band), an American rock group Labels[edit] Dragon Records, a Swedish jazz record label Albums[edit] Dragon (Loudness album) Dragon (Jake Shimabukuro album) The Dragon (album), by Vangelis Songs[edit] "Dragon", by Martin Garrix "Dragon", by Miriam Bryant "Dragon", by the Sugarcubes from Life's Too Good "Dragons", by Caravan Palace from Caravan Palace Roller coasters[edit] Dragon (Adventureland), in Altoona, Iowa Dragon Challenge, in Orlando, Florida Dragon Coaster (Playland), in Rye, New York The Dragon, Ocean Park Hong Kong, in Hong Kong, China Television[edit] Dragon Television, a Chinese provincial satellite TV station Dragon (TV series), a Canadian children's TV program DreamWorks Dragons, a TV series based on How to Train Your Dragon "The Dragon" (Arrow), nineteenth episode of the 2018 sixth season of the TV show Arrow Other arts and entertainment[edit] Dragon (M. C. Escher), a 1952 wood-engraving print by M. C. Escher The Dragon (theatre play), by Evgeny Shvarts (1944) Biology[edit] DRAGON (protein), a membrane receptor protein Draco volans, commonly known as the flying dragon, a species of lizard endemic to Southeast Asia Komodo dragon, a large species of lizard found in the Indonesian islands of Komodo Pogona, a genus of Australian lizards commonly called "bearded dragons" Many species of the lizard genus Ctenophorus Tarragon which is called dragon in several languages including its Latin name Brands and enterprises[edit] Cathay Dragon, an international airline based in Hong Kong, previously known as Dragonair Dragon Models Limited, a toy manufacturer Dragon Petroleum, a Welsh fuel company Education[edit] Dragon School, a British preparatory school in Oxford, England The Dragon Academy, a private school in Ontario, Canada Mathematics and computing[edit] Dragon (cipher) Dragon (remote sensing) AMD Dragon, a platform engineered for gamers Comodo Dragon, a freeware web browser Dragon 32/64, the names of two 1980s home computers Dragon chip, a line of Chinese CPUs Dragon curve, a family of fractal curves Dragon Data, a Welsh computer manufacturer Dragon NaturallySpeaking, a speech recognition software package DRAKON (Russian: ДРАКОН, "dragon"), a programming language used in flight controllers for rockets and space vehicles Military[edit] Dragon (firearm), the short version of the blunderbuss "Dragons", a USMC helicopter squadron (see: VMM-265) Focke-Achgelis Fa 223, German World War II helicopter, known in English as Dragon HMS Dragon, the name of at least 14 ships (and a building) of the English/British Navy M47 Dragon, an American anti-tank missile system The Dragons, a display team consisting of 4 x Hawker Hunters of No. 4 Flying Training School RAF, during 1973 USS Dragon (1861), a Union Navy steamer during the American Civil War Dragón, a Spanish development of the Mowag Piranha V Wheeled Infantry Fighting Vehicle Nobility and royalty[edit] Dragon Throne, the throne of the Emperor of China Order of the Dragon, a former monarchical chivalric order Sports teams[edit] Africa[edit] AS Dragons, a soccer team in the Democratic Republic of the Congo AS Dragons FC de l'Ouémé, a soccer team in Benin Dragón FC, a soccer team in Equatorial Guinea Asia[edit] CEC Dragons, the sports teams of the Cebu Eastern College in the Philippines China Dragon, an ice hockey team in China Chunichi Dragons, a baseball team in Japan Jeonnam Dragons (formerly spelled as Chunnam Dragons), a football team in South Korea Jiangsu Dragons, a Chinese Basketball Association team Shanghai Dragons, an Overwatch eSports team in China Sichuan Dragons, a baseball team in China Welcoat Dragons, a basketball team in the Philippines Europe[edit] AS Dragon (Guadeloupe), an association football team Barcelona Dragons, an American football team in Spain Catalans Dragons, a rugby league club in France Celtic Dragons, a netball team in Wales, U.K. Delft Dragons, an American football team in the Netherlands Dragons (rugby union), a rugby union team in South East Wales, U.K. Dragons de Rouen, an ice hockey team in France Dragons Rhöndorf, a German basketball team Dublin Dragons, an American football team in Ireland Dudelange Dragons, an American football team in Luxembourg Glamorgan Dragons, a cricket team in the United Kingdom KHC Dragons, a field hockey club in Belgium RC Dragon Brno, a rugby union team in the Czech Republic Wrexham A.F.C., a Welsh association football team known as the Red Dragons North America[edit] C.D. Dragón, a soccer team in El Salvador Chesapeake Dragons, a soccer team in the U.S. Dayton Dragons, a baseball team in the U.S. Dragon Racing, an American auto racing team Dragons, nickname of sports teams at Jefferson High School in Jefferson, Georgia in the U.S. Dragons, nickname of sports teams at Lake Orion High School in Lake Orion, Michigan in the U.S. Drexel Dragons, the sports teams of Drexel University in the U.S. Jersey Dragons, a soccer team in the U.S. Lane College Dragons, the sports teams of Lane College in the U.S. Los Angeles Dragons (American football), a former American football team in the U.S. Los Angeles Dragons, an Australian rules football team in the U.S. Moorhead Dragons, the sports teams of Minnesota State University Moorhead in the U.S. New York Dragons, an Arena Football League team in the U.S. Portland Forest Dragons, a former name of the Oklahoma Wranglers, an Arena Football team in the U.S. San Antonio Dragons, an ice hockey team in the U.S. San Francisco Dragons, a field lacrosse team in the U.S. Seattle Dragons, an American football team in the U.S. Shreveport Swamp Dragons, formerly the Shreveport Captains, a baseball team in the U.S. Thomasville Dragons, a women's soccer team in the U.S. Tiffin Dragons, the sports teams at Tiffin University in the U.S. Verdun Dragons, an ice hockey team in Canada Wisconsin Dragons, a women's tackle football team in the U.S. Oceania[edit] A.S. Dragon (Tahiti), a soccer team Darwin Dragons SC, a soccer team Engadine Dragons, a junior rugby league team Northcote Football Club, aka the Northcote Dragons, an Australian rules Football team St. George Dragons, a rugby league team St. George Illawarra Dragons, a rugby league football club Shellharbour City Dragons, a rugby league team South Dragons, a former team in the Australasian National Basketball League (2006-2009) Transport[edit] Air[edit] de Havilland Dragon, a small commercial aircraft Douglas B-23 Dragon, a twin-engined bomber aircraft Independence Dragon, a German paraglider design Land[edit] Dennis Dragon, a bus Dragon Automobile Company, an American manufacturer (1906-1908) Kaiser Dragon, a 1950s American car Dragon (1848–1872), a GWR Iron Duke Class locomotive Dragon (1873–1892), a South Devon Railway Buffalo class locomotive Dragon (1880–1892), a GWR Rover class locomotive Dragon (1891-1915), a GWR 3031 Class locomotive Dragon (2009–present) Newag E6ACT, an electric freight locomotive Space[edit] Dragon (rocket), a French research sounding rocket SpaceX Dragon capsule, used to transport cargo to and from the International Space Station SpaceX Dragon 2 capsule, also used to transport crew to and from the International Space Station Water[edit] Dragon (keelboat), a sailing yacht, used in racing Dragon boat, a narrow canoe-style boat, used for the sport of dragon boat racing Other uses[edit] Dragon (Ninurta), a figure in Sumerian religion Dragon (zodiac), in the Chinese zodiac Dragon reactor, a gas-cooled nuclear reactor in England Satan, referred to several times in the Book of Revelation as the "Dragon" Welsh Dragon, the flag of Wales In the Japanese board game shogi, the rook and bishop promote to a "dragon (king)" and a "dragon horse" The 2020 Middle East storms of 23 March 2020 and following days are sometimes called the "Dragon storms" See also[edit] Search for "dragon" on Wikipedia. All pages with titles beginning with Dragon All pages with titles containing dragons All pages with titles containing dragon Draconian (disambiguation) Dracaena (disambiguation) Drache (disambiguation) Draco (disambiguation) Dragone (disambiguation) Dragon I (disambiguation) Dragon II (disambiguation) Red Dragon (disambiguation) Disambiguation page providing links to topics that could be referred to by the same search term This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title API. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.