This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (August 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (December 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series on Tibetan Buddhism Sects Nyingma Kadam Sakya Bodong Kagyu Jonang Gelug Rimé Key personalities First dissemination Padmasambhava Śāntarakṣita Kamalaśīla Second dissemination Atiśa Talika Abhayakirti Niguma Sukhasiddhi Milarepa Nyingma Longchenpa Patrul Rinpoche Mipham Kagyu Rangjung Dorje Jonang Dolpopa Taranatha Sakya Sakya Pandita Gorampa Gelugpa Je Tsongkhapa 5th Dalai Lama 13th Dalai Lama 14th Dalai Lama Teachings General Buddhist Three marks of existence Skandha Cosmology Saṃsāra Rebirth Bodhisattva Dharma Dependent origination Karma Tibetan Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Nyingma Dzogchen Pointing-out instruction Practices and attainment Lamrim Pāramitās Bodhicitta Avalokiteśvara Meditation Laity Vajrayana Tantra techniques Deity yoga Buddhahood Major monasteries Tradruk Drepung Dzogchen Ganden Jokhang Kumbum Labrang Mindrolling Namgyal Narthang Nechung Pabonka Palcho Ralung Ramoche Rato Sakya Sanga Sera Shalu Tashi Lhunpo Tsurphu Yerpa Institutional roles Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Lama Karmapa Rinpoche Geshe Tertön Tulku Festivals Chotrul Duchen Dajyur Galdan Namchot Losar Dosmoche Monlam Sho Dun Losoong Texts Kangyur Tengyur Tibetan Buddhist canon Mahayana sutras Nyingma Gyubum Art Sand mandala Thangka Wall paintings Ashtamangala Tree of physiology Festival thangka History and overview History Timeline Outline Culture Index of articles v t e Part of a series on Vajrayana Buddhism Traditions Historical traditions: Ari-Acharya Burmese-Bengal † Yunnan Indonesian Esoteric Buddhism † Filipino Esoteric Buddhism † East Asian Han † Japanese Nepalese Inner Asian Tibetan Altaic (o, x, b, t, k, y) New branches: Gateway of the Hidden Flower New Kadampa Buddhism Shambhala Buddhism True Awakening Tradition History Tantrism Mahasiddha Sahaja Pursuit Buddhahood Bodhisattva Kalachakra Practices Generation stage Completion stage Phowa Tantric techniques: Fourfold division: Kriyayoga Charyayoga Yogatantra Anuttarayogatantra Twofold division: Inner Tantras Outer Tantras Thought forms and visualisation: Mandala Mantra Mudra Thangka Yantra Yoga: Deity yoga Dream yoga Death yoga Ngöndro Guru yoga ("Lama" yoga) Luminosity yoga Sex yoga Festivals Ganachakra Ullambana Puja Tantric texts Anuttarayoga Tantra Cakrasaṃvara Tantra Guhyagarbha Tantra Kulayarāja Tantra Mahāmāyā Tantra Mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa Mañjuśrīnāmasamgīti Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra Vajrasekhara Sutra Yuthok Nyingthig Symbols and tools Damaru Ghanta Kila Vajra Yab-Yum Ordination and transmission Pointing-out instruction Samaya Vajracharya v t e Part of a series on Mahāyāna Buddhism Unique Doctrines Bodhisattva Mind of Awakening Skillful Means Transcendent Wisdom The Transcendent Virtues Emptiness The consciousness doctrine Three bodies of the Buddha Non-abiding Nirvana Key sutras Prajñāpāramitā sūtras Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra Lotus Sūtra Vimalakīrti Sutra Avataṃsaka Sūtra Brahmajāla Sūtra Daśabhūmika Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Tathāgatagarbha sūtras Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra Mahāyāna schools Mādhyamaka Yogācāra Vajrayāna Tiantai Huayan Zen Pure Land Nichiren Regional traditions Han Chinese Japan Korea Vietnam Tibetan Nepal Newar Bhutan Mongolia v t e Part of a series on Buddhism History Timeline Gautama Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering Not-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Buddhist Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Tibetan canon Chinese canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist Paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddha Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Cambodia China India Japan Korea Laos Mongolia Myanmar Russia Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Outline  Religion portal v t e The Drukpa Lineage[1] (Dzongkha: འབྲུག་པ་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད), or simply Drukpa,[2] sometimes called either Dugpa or "Red Hat sect" in older sources,[3][4] is a branch of the Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism. The Kagyu school is one of the Sarma or "New Translations" schools of Tibetan Buddhism. Within the Drukpa Lineage, there are further sub-schools, most notably the eastern Kham tradition and middle Drukpa school which prospered in Ladakh and surrounding areas. In Bhutan the Drukpa Lineage is the dominant school and state religion. Contents 1 History 1.1 Branches of the Drukpa Lineage 1.2 Sub-schools 1.2.1 Lower Drukpa 1.2.2 The Upper Drukpa 1.2.3 The Central Drukpa 2 Contemporary organisation 2.1 Name 3 Commemorative stamp 4 Conversion by Karma Kagyu 5 Western perception 6 Monasteries 7 Drukpa Lineage Masters 8 References 9 Further reading History[edit] The Drukpa lineage was founded in west Tibet by Tsangpa Gyare (1161–1211), a student of Ling Repa, who mastered the Vajrayana practices of the mahamudra and Six Yogas of Naropa at an early age. As a tertön or "finder of spiritual relics", he discovered the text of the Six Equal Tastes, previously hidden by Rechung Dorje Drakpa, the student of Milarepa. While on a pilgrimage Tsangpa Gyare and his disciples witnessed a set of nine dragons (Tibetan: druk) roaring out of the earth and into the skies, as flowers rained down everywhere. From this incident they named their sect Drukpa. Also important in the lineage were the root guru of Tsangpa Gyare, Ling Repa and his guru, Phagmo Drupa Dorje Gyalpo, who was in turn a principal disciple of Gampopa as well as Dampa Sumpa[citation needed], one of Rechung Dorje Drakpa's main disciples. A prominent disciple of Tsangpa Gyare's nephew, Onre Darma Sengye, was Phajo Drugom Zhigpo (1208–1276) who in 1222 went to establish the Drukapa Kagyu teachings in the valleys of western Bhutan.[5] Branches of the Drukpa Lineage[edit] The outstanding disciples of Tsangpa Gyare Yeshi Dorje (1161–1211), the first Gyalwang Drukpa, may be divided into two categories: blood relatives and spiritual sons. His nephew, Onre Darma Sengye (1177–1237), ascended the throne at Ralung, the main seat of the Drukpa lineage. Darma Sengye guided the later disciples of Tsangpa Gyare, such as Gotsangpa Gonpo Dorje (1189–1258), onto the path of realization, thus becoming their guru as well. Darma Sengye's nephew and their descendants held the seat at Ralung and continued the lineage. Gyalwa Lorepa, Gyalwa Gotsangpa and his disciple Gyalwa Yang Gonpa, are known as Gyalwa Namsum or the Three Victorious Ones in recognition of their spiritual realization. The followers of Gyalwa Lorepa came to be called the 'Lower Drukpas'. The followers of Gyalwa Gotsangpa came to be called the 'Upper Drukpas'. And the followers of Onre Darma Sengye came to be called the 'Middle Drukpas'. After the death of 4th Gyalwang Drukpa, Kunkhyen Pema Karpo, in 1592, there were two rival candidates for his reincarnation. Gyalwang Pagsam Wangpo, one of the candidates, was favored by the King of Tsang and prevailed. His rival, Shabdrung Ngawang Namgyal, was then invited to Western Bhutan and eventually he unified the entire country and established Drukpa as the preeminent Buddhist school from Haa all the way to Trongsa. The Drukpa Lineage was divided from that time on into the Northern Drukpa (Dzongkha: བྱང་འབྲུག་, Wylie: byang 'brug)[6] branch in Tibet headed by the Gyalwang Drukpa and the Southern Drukpa (Dzongkha: ལྷོ་འབྲུག་, Wylie: lho 'brug)[6] based in Bhutan and headed by the Shabdrung incarnations.[7] Ever since Shabdrung Ngawang Namgyal appointed Pekar Jungne as the 1st Je Khenpo, the spiritual head of all monasteries in Bhutan, successive Je Khenpos have acted to date as spiritual regents of Bhutan. Sub-schools[edit] Several of Tsangpa Gyare's students started sub-schools, the most important of which were the Lower Drukpa founded by Gyalwa Lorepa Wangchug Tsondru and the Upper Drukpa founded by Gyalwa Gotsangpa Gonpo Dorje. This branch further gave rise to several important sub-schools. However the chief monasteries and succession of Gyalwang Drukpa Tsangpa Gyare passed to his nephew, Önre Darma Senge, at Ralung Monastery; this lineage was known as the Central Drukpa. This lineage of hereditary "prince-abbots" of Ralung continued until 1616, when Ngawang Namgyal, the Zhabdrung Rinpoche, fled to Bhutan due to a dispute over the incarnation of the 4th Gyalwang Drukpa and the enmity of the Tsangpa ruler. Due to those events, the Central Drukpa split into the Southern Drukpa led by the Zhabdrung and his successors in Bhutan and the Northern Drukpa led by Gyalwang Pagsam Wangpo and the successive Gyalwang Drukpa tulkus in Tibet.[8] Lower Drukpa[edit] The Lower Drukpa (Wylie: smad 'brug) was founded by Tsangpa Gyare's disciple Loré Wangchuk Tsöndrü (Wylie: lo ras dbang phyug brtson 'grus, 1187-1250). Lorepa built the Üri (Wylie: dbu ri) and Sengeri (Wylie: seng ge ri) monasteries and visited Bhutan, where he founded Tharpaling Monastery (Wylie: thar pa gling) in Jakar. A special transmission of the Lower Drukpa Lineage is known as The Five Capabilities (Wylie: thub pa lnga), which are:[9] Being capable of [facing] death: capability of Mahāmudrā (Wylie: phyag rgya chen-po 'chi thub) Being capable of [wearing only] the cotton cloth: capability of tummo (Wylie: gtum mo ras thub) Being capable of the tantric activities done in seclusion (Wylie: gsang spyod kyi ri thub) Being capable of [facing] the disturbances of 'don spirits: sickness (Wylie: nad 'don gyi 'khrug thub) Being capable of [facing] circumstances: capability of [applying] antidotes (Wylie: gnyen-po rkyen thub-pa) The Upper Drukpa[edit] The Upper Drukpa (Wylie: stod 'brug) was founded Tsangpa Gyare's disciple Götsangpa Gönpo Dorjé (Wylie: rgod tshang pa mgon po rdo rje, 1189-1258), a highly realized yogi who had many disciples.[10] His main disciples were Orgyenpa Rinchenpel (Wylie: o rgyan pa rin chen dpal, 1230—1309), Yanggönpa (Wylie: yang dgon pa), Chilkarpa (Wylie: spyil dkar pa) and Neringpa. Orgyenpa, who was also a disciple of Karma Pakshi, 2nd Karmapa Lama, became a great siddha who traveled to Bodhgaya, Jalandhar, Oddiyana and China. In Oddiyana he received teachings related to the Six Branch Yoga of the Kalachakra system known as the "Approach and Attainment of the Three Adamantine States" (Wylie: rdo rje gsum gyi bsnyen sgrub) and, after returning to Tibet, founded the Orgyen Nyendrup tradition and wrote many works including a famous guide to the land of Oddiyana. Ogyenpa had many disciples including Rangjung Dorje, 3rd Karmapa Lama, Kharchupa (Wylie: mkhar chu pa, 1284—1339)[11] and Tokden Daseng (Wylie: rtogs dan zla seng). Barawa Gyeltsen Pelzang (, 1255-1343) was a great scholar of the Upper Drukpa succession of Yanggönpa. He established the Barawa sub-school, which for a time was widespread in Tibet and survived as an independent lineage until 1959.[12] For a time this lineage was also important in Bhutan. The Central Drukpa[edit] The Middle Drukpa (Wylie: bar 'brug) was the hereditary lineage of Tsangpa Gyare centered at Ralung. Following Tsangpa Gyare, the next holder of this lineage was his nephew Darma Sengge (Wylie: dar ma seng ge, 1177-1237), son of Tsangpa Gyare's brother Lhanyen (Wylie: lha gnyan). Darma Sengge was succeeded by his own nephew Zhönnu Sengge (Wylie: gzhon nu seng ge, 1200–66) and he by his nephew Nyima Sengge (Wylie: nyi ma seng ge, 1251-1287). The lineage then went to his cousin Dorje Lingpa Sengge Sherap (Wylie: rdo rje gling pa seng ge shes rab, 1238-1287), son of Wöntak (Wylie: dbon stag),[13] a member of the branch of the Drukpa lineage descended from Tsangpa Gyare's brother Lhambum Wylie: lha 'bum). The lineage passed to Sengge Sherap's brother Sengge Rinchen (Wylie: seng ge rin chen, 1258-1313), who was succeeded in turn by his son Sengge Gyelpo (Wylie: seng ge rgyal po, 1289-1326), grandson Jamyang Künga Senggé (Wylie: 'jam dbyangs kun dga' seng ge, 1289-1326), great-grandson Lodrö Sengge (Wylie: blo gros seng ge, 1345–90) and great-great-grandson Sherap Sengge (Wylie: shes rab seng ge, 1371–92). These first nine holders of Tsangpa Gyare's lineage were known as the "Incomparable Nine Lions" (Wylie: mnyam med seng ge dgu). Sherap Sengge, who died at the age of 21, was succeeded on the throne of Ralung by his elder brother Yeshe Rinchen (Wylie: ye shes rin chen, 1364-1413) and he by his sons Namkha Pelzang (Wylie: nam mkha' dpal bzang, 1398-1425) and Sherap Zangpo (Wylie: shes rab bzang po, 1400–38). These three were considered the emanations of the three mahāsattvas Manjusri, Vajrapani and Avalokiteśvara, respectively. Sherap Zangpo's son was the second Gyalwang Drukpa, Gyelwang Jé Künga Penjor (Wylie: rgyal dbang rje kun dga' dpal 'byor, 1428–76), who received teachings from the most renowned lamas of his age and became a great author and teacher. From the 2nd Gyalwang Drukpa, the lineage passed to his nephew Ngakwang Chögyel (Wylie: ngag dbang chos rgyal, 1465-1540), then successively in turns from father to son to Ngak gi Wangchuk Drakpa Gyeltsen (Wylie: ngag gi dbang phyug grags pa rgyal mtshan, 1517-1554), Mipham Chögyal (Wylie: mi pham chos rgyal, 1543-1604), Mipham Tenpa'i Nyima (Wylie: mi pham bstan pa'i nyi ma, 1567-1619) and Ngawang Namgyal, who was the great-great-grandson of Ngawang Chögyal. In the Middle Drukpa tradition many great scholars appeared including the fourth Gyalwang Drukpa, Kunkhyen Pema Karpo (kun mkhyen padma dkar po) [1527—1592], Khewang Sangay Dorji (mkhas dbang sangs rgyas rdo rje) [1569—1645] and Bod Khepa Mipham Geleg Namgyal (bod mkhas pa mi pham dge legs rnam rgyal) (1618—1685) who was famed for his knowledge of poetics, grammar and medicine. His collected works fill over twenty volumes in modern editions. He founded Sangngak Chö Monastery (Wylie: gsang sngags chos gling) in 1571[14] to "subdue the klo pa", the inhabitants of southeastern Tibet.[15] This monastery, which is located in modern Lhoka Prefecture of the Tibet Autonomous Region near the border with Arunachal Pradesh, India, became the seat of the successive Gyalwang Drukpa incarnations in Tibet and thus the center of the Northern Drukpa. Three great siddhas of Middle Drukpa school were Tsangnyön Heruka (1452-1507), author of the Life of Milarepa, the Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, the Life of Rechungpa, and compiler of the Demchog Khandro Nyengyud; Drukpa Kunley (1455-1529); and Ünyön Künga Zangpo (Wylie: dbus smyon kun dga' bzang po, 1458-1532). All three were disciples of the 4th Gyalwang Drukpa. Following the death of the 4th Gyalwang Drukpa, two incarnations were recognized: Paksam Wangpo (Wylie: dpag bsam dbang po), who was the offspring of the Chongje Depa, and Ngawang Namgyal, who was also the heir to Drukpa lineage of Ralung. Paksam Wangpo gained the backing of the powerful Tsangpa Desi, who was a patron of the Karma Kagyu and hostile to Ngawang Namgyal. The latter subsequently fled to Bhutan, where his lineage already had many followers, established the Southern Drukpa, and became both the spiritual and temporal head of the country, after which the country became known as Drukyül in Standard Tibetan and Dzongkha. Contemporary organisation[edit] The Southern Drukpa are led by the Je Khenpo (an elected office, not a tulku lineage), who is the chief abbot of the Dratshang Lhentshog of Bhutan. The Northern Drukpa are led by the 12th Gyalwang Drukpa or incarnation of the Gyalwang Drukpa. In Kham, Khamtrul Rinpoche traditionally has been the most prominent Drukpa Lineage master, and still commands a huge following in Kham. Unlike previously where the lineage was divided geographically into Northern, Middle and Southern Drukpa, the Drukpa Lineage masters today often cross these traditional borders and communicate to strengthen the lineage and the teachings. In April 2009, the first of a yearly event known as the Annual Drukpa Council (ADC) [16] was held on Druk Amitabha Mountain [17] in Kathmandu, Nepal. More than 40 masters of the lineage from India, Nepal, Bhutan and Tibet attended this event and over 10,000 lay practitioners and at least 1,000 monks and nuns or more met on this occasion. This was the first time an annual event for the Drukpa Lineage involving all the three major branches will be held, as a concerted effort to reunite the strengths of the Drukpa Lineage and to mend the historical connections of different monasteries and organizations. In July 2007, when the lineage celebrated its 800-plus-years' legacy in Shey, Ladakh, more than 100,000 attended the event that included celebrations and prayers, as well as mask dancing by 300 nuns. This event, boasted of the first firework in the Himalayas, the first 800 sky lanterns being lit in the Himalayas and the first 12,000 biodegradable balloons sent to the sky, was covered by international media [18][19] In 2010, the Gyalwang Drukpa launched an initiative to plant one million trees in Ladakh, as part of the ‘one million trees’ campaign initiated by Wangari Maathaï, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in 2004. As part of this initiative, the Gyalwang Drukpa led the Live to Love volunteers to break the Guinness World Record twice for most trees planted simultaneously. The first in October 2010, 9,313 volunteers planted 50,033 trees within half an hour, breaking their first Guinness World Records for the "Most Trees Planted" category. In October 2012, they broke again the Guinness World Records for the same category, with over 9,800 volunteers planted nearly 100,000 trees, safeguarding villages from mudslides and cleaning polluted air.[20] The Drukpa Lineage under the guidance of its spiritual masters, in particular the Twelfth Gyalwang Drukpa,[21] has established centers across the world, especially in Europe. Name[edit] In March 2008, the 12th Gyalwang Drukpa, declared his preference that: The spiritual lineage [should] be known throughout the world firmly and clearly as "Dongyu Palden Drukpa", meaning the Spiritual Lineage of the Glorious Dragons or simply the "Drukpa Lineage". I hope and pray that as holders of the Dragon Order, all of my colleagues would be mindful of their activities and their efforts. They have to know and be clear about which household they belong to, and surely they need to be aware of others' ulterior intention. He goes on to note that the "different lineages within a major Tibetan Buddhist branch are like brothers, of course some brothers do better than others, but that doesn't mean that those doing better could self-appoint themselves as the heads of other weaker brothers' households and take over their assets, wives and children, in the name of 'helping' and in the name of 'supporting'," and for that reason it is better that dKar-brgyud[clarification needed] not be used any longer.[22] Commemorative stamp[edit] Drukpa Thuksey Rinpoche, Shri SK Sinha, Member (HRD), Department of Posts, the Gyalwang Drukpa and Arjun Pandey holding the newly released stamp and first-day cover on "The Drukpa Lineage of Buddhism" On 14 May 2014, the Department of Posts celebrated Buddha Purnima with the release of a commemorative stamp on the Drukpa Buddhists, a rare and perhaps the first recognition given by the Indian government to a particular Buddhist lineage.[23] Conversion by Karma Kagyu[edit] On 10 September 2014, the Gyalwang Drukpa issued an official statement [24] that the Drukpa monasteries in Mount Kailash have been forcibly taken over by the Karma Kagyu order with Drukpa monks and yogis being forced out of their monasteries, and photographs of Drukpa masters have been replaced with photographs of Karmapa Ogyen Trinley Dorje.[25] The office of Karmapa Ogyen Trinley Dorje replied, saying "in the late 70s, a high lama of their sect had visited the Kailash region and witnessed how four Drukpa monasteries had been desecrated. 'He had then urged that these be restored because they are very sacred.'".[26] Western perception[edit] Some nineteenth and early-twentieth century writers believed the "Dugpas" to be sorcerers focusing principally on the left-hand path traditions and various Tantric practices of Buddhism.[3] Alexandra David-Néel claims that the name "Dugpa" comes from the Tibetan word for thunder, as the first monastery was built during a thunderstorm.[4] In August 2017 Reuters reported on the Drukpa nuns' social activism, in particular in teaching self-defense to women due to the rise in rapes in India. The nuns are nicknamed the "Kung Fu Nuns". According to the Reuters report, the Drukpa nuns were "the only female order in the patriarchal Buddhist monastic system where nuns have equal status to monks".[27] Monasteries[edit] Important monasteries of the Drukpa order include: Ralung Monastery in Central Tibet just north of Bhutan Druk Sangag Choeling Monastery [28][29] Hemis Monastery Punakha Dzong, the winter home of the Dratshang Lhentshog Tashichho Dzong, Thimphu, which houses the Dratshang Lhentshog in summer Namdruk Monastery Kardang Monastery, the main monastery in Lahaul Drukpa Lineage Masters[edit] Gyalwang Drukpa Drukpa Yongzin Rinpoches Drukpa Choegon Rinpoches Chogdra Rinpoche Thuksey Rinpoche Apho Rinpoche Sey Rinpoche Gyalwa Dokhampa Jazong Rinpoche References[edit] ^ Ray, Reginald A (2002). Secret of the Vajra World: The Tantric Buddhism of Tibet. Shambhala Publications. p. 53. ISBN 1-57062-917-X. ^ The Wand that opens the Eyes and Dispels the Darkness of Mind. Compiled by Tashi Namgyal, translated in 2004. pg. 3 ^ a b Blavatsky, H.P. (1 Mar 2003). The Theosophical Glossary. Kessinger Publishing Co. ISBN 0766147118. ^ a b Initiations And Initiates In Tibet, p. 34 by Alexandra David-Néel. ^ Dargye, Yonten (2001). History of the Drukpa Kagyud School in Bhutan (12th to 17th Century A.D.). Thimphu, Bhutan. ISBN 99936-616-0-0. ^ a b The Biographies of Rechungpa: The Evolution of a Tibetan hagiography. Roberts, Peter Alan. Routledge, 2007. ISBN 0-415-76995-7, pg. 53 ^ The History of Tibet. ed. Alex Mckay. London: Routledge Curzon, 2003: 191–192. ^ Smith & Schaeffer 2001, pp. 44-5. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSmithSchaeffer2001 (help) ^ Martin 2006. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMartin2006 (help) ^ "Gotsangpa Gonpo Dorje". The Treasury of Lives. Retrieved 2018-10-02. ^ "Orgyenpa Rinchen Pel". The Treasury of Lives. Retrieved 2018-10-02. ^ Smith 2001, p. 45. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSmith2001 (help) ^ "Sengge Sherab". The Treasury of Lives. Retrieved 2018-10-02. ^ Berzin 2013. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBerzin2013 (help) ^ "gsang sngags chos gling". Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center. Retrieved 27 June 2015. ^ "Annual Drukpa Council - Online Registration Form for 6th ADC". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ "Druk Gawa Khilwa Abbey". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ "Pilgrims flock to India for Buddhist ‘dragon’ celebration" AFP "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2008-06-02. Retrieved 2008-06-17.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ More news, photographs and media articles on the 800th anniversary celebration in Ladakh[1] ^ "New world record for planting trees in Leh - Times of India". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ "The Gyalwang Drukpa - The Gyalwang Drukpa's Official Website". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ News – Monks and Baby Sheep ^ "Indian Government Releases Postage Stamp on Drukpa Lineage". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ The Gyalwang Drukpa. "The Gyalwang Drukpa - On Forced Conversion of Drukpa Monasteries". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ "Tibetan Buddhist Sect Seeks Indian Intervention". Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ "Eye on border, China fanning intra-sect rivalry: Ladakh's Buddhist leader". 25 September 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2016. ^ "Kung Fu nuns teach women to defend themselves from would-be rapists in India". The Straits Times. 25 August 2017. Retrieved 18 January 2020. ^ "Druk Jangchub Choling". The Treasury of Lives. Retrieved 2018-10-02. ^ "byang chub gling". Buddhist Digital Resource Center. Retrieved 2018-10-02. Further reading[edit] Drukpa Kagyu - The Treasury of Lives The Royal Seal of Mahamudra by the Third Khamtrul RInpoche Dargye, Yonten; Sørensen, Per; Tshering, Gyönpo (2008). Play of the Omniscient: Life and works of Jamgön Ngawang Gyaltshen an eminent 17th–18th century Drukpa master. Thimphu: National Library & Archives of Bhutan. ISBN 99936-17-06-7. Dorji, Sangay (Dasho) (2008). The Biography of Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal: Pal Drukpa Rinpoche. Kinga, Sonam (trans). Thimphu, Bhutan: KMT Publications. ISBN 99936-22-40-0. Roberts, Peter Alan (2007). The Biographies of Rechungpa: The Evolution of a Tibetan hagiography. Routledge-Curzon. ISBN 0-415-76995-7. v t e Tibetan Buddhism Traditions Vajrayana Bön Nyingma Kadam Bodong Sakya Jonang Kagyu Gelug Rimé movement New Kadampa Tradition Practices and teachings Mantra Mudra Mandala Prostration Tantric meditation Deity yoga Wang Lamrim Lamdre Ngöndro Chöd Dzogchen Mahamudra Six Dharmas Kālacakra Tibetan Pure Land Institutional roles Lama Tulku Tertön Rinpoche Ngagpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Karmapa Sakya Trizin Key figures Nyingma (Dzogchen) Padmasambhava Sakya Sakya Pandita Drogön Chögyal Phagpa Kagyu Milarepa Thang Tong Gyalpo Gelug Je Tsongkhapa Other Trisong Detsen Vairotsana Dampa Sangye Drukpa Kunley Namkhai Norbu Godrakpa Gorampa Sonam Sengye Jigdral Yeshe Dorje (2nd Dudjom Rinpoche) Shamarpa Dilgo Khyentse Jamgon Kongtrul Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo Dzongsar Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen Longchenpa Jigme Lingpa Patrul Rinpoche Gampopa Marpa Lotsawa Chögyam Trungpa Penor Rinpoche Ratna Lingpa Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche Chökyi Nyima Rinpoche Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche Shakya Shri Thinley Norbu Chogye Trichen Tenzin Ösel Hita Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche Taranatha Mikyö Dorje, 8th Karmapa Lama Minling Terton Rendawa Rongtong Shenrab Kunrig Orgyen Chokgyur Lingpa Pema Lingpa Tai Situpa Thubten Yeshe Jamgon Ju Mipham Gyatso Tenzin Palmo Sakya Chokden Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche Tsele Natsok Rangdröl Ganden Tripa Lama Jampa Thaye Rangjung Dorje, 3rd Karmapa Lama Thubten Zopa Rinpoche Nyoshul Khenpo Rinpoche Tarthang Tulku Dodrupchen Rinpoche Anagarika Govinda Alexandra David-Néel Vimalamitra Atiśa Ngorchen Kunga Zangpo Tsangnyön Heruka Go Lotsawa Shonnu Pal Sogyal Rinpoche Second Beru Khyentse Alexander Berzin (scholar) Chatral Rinpoche Dezhung Rinpoche Tulku Thondup Traleg Kyabgon Rinpoche Akong Rinpoche Khenpo Abbey Rinpoche Kangyur Rinpoche Dudjom Yangsi Dzigar Kongtrul Rinpoche Orgyen Tobgyal Kathok Ontrul Rinpoche Zurmang Tenpa Rinpoche Adzom Drukpa Yudra Nyingpo Ratna Vajra Sakya Gyana Vajra Sakya Dzogchen Ponlop Rinpoche Dawa Chodrak Rinpoche Kalu Rinpoche Tenga Rinpoche Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche Thrangu Rinpoche Chetsang Rinpoche Trijang Rinpoche Phabongkha Reting Rinpoche Zong Rinpoche Ling Rinpoche Khandro Rinpoche Trulshik Rinpoche Karma Thinley Rinpoche Khamtrul Rinpoche Gyalwang Drukpa Luding Khenchen Rinpoche Rechung Dorje Drakpa Phagmo Drupa Dorje Gyalpo Arija Rinpoche Hugh Edward Richardson Charles Alfred Bell Texts Terma Gyubum Kangyur Tengyur Tibetan canon Ritual objects Thangka Stupa Yidam Monasteries Jokhang Palyul Monastery Dzogchen Monastery Kathog Monastery Shechen Monastery Namdroling Monastery Ganden Monastery Sera Monastery Ramoche Temple Sanga Monastery Drepung Monastery Tashilhunpo Monastery Dzongsar Monastery Sakya Monastery Places Tibet Mongolia Bhutan Buryatia Tuva Kalmykia Sikkim Ladakh Mustang Lhasa Dharamshala Shambhala Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125