Druk Gyalpo of Bhutan Incumbent Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck 5th Dragon King Details Style His Majesty Heir apparent Jigme Namgyel Wangchuck First monarch Ugyen Wangchuck Formation 17 December 1907 Residence Samteling Palace, Thimphu This article contains Tibetan script. Without proper rendering support, you may see very small fonts, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Tibetan characters. Bhutan This article is part of a series on the politics and government of Bhutan Constitution Law Human rights LGBT rights Monarchy King (list) Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck Heir Apparent Crown Prince Jigme Namgyel Wangchuck House of Wangchuck State religion Dratshang Lhentshog (state religious commission) Chairman: The Je Khenpo Government Executive Prime Minister Lotay Tshering Lhengye Zhungtshog (council of ministers) Parliament National Council National Assembly Judiciary Royal Court of Justice Supreme Court High Court Dzongkhag Courts Dungkhag Courts Elections Recent elections Council: 2013 2018 Assembly: 2013 2018 Local: 2011 Political parties Administrative divisions Districts of Bhutan Gewogs Dungkhags Thromdes Chiwogs Villages Foreign relations Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister: Tandi Dorji Diplomatic missions of / in Bhutan Nationality law Passport Visa requirements Visa policy Other countries v t e The Druk Gyalpo ( འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་པོ་; lit. Dragon King) is the head of state of the Kingdom of Bhutan.[1] In the Dzongkha language, Bhutan is known as Drukyul which translates as "The Land of the Thunder Dragon". Thus, while Kings of Bhutan are known as Druk Gyalpo ("Dragon King"), the Bhutanese people call themselves the Drukpa, meaning "Dragon people". The current ruler of Bhutan is Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the 5th Druk Gyalpo.[2] He wears the Raven Crown which is the official crown worn by the kings of Bhutan. He is correctly styled "Mi'wang 'Ngada Rimboche" ("His Majesty") and addressed "Ngada Rimboche" ("Your Majesty").[3][4] King Jigme Khesar was the second-youngest reigning monarch in the world[5] when he ascended the throne on 6 November 2008 after his father, Jigme Singye Wangchuck, abdicated the throne in his favor.[2] Contents 1 Duties and powers 1.1 Royal prerogatives 1.2 Royal appointments 1.3 Military powers 2 Voluntary and involuntary abdication 3 List of Druk Gyalpos 4 See also 5 References Duties and powers[edit] The Constitution confirms the institution of monarchy. The Druk Gyalpo (King of Bhutan) is the Head of State and the symbol of unity of the Kingdom and of the people of Bhutan. The Constitution establishes the "Chhoe-sid-nyi" (dual system of religion and politics) of Bhutan as unified in the person of the King who, as a Buddhist, is the upholder of the Chhoe-sid (religion and politics; temporal and secular).[6] In addition, the King is the protector of all religions in Bhutan.[7] The King is not answerable in a court of law for his actions, and his person is sacrosanct.[6] However, the King is mandated to protect and uphold the Constitution "in the best interest and for the welfare of the people of Bhutan. Royal prerogatives[edit] Under the Constitution, the King, in exercise of his Royal Prerogatives (and as Head of State), promotes goodwill and good relations with other countries by receiving state guests and undertaking state visits to other countries. The King may also award titles, decorations, dar for Lhengye and Nyi-Kyelma (conferring a red scarf of rank and honour with the title of "Dasho") in accordance with tradition and custom. Also among the Royal Prerogatives are the grants of citizenship, amnesty, pardon and reduction of sentences; and land "kidu" and other "kidus" (benefits).[6] Royal appointments[edit] Under Article 2 Section 19, the King appoints a significant number of high-level Government officers: Judicial appointees, the Auditor General, and the Chairs of Anti-Corruption, Civil Service, and Election Commissions are holders of Constitutional Office.[8] [6] The King appoints most of the upper Judicial branch: the Chief Justice of Bhutan and the Drangpons (Associate Justices) of the Supreme Court; the Chief Justice and Drangpons (Associate Justices) of the High Court. These judicial appointments are made from among the vacant positions' peers, juniors, and available eminent jurists in consultation with the National Judicial Commission[9][6] Dungkhag Court jurists are not appointed by the King. The King also appoints, from lists of names recommended jointly by the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of Bhutan, the Speaker, the Chairperson of the National Council, and the Leader of the Opposition Party, four kinds of high-level Government: the Chief Election Commissioner and other members of the Election Commission;[10] the Auditor General of the Royal Audit Authority;[11] the Chairperson and other members of the Royal Civil Service Commission;[12] and the Chairperson and other members of the Anti-Corruption Commission.[13] The term for each position is 5 years. Referenced for incorporation are the Bhutanese Audit Act, Bhutanese Civil Service Act, Bhutanese Anti-Corruption Act, and Attorney General Act; references to existing Election Laws also appear throughout the Constitution. The King appoints positions other than Constitutional Officers on the advice of other bodies.[6] He appoints the heads of the Defence Forces from a list of names recommended by the Service Promotion Board. The King appoints the Attorney General of Bhutan,[14] the Chairperson of the Pay Commission,[6][15] the Governor of the Central Bank of Bhutan, the Cabinet Secretary, and Bhutanese ambassadors and consuls on the recommendation of the Prime Minister. The King also appoints Dzongdags to head Local Governments, and other secretaries to the Government on the recommendation of the Prime Minister who obtains nominations from the Royal Civil Service Commission on the basis of merit and seniority and in accordance with other relevant rules and regulations. The King appoints the Secretary General of the respective Houses on the recommendation of the Royal Civil Service Commission. Military powers[edit] The King is also the Supreme Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and the Militia of Bhutan.[16] Voluntary and involuntary abdication[edit] The Constitution provides substantive and procedural law for two paths of abdication for reigning monarchs: voluntary and involuntary. As stated above, the King may relinquish the exercise of Royal Prerogatives, and such relinquishment may be temporary. The Constitution provides that the King must abdicate the throne for willful violations of the Constitution or for suffering permanent mental disability. Either must be upon a motion passed by a joint sitting of Parliament. The motion for abdication must be tabled for discussion at a joint sitting of Parliament (presided by the Chief Justice of Bhutan) if at least ⅔ of the total number of the members of Parliament submits such a motion stating its basis and grounds. The King may respond to the motion in writing or by addressing the joint sitting of Parliament in person or through a representative.[6] If, at such joint sitting of Parliament, at least ¾ of the total number of members of Parliament passes the motion for abdication, then such a resolution is placed before the people in a National Referendum to be approved or rejected. If the National Referendum passes in all the Dzongkhags in the Kingdom, the King must abdicate in favour of the heir apparent. List of Druk Gyalpos[edit] Main article: List of rulers of Bhutan The Hereditary Dragon Kings of Bhutan:[17] Name Lifespan Reign start Reign end Notes Family Image Ugyen 1st Druk Gyalpo ཨོ་རྒྱན་དབང་ཕྱུག (1862-06-11)11 June 1862 – 26 August 1926(1926-08-26) (aged 64) 17 December 1907 26 August 1926 Wangchuck Jigme 2nd Druk Gyalpo འཇིགས་མེད་དབང་ཕྱུག 1905 – 30 March 1952 (aged 47) 26 August 1926 30 March 1952 Son of Ugyen Wangchuck Jigme Dorji 3rd Druk Gyalpo འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་པོ་ འཇིགས་མེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་དབང་ཕྱུག་མཆོག་ (1929-05-02)2 May 1929 – 21 July 1972(1972-07-21) (aged 43) 30 March 1952 21 July 1972 Son of Jigme Wangchuck Jigme Singye 4th Druk Gyalpo འཇིགས་མེད་སེང་གེ་དབང་ཕྱུག་ (1955-11-11) 11 November 1955 (age 65) 21 July 1972 14 December 2006 (abdicated) Son of Jigme Dorji Wangchuck Jigme Khesar Namgyel 5th Druk Gyalpo འཇིགས་མེད་གེ་སར་རྣམ་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཕྱུག་ (1980-02-21) 21 February 1980 (age 41) 14 December 2006 Incumbent Son of Jigme Singye Wangchuck See also[edit] Constitution of Bhutan Druk Druk Gyaltsuen Dual system of government History of Bhutan House of Wangchuck Politics of Bhutan References[edit] ^ "Article 2: The Institution of Monarchy" (PDF). The Constitution of the Kingdom of Bhutan. ISBN 99936-754-0-7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011. ^ a b "A Legacy of Two Kings". Bhutan 2008. Archived from the original on 15 December 2010. ^ "༈ རྫོང་ཁ་ཨིང་ལིཤ་ཤན་སྦྱར་ཚིག་མཛོད། ༼མི༽" [Dzongkha-English Dictionary: "MI"]. Dzongkha-English Online Dictionary. Dzongkha Development Commission, Government of Bhutan. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 2011-10-30. ^ "༈ རྫོང་ཁ་ཨིང་ལིཤ་ཤན་སྦྱར་ཚིག་མཛོད། ༼མང-༽" [Dzongkha-English Dictionary: "MNGA"]. Dzongkha-English Online Dictionary. Dzongkha Development Commission, Government of Bhutan. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 2011-10-30. ^ "Himalayan state crowns youngest king in the world". France 24. 6 November 2008. Archived from the original on 31 January 2009. ^ a b c d e f g h Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 2 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 3 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 31 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 21 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 24 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 25 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 26 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 27 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 29 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 30 ^ Constitution of Bhutan Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 28 ^ "Hundred years of Monarchy: A walk down the memory lane". Bhutan 2008. Archived from the original on 1 March 2010. v t e Rulers of Bhutan Druk Desis (1650–1905) Tenzin Drukgye Tenzin Drukdra Minjur Tenpa Tenzin Rabgye Gedun Chomphel Ngawang Tshering Umze Peljor Druk Rabgye Ngawang Gyamtsho Mipham Wangpo Khuwo Peljor Ngawang Gyaltshen Sherab Wangchuck Druk Phuntsho Wangzob Druk Tenzin I Sonam Lhundub Kunga Rinchen Jigme Singye Druk Tenzin Umzey Chapchhab Chhogyel Sonam Gyaltshen Druk Namgyel Sangye Tenzin Umzey Parob Byop Chhyoda Tulku Tsulthrim Daba Zhabdrung Thutul Chholay Yeshey Gyaltshen Tshaphu Dorji Namgyel Sonam Drugyel Gongzim Tenzin Drukda Chhoki Gyaltshen Dorji Namgyal Adab Thinley Dorji Norbu Wangchuk Gyalpo Zhabdrung Thutul Chagpa Sangye Damchho Lhundrup Jamtul Jamyang Tenzin Kunga Palden Sherab Tharchin Phuntsho Namgyel Tshewang Sithub Tsulthrim Yonten Kagyud Wangchuk Tsondul Pekar Jigme Namgyel Kitshab Dorji Namgyel Chhogyel Zangpo Lam Tshewang Gawa Zangpo Sangye Dorji Choley Yeshe Ngodub Druk Gyalpos (1907–present) Ugyen Wangchuck Jigme Wangchuck Jigme Dorji Wangchuck Jigme Singye Wangchuck Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck v t e Bhutan articles History Second Battle of Simtokha Dzong Bhutan War (Duar War) Independence Operation All Clear Military history Geography Borders Climate Ecoregions Environment Extreme points Glaciers Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Valleys Wildlife Subdivisions Cities Chiwogs (electoral precincts) Dzongkhags (districts) Dungkhags (subdistricts) Gewogs (village groups) Villages Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT King Law enforcement Military Parliament National Council National Assembly Political parties Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Companies Energy Ngultrum (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Culture Anthem Architecture Cinema Cuisine Emblem Flag Media Music National symbols Public holidays Sport Demographics Crime Education Ethnic groups Health care Languages Religion Women Outline Index Bibliography Category