This article is about the Bodic druk-dragon. For the 2020 Danish-Swedish film with the Danish title "Druk", see Another Round (film). For Bodic klu-dragon which is frequently identified with Indic nāga but with an indigenous origin with cognate creatures from Burmo-Qiangic peoples and possibly the Chinese dragon, see zh:鲁 (龙). The Flag of Bhutan features Druk This article contains Tibetan script. Without proper rendering support, you may see very small fonts, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Tibetan characters. The Druk (Standard Tibetan: འབྲུག, Dzongkha: འབྲུག་) is the "Thunder Dragon" of Tibetan and Bhutanese mythology and a Bhutanese national symbol. A druk appears on the flag of Bhutan, holding jewels to represent wealth. In Dzongkha, Bhutan is called Druk Yul "Land of Druk", and Bhutanese leaders are called Druk Gyalpo, "Thunder Dragon Kings". During the Bhutanese mock election in 2007, all four mock parties were called the Druk [colour] Party.[1] The national anthem of Bhutan, Druk tsendhen, translates into English as "Kingdom of Druk". The druk (also known as a "duk" or "dug") was adopted as an emblem by the Drukpa Lineage, which originated in Tibet and spread to Bhutan. According to traditional accounts, when the sect's founder, Tsangpa Gyare, 1st Gyalwang Drukpa, began to build Ralung Monastery, there was a violent storm. Thunder, or the "Cloud-Voice," is seen as the roar of the dragon.[2] Deciding that this was an omen, he named the monastery Drug-Ralung, adding the word "thunder dragon" to the name. The disciples at the monastery were known as Drugpa, or "Those of the Thunder."[3] As of the 1900s, the Grand Lama of Bhutan wore a hat with thunder dragons on it to signify the origins of the sect.[2] As the sect became more popular, it set up monasteries in what is now Bhutan, with the result that the area became known as Dug Yul, or Land of Thunder, among both Tibetans and Bhutanese.[3] Other Asian dragons[edit] Bakunawa Chinese dragon Japanese dragon Korean dragon Pakhangba Vietnamese dragon See also[edit] Emblem of Bhutan References[edit] ^ Every party had a separate colour representing its values. ^ a b Waddell, Laurence (1895). The Buddhism of Tibet Or Lamaism. p. 199. ^ a b David-Neel, Alexandra. Initiations and Initiates in Tibet. v t e Dragons In mythology European Ajatar Amphiptere Balaur Bisterne Dragon Blue Ben Bolla Chuvash dragon Cockatrice Cuélebre Gargouille Greek Dragon Cychreides Delphyne Lernaean Hydra Ladon Pyrausta Python Guivre Herensuge Knucker Jaculus La Guita Xica Lambton Worm Laidly Worm of Spindleston Heugh Worm of Linton Lindworm Marraco Dragon of Mordiford Norse dragon Fafnir Jörmungandr Níðhöggr Oilliphéist Peluda Slavic dragon Sockburn Worm Stoor worm Sugaar Tugarin Wawel Dragon Welsh Dragon White dragon Wyvern Yelbeghen Zilant Zirnitra Asian Apalala Bakunawa Bašmu Chinese dragon Ao Guang Azure Dragon Chi Dilong Feilian Feilong Fucanglong Hong Jiaolong Panlong Pulao Qiulong Shenlong Teng Tianlong Yellow Dragon Yinglong Zhulong Druk Illuyanka Japanese dragon Kiyohime Kuraokami Kuzuryū Mizuchi Ryūjin Toyotama-hime Wani Watatsumi Yamata no Orochi Zennyo Ryūō Korean dragon Kur Labbu Lahamu Leviathan Lotan Pakhangba Phaya Naga Seraphim Tanin'iver Tannin (monster) Tiamat Vietnamese dragon Vishap Vritra Yam Zahhak Other Amaru Feathered Serpent Gaasyendietha Horned Serpent Nyami Nyami Ouroboros Peuchen Piasa Quetzalcoatl Rahab (Egypt) Sea serpent Snallygaster Teju Jagua Xiuhcoatl In culture Mythology and folklore Draco (constellation) Dragon dance Dragon boat Dragon (zodiac) Dragonslayers Princess and dragon In fiction Popular culture Film and television Games Dragons in Dungeons & Dragons Literature Dragons in J.R.R.Tolkien's legendarium Smaug Dragons in Dragon Prince Dragons in Pern In art Nine Dragons painting Nine-Dragon Wall Dragon jar Cádiz Memorial Dragon and Tiger Pagodas Dragon boundary mark Dragon Bridge (Da Nang) Dragon Bridge (Ljubljana) Merritt Island Dragon Pegasus and Dragon Related Dragon's Eye Here be dragons Dragon curve