Dungeon Master's Guide Authors Gary Gygax, Mike Carr Cover artist David C. Sutherland III Genre Role-playing game Publisher TSR Publication date 1979 Pages 238 ISBN 0935696024 The Dungeon Master's Guide (DMG[1] or DM's Guide; in earlier editions, the Dungeon Masters Guide or Dungeon Master Guide) is a book of rules for the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons. The Dungeon Master's Guide contains rules concerning the arbitration and administration of a game, and is intended for use primarily or only by the game's Dungeon Master.[2] The original Dungeon Master's Guide was published in 1979,[3] and gave Dungeon Masters everything they needed to run a D&D game campaign.[1] It is intended as a companion book to the Player's Handbook, which contains all of the basic rules of gameplay, and the Monster Manual, which is a reference book giving statistics and characteristics to various animals and monsters. The Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and Monster Manual are collectively referred to as the "core rules" of the Dungeons & Dragons game.[4] Both the Dungeon Master's Guide and the Player's Handbook give advice, tips, and suggestions for various styles of play.[5] While all players, including the Dungeon Master, are expected to have at their disposal a copy of the Player's Handbook, only the Dungeon Master is expected to refer to the Dungeon Master's Guide or Monster Manual during gameplay.[6] Contents 1 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1.1 Reviews 2 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition 3 Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition 4 Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition 5 Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition 5.1 Reception 5.2 Reviews 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Advanced Dungeons & Dragons[edit] The original AD&D Dungeon Masters Guide (sic) was written by Gary Gygax, and published by TSR in 1979 as a 232-page hardcover with a cover by David C. Sutherland III.[7] The 1983 printing featured a new cover by Jeff Easley.[7] Like other volumes of Dungeons & Dragons handbooks, the Dungeon Masters Guide has gone through several versions through the years. The original edition was written by Gary Gygax and edited by Mike Carr, who also wrote the foreword. The original cover art was by David C. Sutherland III, and interior illustrations were provided by Sutherland, D. A. Trampier, Darlene Pekul, Will McLean, David S. LaForce, and Erol Otus. The first edition Dungeon Masters Guide covered all the essential rules for the Dungeon Master: creating and maintaining player characters and managing non-player characters, handling combat, and running adventures and multi-session campaigns.[7] The book also included descriptions of magic items and treasure, random monster encounters, and statistics for the basic monsters and creatures of the game.[7] New magic items were introduced, including the Apparatus of Kwalish. The Dungeon Masters Guide contains scores of tables and charts for figuring damage and resolving encounters in a typical adventure, tables and rules for creating characters, and lists of the various abilities of the different classes of characters. One supplement to the Guide was the Dungeon Masters Screen: two heavy-duty tri-fold boards with the most frequently used tables printed on them for easy reference. The 1979 second edition of the screen describes its purpose as "useful for shielding maps and other game materials from the players when placed upright, and also provide[s] instant reference to the charts and tables most commonly used during play." The Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Second Edition screen came packaged with a brief adventure; later editions of that screen, and screens produced for later editions, have instead included character sheets and general reference booklets. A feature of the first edition Dungeon Masters Guide was the random dungeon generator. The generator allowed the Dungeon Master, by the rolling of dice, to generate a dungeon adventure "on the fly". A dungeon complete with passageways, rooms, treasure, monsters, and other encounters could easily and randomly be constructed as the player progressed. It could be used with several people or a single player. The generator was not included in subsequent editions of the Dungeon Master's Guide but made a re-appearance in the fifth edition Dungeon Master's Guide. The original Dungeon Masters Guide was reviewed by Don Turnbull in issue #16 of the magazine White Dwarf (December 1979/January 1980). Turnbull commented mostly on the size of the book, "I would say that only the most severe critic could point at a minor omission, let alone a serious one."[2] The 1st edition Dungeon Masters Guide was reproduced as a premium reprint on July 17, 2012.[8] Reviews[edit] Casus Belli #39 (Aug 1987) Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition[edit] The AD&D 2nd Edition Dungeon Master Guide was released in 1989.[3] This 192-page hardcover book was designed by David "Zeb" Cook, with cover art by Jeff Easley.[7] The book featured interior illustrations by Easley, Clyde Caldwell, John and Laura Lakey, David Dorman, Douglas Chaffee, and Jean E. Martin. This Dungeon Master Guide featured revised second edition rules for the Dungeon Master, totally reorganized and streamlined.[7] The book detailed options for character creation, handling alignment, new money and equipment rules, treasure and magical items, encounters, time and movement, and handling non-player characters.[7] The book is indexed, and contains many full-page color illustrations.[7] The second edition Dungeon Master Guide is an ORIGINS and Gamer's Choice award-winner.[7] In his 1991 book Heroic Worlds, Lawrence Schick commented that this book contained "lots of excellent new advice on how to run AD&D".[7] A new version of the Dungeon Master Guide, with new art and layout but the same text, was released in 1995, as part of TSR's 25th anniversary.[3] The 2nd edition Dungeon Master Guide was reproduced as a premium reprint on May 21, 2013.[9] Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition[edit] Dungeon Master's Guide (v.3.5) Genre Role-playing game Publisher Wizards of the Coast Publication date July 2003 Media type Print (Hardback) Pages 320 ISBN 0-7869-2889-1 OCLC 52691405 LC Class GV1469.62.D84 D836 2000 The 3rd edition D&D Dungeon Master's Guide was published in 2000. Monte Cook, Jonathan Tweet, and Skip Williams all contributed to the 3rd edition Player's Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and Monster Manual, and then each designer wrote one of the books based on those contributions.[10] Cook is credited with the book's design. Cover art is by Henry Higginbotham, with interior art by Lars Grant-West, Scott Fischer, John Foster, Todd Lockwood, David Martin, Arnie Swekel, Kevin Walker, Sam Wood, and Wayne Reynolds. Dungeon Master's Guide was republished in 2001 as a slightly revised edition, correcting a few errors in the first edition. In 2003, the Dungeon Master's Guide was revised for the 3.5 edition. David Noonan and Rich Redman are credited for the Dungeon Master's Guide 3.5 revision. Cover art is by Henry Higginbotham, with interior art by Matt Cavotta, Ed Cox, Lars Grant-West, Scott Fischer, John Foster, Jeremy Jarvis, John and Laura Lakey, Todd Lockwood, David Martin, Raven Mimura, Wayne Reynolds, Scott Roller, Brian Snoddy, Arnie Swekel, and Sam Wood. When asked about the changes from the previous Dungeon Master's Guide, Rich Redman said:[11] I think the most immediate, obvious, and dramatic change is the reorganization. When the 3rd Edition books came out, the adventure game was supposed to teach you about D&D (including both playing and DMing) and the adventure path modules were supposed to help you learn more about DMing. That meant that the DMG could be, more or less, a catalogue or encyclopedia of rules information, a reference book for DMs. With the demise of the adventure game (which had stopped printing long before we started on 3.5), we needed to focus the 3.5 books much more on introducing the game to players. That meant reorganizing the DMG in particular. Several years of published books that referred to pages and chapters in the DMG meant we could only reorganize so much, but the copies I've seen stayed pretty close to the way I reorganized it. The D&D Dungeon Master's Guide (v.3.5) was reproduced as a premium reprint on September 18, 2012.[12] Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition[edit] Dungeon Master's Guide (4E) Author James Wyatt, Wizards RPG Team Genre Role-playing game Publisher Wizards of the Coast Publication date June 2008 Media type Print (Hardback) Pages 224 ISBN 978-0-7869-4880-2 The 4th edition D&D Dungeon Master's Guide was released on June 6, 2008, at the same time as its companion volumes. It is a 224-page hardcover written by James Wyatt. The front cover illustration was by Wayne Reynolds and the back cover illustration is by Brian Hagan, with interior illustrations by Rob Alexander, Steve Argyle, Wayne England, Jason Engle, David Griffith, Espen Grundetjern, Brian Hagan, Ralph Horsley, Howard Lyon, Lee Moyer, William O'Connor, Wayne Reynolds, Dan Scott, Ron Spears, Chris Stevens, Anne Stokes, and Eva Widermann. In addition to a comprehensive look at how to DM a 4th Edition campaign or adventure, it contains information on building encounters, aquatic and mounted combat, skill challenges, traps and hazards, rewards, NPC creation, artifacts, monster creation, and template, along with a sample town and short adventure so that DMs can start running their first 4th Edition adventure right away. Although it does contain artifacts, it is the first Dungeon Master's Guide not to contain standard magic items, which were moved into the Player's Handbook for 4th Edition. Shannon Appelcline, author of Designers & Dragons, highlighted that the book introduced mechanical changes such as a "new style for adventure encounters" and a "skill challenge system" which were part of the key design philosophies of 4th edition. Appelcline wrote "besides revamping philosophies and rules, D&D 4e also revamped the game's standard world model and its cosmology" and "Wizards also introduced a new world setting that has become most popularly known as 'Nentir Vale' (though that just designates a small part of the world)".[13] In September 2009, the Dungeon Master's Guide 2 was released. It was written by James Wyatt, with Bill Slavicsek, Mike Mearls, and Robin D. Laws. Appelcline wrote "the original Dungeon Master's Guide had covered heroic adventuring (levels 1-10), so now the Dungeon Master's Guide 2 detailed paragon adventuring (levels 11-20). However, there is much more in the book too, including storytelling advice, skill challenge and monster customization, and the return of one of D&D's most beloved settings". The "fan-favorite setting of Sigil" was last revisited in depth in the Planescape Campaign Setting (1994) for the 2nd edition.[14] As part of the Essentials line of products, which were intended as an easy entry point for new players, Wizards of the Coast released a Dungeon Master's Kit (2010) that included a digest-sized book for the Dungeon Master containing much of the same material as the 4th edition Dungeon Master's Guide along with a two-part adventure module and a set of cardboard tokens for monsters.[15] Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition[edit] Dungeon Master's Guide (5E) Author Mike Mearls, Jeremy Crawford, Christopher Perkins, James Wyatt Genre Role-playing game Publisher Wizards of the Coast Publication date December 9, 2014 Media type Print (Hardback) Pages 320 ISBN 978-0786965625 The 5th edition Dungeons & Dragons Dungeon Master's Guide was released in 2014 as the last of three core rulebooks for the new edition. On the staggered release schedule, Jeremy Crawford wrote "our small team couldn’t finish the books at the same time and also ensure their high quality. [...] We could either stagger their releases, or we could sit on the books until all three were finished".[16] Crawford and Mike Mearls co-lead design for the Fifth Edition of Dungeons & Dragons. Polygon reported that the book "is by far the densest of the rulebooks yet released, but shares the same cover price — $50 in the US".[16] In an interview with Escapist Magazine, Mearls said:[17] Basic D&D hits core fantasy, it's stereotypical fantasy adventuring. If you're the DM and you want to do something more exotic, you say "I want to add technology to my game" or "I want to have more detailed rules for a grim and grittier game, more of a horror game." That's where the DMG comes in, it's for really fine-tuning your campaign, and creating a different type of experience than your standard fantasy campaign. It's also for expanding the scope of the game. [...] The DMG also has a lot of utilities in it, like for dungeon creation, adventure creation, creating monsters, creating spells, even if you wanted to create a character class. [...] So it's really for getting under the hood of how the system works and building up your campaign. Reception[edit] The book won the 2015 ENnie "Best Supplement" Gold award and the 2015 Origins "Best Role-Playing Game Supplement" and "Fan Favorite" awards.[18][19] Henry Glasheen, for SLUG Magazine, wrote "Fifth Edition, to my eyes, is the new gold standard for D20-based tabletop RPGs. It strips away the tedium of systems and statistics and replaces them with the true substance of role playing—deep, immersive stories. I’ve often found that the Dungeon Master’s Guide was the most vestigial of all the D&D manuals, but Fifth Edition has elevated this previously tertiary book into something far more important and useful".[20] Jonathan Bolding, for Escapist Magazine, wrote "however, on finishing the book it's clear that while many critics - myself included - thought that this system would hinge on the DMG, the DMG just confirmed what we already knew D&D 5th Edition to be. This is a living history of D&D, a collection of what the game has been so far. Perfection, not innovation. Options, not prescriptions".[21] Chuck Francisco of mania.com commented: "Miles of treasure tables escort a wealth of random adventure tables to the ball, where they're resplendent in all of their easy session crafting majesty. The versatility of this tome is nowhere more obvious than amongst the flavor filled side panels, which further detail the lower magical level of the main setting, before explaining all of the variable options a DM has in bringing to life a world of their own."[22] Reviews[edit] Casus Belli (v4, Issue 13 - Jan/Feb 2015)[23] References[edit] ^ a b "Dungeons & Dragons FAQ". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on May 14, 2010. Retrieved October 3, 2008. ^ a b Turnbull, Don (December 1979 – January 1980). "Open Box". White Dwarf (review). Games Workshop (16): 15. ^ a b c "The History of TSR". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on 2008-09-24. Retrieved 2005-08-20. ^ Livingstone, Ian (August–September 1979). "White Dwarf Interviews Gary Gygax". White Dwarf (interview) |format= requires |url= (help). Games Workshop (14): 23–24. ^ Pulsipher, Lewis (April–May 1981). "An Introduction to Dungeons & Dragons, Part II". White Dwarf (overview) |format= requires |url= (help). Games Workshop (24): 10–11. ^ Pulsipher, Lewis (February–March 1981). "An Introduction to Dungeons & Dragons". White Dwarf (overview) |format= requires |url= (help). Games Workshop (23): 8–9. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. p. 85. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ "Dungeon Master's Guide". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 24, 2013. ^ "Dungeon Master Guide". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 24, 2013. ^ "Profiles: Monte Cook". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#275): 10, 12, 14. September 2000. ^ Ryan, Michael (July 4, 2003). "Product Spotlight: D&D 3.5". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved August 11, 2013. ^ "3.5 Edition Premium Dungeon Master's Guide". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 24, 2013. ^ Appelcline, Shannon. "Dungeon Master's Guide (4e) - Product History". DriveThruRPG. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ Appelcline, Shannon. "Dungeon Master's Guide 2 (4e) - Product History". DriveThruRPG. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ Kulp, Kevin. "Dungeon Master's Kit (4e) - Product History". DriveThruRPG. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ a b Hall, Charlie (2014-12-08). "D&D's last core book is your comprehensive guide to breaking the rules". Polygon. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ Bolding, Jonathan (2 June 2014). "Inside the Launch of the New Dungeons & Dragons With Designer Mike Mearls". Escapist Magazine (v1). Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ "2015 ENnie Award Winners". ENNIE Awards. 2015-08-12. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ "2015 Origins Award Winners". icv2.com. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ Glasheen, Henry (2015-02-26). "D&D Fifth Edition: Dungeon Master's Guide Review". SLUG Magazine. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ Bolding, Jonathan (12 January 2015). "D&D Dungeon Master's Guide Review - A Toolbox, But is it Useful?". Escapist Magazine (v1). Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons Dungeon Master's Guide Review". January 5, 2015. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. ^ https://rpggeek.com/rpgissuearticle/162147/dungeons-master-guide Further reading[edit] "Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Combat Tables", White Dwarf #13. "Clerics Turning Undead", Footprints #7. "Expanded Secondary Skills", Footprints #8. "Master Encumbrance Guide: Lessening the Burden of Encumbrance", Footprints #7. "Sneak Preview: AD&D Dungeon Masters Guide", The Dragon #22. "The Complete Attack and Saving Throw Table", Footprints #10. External links[edit] Full list of contents for the AD&D Dungeon Master's Guide Errata Review of the AD&D Dungeon Master's Guide from RPG.net v t e Dungeons & Dragons rulebooks and accessories Original Dungeons & Dragons Core Dungeons & Dragons Chainmail Supplements Supplement I: Greyhawk Supplement II: Blackmoor Supplement III: Eldritch Wizardry Supplement IV: Gods, Demi-Gods, and Heroes Swords & Spells Basic Dungeons & Dragons Core Basic Set Expert Set Companion Set Master Rules Immortals Rules Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Creature Catalogue The Shady Dragon Inn Wrath of the Immortals Modules Adventures in Blackmoor Castle Amber Castle Caldwell and Beyond City of the Gods Combat Shield and Mini-adventure Curse of Xanathon Death's Ride The Duchy of Ten Earthshaker! The Endless Stair The Gem and the Staff Ghost of Lion Castle Horror on the Hill In Search of Adventure In Search of the Unknown The Isle of Dread The Jade Hare The Keep on the Borderlands The Kidnapping of Princess Arelina Legacy of Blood The Lost City Master Player Screen Mystery of the Snow Pearls Night's Dark Terror Palace of the Silver Princess Queen's Harvest Rahasia The Revenge of Rusak Sabre River Temple of the Frog Test of the Warlords The Tree of Life The Veiled Society War Rafts of Kron Where Chaos Reigns Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Core Players Handbook Dungeon Masters Guide Monster Manual Supplements Deities & Demigods Dragonlance Adventures Dungeoneer's Survival Guide Empires of the Sands Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Set Greyhawk Adventures Lords of Darkness The Magister Manual of the Planes Monster Manual II Moonshae Oriental Adventures The Savage Frontier Unearthed Arcana Waterdeep and the North Wilderness Survival Guide World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting Modules Against the Cult of the Reptile God Against the Giants The Assassin's Knot Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords The Bane of Llywelyn Beyond the Crystal Cave Blood of the Yakuza Bloodstone Pass The Bloodstone Wars Castle Greyhawk Conan Against Darkness! Conan Unchained! Danger at Dunwater Day of Al'Akbar Deep Dwarven Delve Descent into the Depths of the Earth Dragonlance modules Dragons of Despair Dungeonland Dwellers of the Forbidden City The Final Enemy The Forest Oracle Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun The Gauntlet The Ghost Tower of Inverness Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl Hall of the Fire Giant King The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan Isle of the Ape The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth The Lost Island of Castanamir Lost Tomb of Martek The Mines of Bloodstone Oasis of the White Palm Pharaoh Queen of the Demonweb Pits Queen of the Spiders Ravager of Time Ravenloft Ravenloft II: The House on Gryphon Hill Red Sonja Unconquered Ruins of Adventure Scourge of the Slave Lords The Secret of Bone Hill The Sentinel Shrine of the Kuo-Toa Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh Swords of Deceit Swords of the Undercity The Temple of Elemental Evil The Throne of Bloodstone To Find a King Tomb of Horrors Tomb of the Lizard King Treasure Hunt Under Illefarn Vault of the Drow The Village of Hommlet White Plume Mountain Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monstrous Compendium/Monstrous Manual Supplements Anauroch Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Artifacts The Code of the Harpers The Complete Book of Dwarves The Complete Book of Humanoids The Complete Fighter's Handbook The Complete Psionics Handbook The Dalelands Demihuman Deities Draconomicon Drow of the Underdark Dwarves Deep Earth, Air, Fire, and Water Faiths & Avatars Forgotten Realms Adventures The Forgotten Realms Atlas Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting From the Ashes Greyhawk: The Adventure Begins A Guide to the Astral Plane Hall of Heroes Heroes' Lorebook Iuz the Evil Jungles of Chult Legends & Lore The Marklands Monster Mythology Old Empires The Ruins of Undermountain The Shining South Tome of Magic Villains' Lorebook Adventures Against the Giants: The Liberation of Geoff The Bloodstone Lands Border Watch The City of Skulls Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad Die Vecna Die! The Doomgrinder Doom of Daggerdale Fate of Istus Five Shall Be One Gargoyle Greyhawk Ruins Halls of the High King House of Strahd Howl from the North Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure Night Below Patriots of Ulek Rary the Traitor Return of the Eight Return to the Keep on the Borderlands Return to the Tomb of Horrors Return to White Plume Mountain Slavers The Star Cairns Treasures of Greyhawk Vecna Lives! Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Challenges Book of Vile Darkness Defenders of the Faith Deities and Demigods Enemies and Allies Epic Level Handbook Faiths and Pantheons Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Ghostwalk Hero Builder's Guidebook Living Greyhawk Gazetteer Lords of Darkness Magic of Faerûn Monsters of Faerûn Manual of the Planes Masters of the Wild Monster Manual II Oriental Adventures Psionics Handbook Races of Faerûn Savage Species Song and Silence Stronghold Builder's Guidebook Sword and Fist Tome and Blood Adventures Bastion of Broken Souls City of the Spider Queen Deep Horizon The Forge of Fury The Fright at Tristor Heart of Nightfang Spire Lord of the Iron Fortress Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil The Speaker in Dreams The Standing Stone The Sunless Citadel Dungeons & Dragons v3.5 Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Dungeons & Dragons Basic Game Supplements An Adventurer's Guide to Eberron Book of Exalted Deeds City of Splendors: Waterdeep City of Stormreach Cityscape Complete Adventurer Complete Arcane Complete Champion Complete Divine Complete Mage Complete Psionic Complete Scoundrel Complete Warrior Draconomicon Dragon Magic Dragonmarked Dragons of Eberron Dragons of Faerûn Drow of the Underdark Dungeon Master's Guide II Dungeonscape Eberron Campaign Setting Elder Evils Exemplars of Evil Expanded Psionics Handbook Faiths of Eberron Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss Fiendish Codex II: Tyrants of the Nine Hells Five Nations The Forge of War Frostburn The Grand History of the Realms Heroes of Battle Heroes of Horror Libris Mortis Lords of Madness Lost Empires of Faerûn Magic Item Compendium Magic of Incarnum Miniatures Handbook Monster Manual III Monster Manual IV Monster Manual V Planar Handbook Player's Handbook II Races of Destiny Races of the Dragon Races of Stone Races of the Wild Rules Compendium Sandstorm Spell Compendium Stormwrack Tome of Battle: The Book of Nine Swords Tome of Magic Underdark Unearthed Arcana Weapons of Legacy Adventures Eberron Eyes of the Lich Queen Grasp of the Emerald Claw Shadows of the Last War Voyage of the Golden Dragon Whispers of the Vampire's Blade Expedition series Expedition to Castle Ravenloft Expedition to the Demonweb Pits Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk Expedition to Undermountain Fantastic Locations City of Peril Dragondown Grotto Fane of the Drow Fields of Ruin The Frostfell Rift Hellspike Prison Other adventures Barrow of the Forgotten King Fortress of the Yuan-Ti Red Hand of Doom Scourge of the Howling Horde The Shattered Gates of Slaughtergarde The Sinister Spire Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arcane Power Divine Power Dark Sun Campaign Setting Dungeon Master's Guide 2 Draconomicon: Chromatic Dragons Draconomicon: Metallic Dragons Eberron Campaign Guide Eberron Player's Guide Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide Forgotten Realms Player's Guide Manual of the Planes Martial Power Martial Power 2 Monster Manual 2 Monster Manual 3 Player's Handbook 2 Player's Handbook 3 Primal Power Psionic Power Adventures Assault on Nightwyrm Fortress Demon Queen's Enclave Keep on the Shadowfell King of the Trollhaunt Warrens Madness at Gardmore Abbey Marauders of the Dune Sea Orcs of Stonefang Pass Prince of Undeath Pyramid of Shadows Thunderspire Labyrinth Tomb of Horrors Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Elemental Evil Player's Companion Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide Volo's Guide to Monsters Xanathar's Guide to Everything Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica Acquisitions Incorporated Eberron: Rising from the Last War Explorer's Guide to Wildemount Mythic Odysseys of Theros Tasha's Cauldron of Everything Adventures Hoard of the Dragon Queen The Rise of Tiamat Princes of the Apocalypse Out of the Abyss Curse of Strahd Storm King's Thunder Tomb of Annihilation Waterdeep: Dragon Heist Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage Baldur's Gate: Descent Into Avernus Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden Anthologies Tales from the Yawning Portal Ghosts of Saltmarsh Candlekeep Mysteries Magazines Dragon Dungeon v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond