This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Author Skip Williams Genre Role-playing game Publisher TSR Publication date 1995 Media type Print (Hardcover) Pages 192 Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns is a supplemental sourcebook to the core rules of the 2nd edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D) fantasy role-playing game. Contents 1 Contents 2 Header 3 Publication history 4 Reception 5 References Contents[edit] High-Level Campaigns is split into seven sections. The book starts with "The Seven Maxims", a series of common-sense principles. Second is "Adventures", which offers a mechanic to generate custom lands and creatures. "Spells and Magical Items" addresses the nature of high-level magical powers, detailing suggested limits for both spells and magical items, while "Creating Magic Items" deals with high-level wizards who want to create weapons and wands and "Magical Duels" introduces a mage-specific combat system, with the idea that wizards can fight by proxy in a pseudo-world in which they can unleash their mightiest magic for any purpose. "True Dweomers" is an additional spell list, while "High-level Characters" suggests extra abilities to give to powerful characters.[1] Header[edit] The book begins with a one-page foreword by Skip Williams. Chapter One (pages 6–29) explains the seven maxims for running high-level AD&D campaigns: Don't depend on the dice, Use adversaries intelligently and inventively, Control magic, Be aware of demographics, Think on an epic scale, Plan ahead, and Share responsibility with your players. Chapter Two (pages 30–67) provides advice on how to construct adventures. Chapter Three (pages 68–85) expands on the use of spells and magical items. Chapter Four (pages 86–95) presents a guide for spellcasting characters to create magical items. Chapter Five (pages 96–117) details how to conduct magical duels between spellcasters. Chapter Six (pages 118-141) details true dweomers, spells more powerful than those presented in the Player's Handbook. Chapter Seven (pages 142-179) details how to advance high-level player characters beyond 20th level. An appendix (pages 180-188) lists the statistics of spells usable in spell dueling. Pages 189-192 are an index to the book. Publication history[edit] This 192-page book was published by TSR, Inc. in 1995. The book was designed by Skip Williams. The book's cover art is by Jeff Easley and interior art is by Eric Hotz, Ken Frank, and Stephan Peregrine. Reception[edit] Trenton Webb reviewed Dungeon Master Option: High-level Campaigns for Arcane magazine, rating it a 4 out of 10 overall.[1] Webb comments that "The AD&D system has a fundamental flaw: characters eventually become so potent that they can cope with anything the world (or alternative planes, or gods) can throw at them. High-level Campaigns seeks to remedy this, aiming to provide new inspiration and sensible controls for [...] high-level campaigns."[1] He comments that the "Adventures" section is "an attempt to reinvigorate the level-challenged DM" and calls the "True Dweomers" section "the obligatory additional spell list, with more 'earth-shaking' magic", and suggests that the "High-level Characters" section "suggests extra abilities to give powerful people a truly heroic swagger".[1] Webb concludes that "The Seven Maxims is the most essential section, though it contains little more than solid, common-sense rules that focus the minds of DMs and players", and that "Similar strong-but-simple ideas are crystallised in Magical Duels [which] is a complex but calculated system with unique spell-on-spell combat rules that make for invigorating battles."[1] Webb contends that "The new powers in High-level Characters fall into two kinds: style and substance. The style side is great, helping PCs to develop nuances of character, but the abilities in the substance part are really trivial things that will be overlooked by referees, but that players will attempt to transform into life-saving skills."[1] Referring to "The Seven Maxims", "Magical Duels", and "High-Level Characters" sections, he states that "These three good chapters constitute the majority of the book and are recommended reading. The other four chapters, however, fall into the trap of so many TSR supplements and guides; namely that rather than replacing or refining rules, ever more tables and lists are heaped on top of the old."[1] Webb concludes his review by saying: "High-level Campaigns is of interest but by no means essential. The Seven Maxims could add clarity, and Magical Duels might add excitement. Essentially, though, High-level Campaigns is an ideal present for a referee friend. That way you can borrow it, check out the good bits, and avoid that sinking feeling of having paid £12 for another earnest AD&D debate and yet another spell list.[1] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h Webb, Trenton (December 1995). "Games Reviews". Arcane. Future Publishing (1): 66. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond