Easter witches in 2008 and 1958 A girl dressed up as an Easter witch Easter witches (Swedish: påskkärring, 'easter hag',[1] 'easter witch',[1] Finland Swedish: påskhäxa, 'easter witch') is an old Swedish legend about witches flying to Blockula (Swedish: Blåkulla, Blå Jungfrun) on brooms on the Thursday before Easter (Maundy Thursday, sv:Skärtorsdagen) or on the night between the Wednesday (Holy Wednesday, sv:Dymmelonsdag) and Thursday before, and returning on Easter.[2] In modern times children dress up as witches, old ladies or in old men's clothing and go door to door distributing greetings and often receiving treats in return.[3] Contents 1 Witch persecutions 2 Modern times 3 Image gallery 4 References 5 External links Witch persecutions[edit] In the 1600s, fear of witches caused persecution and trials. More than 200 women were tortured to death in Sweden. The last witch was sentenced in 1704 but it was not until 1779 that the death penalty for witchcraft was repealed. Because of this during this time period doors and dampers were secured to guard against the travel of the witches to Blockula to meet the Devil. Any tools the witches could use on their trip were put away on Maundy Thursday. Barn doors were secured to prevent the witches from milking or riding the creatures.[4] Modern times[edit] In Sweden and Finland, it is an Easter tradition for children to dress as witches, old women and old men and go door to door for treats similar to the trick-or-treating tradition of Halloween on Maundy Thursday or the day before Easter (Holy Saturday).[5] The children sometimes present hand-made cards and other greetings.[2] Related to warding off witchcraft and at a similar time of year is the Walpurgis Night celebration. Image gallery[edit] Swedish Easter card from 1916. Witch with broom and coffee pot. Easter witch handing out gifts (tree twigs) in Finland in 1998. The small basket is for thank you gifts. Boys dressed as witches in Finland in 2009 References[edit] ^ a b Prisma's Swedish-English and English-Swedish Dictionary (Third ed.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 1995. pp. 304, 424. ^ a b "Små påskhäxor på jakt efter godis". Yle. April 13, 2017. ^ "Svenskspråkiga påskhäxor går ut på påskaftonen". Yle. March 13, 2010. ^ "Skärtorsdag". Nordiska Museet. Retrieved April 3, 2020. ^ "Sweden's Easter Witches". Time. 9 April 2009. Retrieved April 3, 2020. External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons v t e Scandinavian folklore Beings Askafroa Bäckahäst Bergsrå Changeling Deildegast Draugr Dwarf Elf Erlking Fossegrim Gjenganger Helhest Hulder Kraken Mara Myling Nisse Neck Rå Sjörå Skrømt Skogsrå Troll Troll cat Valravn Vargr Vættir Vǫrðr Will-o'-the-wisp Ysätters-Kajsa People Askeladden Blenda Disa Påskkärring Origins Norse mythology Old Norse religion v t e Holy Week and Easter Controversies Date (List) Etymology Observances Traditions Days Palm Sunday Holy Monday Holy Tuesday Holy Wednesday Maundy Thursday Good Friday Holy Saturday Easter Easter Monday Easter Friday Easter Saturday Events Shrovetide Lent Great Lent Paschal Triduum Bright Week Octave of Easter Second Sunday of Easter Divine Mercy Sunday Eastertide Mid-Pentecost Pentecost Trinity Sunday Christianity Passion of Jesus Last Supper Crucifixion of Jesus Burial of Jesus Resurrection of Jesus Dormition of the Theotokos Tenebrae Easter Vigil Epitaphios Exsultet Good Friday Prayer For Jews Jesus Lumen Christi Myrrhbearers Paschal candle Paschal cycle Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal trikirion Paschal troparion Pentecostarion Traditions Artos Burning of Judas Cascarón Clipping the church Croatian pisanica Crucession Easter basket Easter Bilby Easter bonnet Easter Bunny Easter egg Easter egg tree Easter parade Easter postcard Easter Sepulchre Egg dance Egg decorating Egg decorating in Slavic culture Egg hunt Egg rolling Egg tapping Egg tossing Fasika Gorzkie żale Holy Fire Holy Week procession Lieldienas Osterbrunnen Pace Egg play Polish pisanka Pysanka Radonitsa Rouketopolemos Saitopolemos Scoppio del carro Sunrise service Święconka Traditional Easter games and customs Media Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden, BWV 6 Christ lag in Todes Banden, BWV 4 Easter hymns Easter Oratorio Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen, BWV 66 Der Friede sei mit dir, BWV 158 Ein Herz, das seinen Jesum lebend weiß, BWV 134 Films Der Himmel lacht! Die Erde jubilieret, BWV 31 I Will Mention the Loving-kindnesses Ich lebe, mein Herze, zu deinem Ergötzen, BWV 145 Passion hymns Russian Easter Festival Overture Topics Computus Dionysius Exiguus' Easter table Easter controversy Easter Epic Ecclesiastical new moon Paschal Full Moon Pussy willow Reform of the date of Easter Society Ēostre Maslenitsa Salzburg Easter Festival