Sahara desert east of the Nile river This article is about the desert in Northeast Africa. For the Arabian Desert in the Arabian Peninsula, see Arabian Desert. The Nile River and the Eastern Desert. The Eastern Desert is the part of the Sahara desert that is located east of the Nile river, between the river and the Red Sea.[1][2] It extends from Egypt in the north to Eritrea in the south, and also comprises parts of Sudan and Ethiopia. The Eastern Desert is also known as the Red Sea Hills, the Arabian Desert, and the Arabian Mountain Ranges because to the east it is bordered by the Red Sea and because it was originally inhabited by Arabs in Pre-Islamic Egypt, respectively.[3][4][5] Contents 1 Features 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Features[edit] The Eastern Desert's main geographic features are the western Red Sea coastline—with the "Red Sea Riviera"—and the Eastern Desert mountain range that runs along the coast, the highest peak of which is Shaiyb al-Banat (2,187 m). Other notable ecological areas are Wadi Gamal National Park, Gebel Elba and the Wadi Dib ring complex. The Eastern Desert is a popular setting for safaris and other excursions. Gallery[edit] The Eastern Desert mountain range along the Safaga-Qena Road The Eastern Desert along the Hurghada-Safaga Road Early morning with the Eastern Desert mountain range on the horizon Tourist bus in the Eastern Desert Lunar landscape See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eastern Desert. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Libyan/Western Desert Geography of Egypt Anthony the Great References[edit] ^ Hobbs, Joseph J. (2007). Egypt. New York: Chelsea House. p. 26. ^ Zahran, M. A.; Willis, A. J. (2009). The Vegetation of Egypt. Berlin: Springer. p. 101. ^ Bard, Kathryn A. (2005). Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Routledge. p. 46. ISBN 1134665245. Retrieved 27 September 2017. ^ Flora Aegyptiaca, Volume 1, Issue 1. Palm Press. 2000. p. 5. ISBN 9775089344. Retrieved 27 September 2017. ^ Rawlinson, George. The History of Herodotus. p. 9. External links[edit] National Parks of Egypt v t e World deserts Desert Desertification Polar desert List of deserts List of deserts by area Desert exploration Africa Algerian Bayuda Black Desert Blue Chalbi Danakil Djurab Eastern Ferlo Farafra (White) Kalahari Libyan Moçâmedes Namib Nubian Nyiri Owami Richtersveld Sahara Tanezrouft Ténéré Western Asia Ad-Dahna Akshi Arabian Aral Karakum Aralkum Badain Jaran Betpak-Dala Bromo Sand Sea Cholistan Dasht-e Kavir Dasht-e Khash Dasht-e Leili Dasht-e Loot Dasht-e Margo Dasht-e Naomid Gurbantünggüt Gobi Hami Indus Valley Judaean Karakum Katpana Kharan Kumtag Kyzylkum La Paz Lop Maranjab Mu Us Muyunkum Nefud Negev Polond Ordos Qaidam Ramlat al-Sab'atayn Rub' al Khali Russian Arctic Registan Saryesik-Atyrau Sarykum Syrian Taklamakan Tengger Thal Thar Ustyurt Plateau Wahiba Sands Europe Accona Bardenas Reales Błędów Cabo de Gata Deliblatska Peščara Đurđevački Peski Hálendi Monegros Oleshky Oltenian Sahara Ryn Stranja Tabernas North America Alvord Amargosa Baja California Black Rock Carcross Carson Channeled scablands Chihuahuan Colorado Escalante Forty Mile Gran Desierto de Altar Great Basin Great Salt Lake Great Sandy Jornada del Muerto Kaʻū Lechuguilla Mojave North American Arctic Owyhee Painted Desert Red Desert Sevier Smoke Creek Sonoran Tonopah Desert Tule (Arizona) Tule (Nevada) Yuha Yuma Oceania Australia Gibson Great Sandy Great Victoria Little Sandy Nullarbor Plain Painted Pedirka Simpson Strzelecki Sturt Stony Tanami Tirari New Zealand Rangipo South America Atacama La Guajira Los Médanos de Coro Monte Patagonian Sechura Tatacoa Polar Regions Antarctica Arctic Greenland North American Arctic Russian Arctic Project Category Commons Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 Coordinates: 27°18′N 32°36′E﻿ / ﻿27.300°N 32.600°E﻿ / 27.300; 32.600 This Egypt location article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e