slang term in the Japanese language for playfully sexual actions The examples and perspective in this deal primarily with the Western world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this , discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new, as appropriate. (June 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Clothing which is too short or transparent (wet or not) is a typical element in works considered in the West as ecchi.[1] Part of a series on Anime and manga Anime History Voice acting Companies Original video animation Original net animation Fansub Fandub Lists Longest series Longest franchises Manga History Publishers International market Mangaka Doujinshi Alternative Gekiga Yonkoma Iconography Scanlation Lists Best-selling series Longest series Demographic groups Children Shōnen Shōjo Seinen Josei Genres Bara Cooking Harem Isekai Magical girl Mecha Ryona Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri People Mitsuru Adachi Fujio Akatsuka George Akiyama Hideaki Anno Hideo Azuma Clamp Osamu Dezaki Tetsuo Hara Mamoru Hosoda Yukinobu Hoshino Ryoichi Ikegami Kunihiko Ikuhara Ken Ishikawa Shotaro Ishinomori Ikki Kajiwara Tomoharu Katsumata Yoshiaki Kawajiri Shōji Kawamori Kitazawa Rakuten Kazuo Koike Satoshi Kon Masami Kurumada Kōichi Mashimo Katsuji Matsumoto Leiji Matsumoto Hayao Miyazaki Shigeru Mizuki Hideko Mizuno Shinji Mizushima Daijiro Morohoshi Tadao Nagahama Go Nagai Shinji Nagashima Daisuke Nishio Eiichiro Oda Kyoko Okazaki Mamoru Oshii Rintaro Takao Saito Hiroshi Sasagawa Junichi Sato Sanpei Shirato Masamune Shirow Gisaburō Sugii Isao Takahata Osamu Tezuka Akira Toriyama Year 24 Group Tatsuo Yoshida Tsutomu Nihei Fandom Conventions Clubs Cosplay Anime music video Otaku Yaoi fandom General Glossary Ecchi Hentai Lolicon Moe Anime-influenced animation 2.5D musical  Anime and manga portal v t e Ecchi (エッチ, etchi, pronounced [et.tɕi]) is an often used slang term in the Japanese language for playfully sexual actions. As an adjective, it is used with the meaning of "sexy", "dirty" or "naughty"; as a verb, ecchi suru (エッチする or Ｈする) means “to have sex” or, as a noun, to describe someone of lascivious behavior. It is perhaps softer than the Japanese word ero (エロ from Eros), and does not imply perversion in the way hentai does. The word ecchi has been adopted by western fans of Japanese media to describe works with sexual overtones. In Japanese, the word ecchi is often used to describe a person's conduct, but in western fandom, it has come to be used to refer to softcore or playful sexuality, as distinct from the word hentai, which connotes perversion or fetishism.[2] Works described as ecchi by the western fans do not show sexual intercourse or genitalia, but sexual themes are referenced. Ecchi themes are a type of fan service, and can be found in most comedy shōnen and seinen manga and harem anime.[3][4] Contents 1 Etymology and use in Japan 2 Western usage 2.1 Typical examples 2.1.1 Nudity 2.1.2 Panties 2.1.3 Sexual activity 3 See also 4 References Etymology and use in Japan[edit] The correct transcription of the word エッチ in Hepburn notation is "etchi".[5] However, it is typically written as "ecchi". In the word hentai (変態), the first kanji hen refers to strangeness, and the second kanji tai refers to a condition or state. Hentai was introduced in the Meiji period as a term for change of form or transformation in science and psychology. In this context, it was used to refer to disorders such as hysteria or to describe paranormal phenomena like hypnosis or telepathy.[6] Slowly, the meaning expanded until it had the meaning of non-standard. In the 1910s, it was used in sexology in the compound expression "hentai seiyoku" (変態性欲, abnormal sexual desire)[7] and became popular within the theory of sexual deviance (Hentai seiyoku ron), published by Eiji Habuto and Jun'ichirō Sawada in 1915.[8][9] In the 1920s, many publications dealt with deviant sexual desires and the Ero Guro Nansensu movement. Matsuzawa calls it a period characterized by a "hentai boom".[10] In the 1930s, censorship became more common leading to fewer books being published on this theme.[11] After the Second World War, in the 1950s, interest in hentai was renewed, and people would sometimes refer to it just by the first English letter, H (pronounced as エッチ, /eɪtʃ/). In 1952, the magazine Shukan Asahi reported that a woman who was groped by a stranger in a movie theater reacted with "ara etchi yo" ("hey, that's perverse"). In this context, etchi should be understood as sexually forward and is synonymous to iyarashii (嫌らしい, dirty or disgusting) or sukebe (すけべ, a person with sex on the brain). From this, the word etchi started to branch off, and assume new connotations. In the 1960s, etchi started to be used by youth to refer to sex in general. By the 1980s, it was used to mean sex as in the phrase etchi suru (to have sex).[6][12][13] Other neologisms such as sekkusu are often used to refer to sex, in addition to the term ecchi. Ecchi is now used as a qualifier for anything related to erotic or pornographic content. Its exact meaning varies with context, but in general, it is most similar to the English word "naughty" (when used as an adjective). The Japanese media tend to use other words, e.g. ero-manga (エロ), adult manga (アダルト), or anime / manga for persons over 18 years (18禁アニメ, 18禁). The prefix "H-" is also sometimes used to refer to pornographic genres, e.g. H-anime, H-manga, etc. Western usage[edit] In Japan, oiroke manga (お色気漫画) is used to describe manga with very light or playful erotic content such as is found in shonen manga. In western nations though, ecchi has become the preferred term. The more explicit seijin manga (成人向け漫画, seijinmukemanga) are more likely to be referred to as hentai in the west. This does correlate to a similar distinction in Japanese. For instance, if a young woman were to call a young man e(t/c)chi, that might be construed as flirting, whereas hentai sounds more like condemnation.[14] [...] Bezeichnet erotische Darstellungen. Im Vergleich zu Hentai weniger explizit. [...] [Ecchi] refers to erotic depictions. In comparison to hentai, it is less explicit. — Sebastian Keller, Der Manga und seine Szene in Deutschland von den Anfängen in den 1980er Jahren bis zur Gegenwart: Manga- mehr als nur große Augen[2] Works aimed at a female audience can contain scenes which are seen as ecchi. Examples are R-18 Love Report! from Emiko Sugi and Oruchuban Ebichu from Risa Itō, which are aimed at the shōjo and josei audience, but contain rather explicit content.[3][4] Common elements of ecchi include conversations with sexual references or misunderstandings (e.g. double entendre or innuendo), misunderstandings in visual depictions (e.g. suggestive posing), revealing or sexualized clothing (e.g. underwear or cosplay), nudity (e.g. ripped apart clothing, wet clothing, clothing malfunctions) and the portrayal of certain actions (e.g. groping). This kind of sexuality is often used for comical effect. A typical example scene would contain a male protagonist that trips over a female character, giving the impression of sexual harassment. The concept of ecchi is very closely related to fan service. While fan service describes every aspect to please the fans, ecchi relates to sexual themes. A special kind of fan service, that is usually bound or justified by the narrative.[15] Typical examples[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There are many elements that may classify a work as ecchi, but these elements have to occur quite often (for example, in all episodes of a show). Graphically speaking, different techniques are used to show sexy pictures, usually by revealing parts of the female body such as the back or breasts. Some of these patterns are recurrent, such as scenes in a shower, hot springs (onsen), or fighting scenes in which clothes are torn apart. The imagination of characters is also a common device for showing their sexual fantasies, as well as transformation scenes of magical girls. In the end, any excuse is valid to show a character partially or completely nude.[1] Nudity[edit] Censorship with artificial light rays is one common method to hide some elements in anime television series. The degree of censorship can vary widely across television stations, even among those broadcasting the series at the same time. Levels of nudity vary strongly between works depending on the intended audience and the preferences of the authors. For example, in some cases, though the breasts are shown on the screen, nipples and genitals are obscured by props, clothing, or effects. This kind of censorship was typical for Lala Satalin Deviluke in To Love Ru, Blair in Soul Eater or even Asuka Langley Soryu from Neon Genesis Evangelion. Meanwhile, in Ladies versus Butlers! and other anime, the nipples are clearly visible through clothing, no matter how thick it is. Nosebleeds are a typical reaction to nudity in Japanese works, as they represent sexual arousal; this is due to an exaggeration of high blood pressure whilst aroused. Panties[edit] The use of panty shots (panchira), or visibility of the underwear (panties), is one common motif. Typically the male will react in an exaggerated manner and be castigated. The color and style of the panties are seen as an indication of the female's character, e.g. white for innocent characters, striped for shy characters, and red for sexually aggressive characters. Panties are a popular main theme in ecchi (for instance, Chobits and Panty & Stocking with Garterbelt feature them heavily), but they are also featured in other shows just for sexual appeal. Another image frequently associated in the West with ecchi, though it is closer to the hentai section of anime. This may also be referred to as a panty shot. Sexual activity[edit] Although revealing or sexualized clothing, nudity or groping may occur in ecchi works, there usually is no explicit sexual intercourse in the works; in the west, such works are classified as hentai. However, in an ecchi work, it may appear as if a couple are having sex. For instance, the two may be seen in silhouette from outside a tent, appearing to be having sex, although they are doing something nonsexual.[1] See also[edit] Adult animation Cartoon pornography Exhibitionism Fan service Hentai Nudity in film Rule 34 Scopophilia Softcore porn Voyeurism References[edit] ^ a b c Steiff, Josef; Tamplin, Tristan D. (2010). Anime and Philosophy. Popular Culture and Philosophy. Vol. 47. Open Court Puplishing. ISBN 978-0-8126-9670-7. |volume= has extra text (help) ^ a b Sebastian Keller: Der Manga und seine Szene in Deutschland von den Anfängen in den 1980er Jahren bis zur Gegenwart: Manga- mehr als nur große Augen, GRIN Verlag, 2008, ISBN 978-3-638-94029-0, p. 127 ^ a b Robin E. Brenner: Understanding manga and anime. Libraries Unlimited, 2007, ISBN 978-1-59158-332-5, p. 89. ^ a b Ask John: Why Do Americans Hate Harem Anime?. animenation.net. May 20. 2005. Note: fan service and ecchi refer to similar concepts. ^ After the sources of the article Hepburn romanization. In Hepburn, the sokuon (っ, small tsu) is romanized t before ch. ^ a b Hikaru, Saitō (2004). Hentai—H. Sei no yōgoshū (Kansai seiyoku kenkyūkai ed.). Kōdansha gendaishinsho. pp. 45–58. ^ Robertson, Jennifer (1991). Gender and the State in Japan. Theatrical Resistance, Theatres of Restraint: The Takarazuka Revue and the "State Theatre" Movement in Japan. Vol. 64. The George Washington University Institute for Ethnographic Research. pp. 165–177. |volume= has extra text (help) ^ Robertson, Jennifer (1999). Dying to Tell: Sexuality and Suicide in Imperial Japan. Vol.25. The University of Chicago Press. p. 21. |volume= has extra text (help) ^ Reichert, Jim. Deviance and Social Darwinism in Edogawa Ranpo's Erotic-Grotesque Thriller "Kotō no oni". Journal of Japanese Studies. Vol. 27. The Society for Japanese Studies. p. 128. |volume= has extra text (help) ^ Goichi Matsuzawa (1997). Meiji, Taishō, Shōwa, kindai fūzoku shuppan no rekishi, Ero no hon. Tokyo. Wani no ana. p. 55 ^ Sabine Frühstück (2003). Colonizing Sex: Sexology and Social Control in Modern Japan. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-23548-7. p. 15 ^ Mark McLelland (2006). "A Short History of 'Hentai'". In: Intersections: Gender, History and Culture in the Asian Context. Vol. 12. ^ Cunningham, Phillip J. (1995). Zakennayo!. Penguin Group. p. 30. ^ Jonathan Clements, Helen McCarthy: The anime encyclopedia: a guide to Japanese animation since 1917, Edition 2, Stone Bridge Press, 2006, University of California, ISBN 1-933330-10-4, p. 30 ^ Robin E. Brenner: Understanding Manga and Anime. Libraries Unlimited, 2007, ISBN 1-59158-332-2, p. 295 v t e Animation industry in Japan History of anime Companies/studios Active 3Hz A.C.G.T A.P.P.P. AIC Ajia-do Animation Works Aniplex A-1 Pictures CloverWorks Arvo Animation Asahi Broadcasting Corporation DLE Silver Link Asahi Production Asatsu-DK Eiken Gonzo NAS Ashi Productions Asread AXsiZ Bandai Namco Holdings Bandai Namco Arts Actas Sunrise Bandai Namco Pictures Happinet Bibury Animation Studios Bones Brain's Base Bridge C-Station C2C CoMix Wave Films Creators in Pack CyberAgent Cygames CygamesPictures Dentsu Digital Frontier GEMBA Diomedéa Doga Kobo Egg Firm Eight Bit Emon Ekachi Epilka EMT Squared Encourage Films Ezo'la Feel Felix Film Fuji TV Blue Lynx David Production Frontier Works G&G Direction Gaina Gainax Gallop Gathering Geek Pictures Geek Toys Genco GoHands Graphinica Yumeta Company Grizzly Hoods Entertainment IG Port Production I.G Signal.MD Wit Studio J.C.Staff Kadokawa Corporation Dwango ENGI Khara Kinema Citrus Kyoto Animation Lapin Track Lesprit Magic Bus Maho Film MAPPA Marvelous Millepensee Movic NAZ Nexus Nippon Animation Nippon TV Madhouse Tatsunoko Production Nomad NUT Odessa Entertainment Oh! Production Okuruto Noboru OLM Orange Passione P.A.Works Pierrot Studio Signpost Pine Jam Platinum Vision Polygon Pictures Project No.9 Robot Communications Satelight Science SARU Sega Sammy Holdings TMS Entertainment Marza Animation Planet Seven Shaft Shirogumi Shuka Sola Digital Arts Square Enix Visual Works Studio 4°C Studio A-Cat Studio Bind Studio Chizu Studio Comet Studio Deen Studio Ghibli Studio Gokumi Studio Hibari Larx Entertainment Lerche Studio Nue Studio Ponoc Studio Puyukai Studio VOLN SynergySP Tezuka Productions TNK Tokyo Broadcasting System Seven Arcs Toei Company Toei Animation Troyca TV Asahi Shin-Ei Animation Twin Engine Geno Studio Lay-duce Revoroot Studio Colorido Typhoon Graphics Ufotable Ultra Super Pictures Liden Films Sanzigen Trigger White Fox Yokohama Animation Laboratory Zero-G Zexcs Inactive Artland Bee Train Production Chaos Project Daume Imagin Knack Productions Mook Animation Mushi Production Ordet Remic Defunct Arms Artmic Bandai Visual Connect Group TAC Hal Film Maker J2 Communications Jetlag Productions Kitayama Eiga Seisakujo Kitty Films (Mitaka Studio) Kokusai Eiga-sha Manglobe Palm Studio Production IMS Radix Ace Entertainment Spectrum Animation Studio Fantasia Tear Studio Topcraft Triangle Staff Tsuchida Production Walt Disney Animation Japan Xebec Yaoyorozu Industry associations The Association of Japanese Animations Japanese Animation Creators Association Awards Animation Kobe Awards Animax Anison Grand Prix Anime Grand Prix Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year Japan Media Arts Awards Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film Newtype Anime Award Ōfuji Noburō Award Seiyu Awards Sugoi Japan Award Tokyo Anime Award Types Original net animation (ONA) Original video animation (OVA) Television Late night UHF Genres Bara Cooking Ecchi Futanari Girls with guns Harem Hentai Tentacle erotica Isekai Lolicon Kaitō Magical girl Mecha Ryona Shotacon Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri Anime programming blocks Animeism Noitamina +Ultra Related topics Animage Animedia Katsudō Shashin Kinema Junpo Manga Newtype Portal v t e Lists of anime and manga By genre Action Adventure Comedy Cooking Drama Fantasy Harem Hentai Anime Manga Horror Idol Magical girl Mecha Mystery Romance Anime Manga Science fiction Sports Slice of life Yaoi Yuri By broadcaster Fuji Television Nippon Television TV Tokyo Mainichi Broadcasting System Tokyo Broadcasting System NHK Hero (defunct) By publisher Akita Shoten ASCII Media Works Gangan Comics Hakusensha Shogakukan Other Anime Based on video games In the United States Simulcasts Theatrically released In India By episode count By release date (pre-1939) (1939-1945) (1946–1959) By total episode count Highest-grossing films Osamu Tezuka Titles by Green Bunny Manga Best-selling Magazines by circulation By volume count In English Artists Publishers Distributors The New York Times Best Sellers Osamu Tezuka See also Years in anime Anime conventions Highest-grossing media franchises List of bisexual characters in anime List of lesbian characters in anime List of gay characters in anime v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie