Fictional car from the Ghostbusters franchise This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: New article, tonnes of opportunity for expansion. Please help improve this article if you can. (August 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Ecto-1 Ectomobile Plot element from the Ghostbusters franchise Publisher Columbia-Delphi Productions Black Rhino First appearance Ghostbusters 1984 Created by Dan Aykroyd Harold Ramis Genre Adventure In-story information Type Car Element of stories featuring Ghostbusters Function Travel Affiliation Ghostbusters The Ectomobile is a fictional vehicle from the Ghostbusters franchise. It appears in the films Ghostbusters (1984), Ghostbusters II (1989), the remake Ghostbusters (2016), in the animated television series: The Real Ghostbusters, Slimer! and Extreme Ghostbusters, and in the video games Ghostbusters: The Video Game and Beeline's Ghostbusters and coming to the upcoming film Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Contents 1 Creation and conception 2 Other versions 3 References Creation and conception[edit] The Ectomobile, or Ecto-1 is a 1959 Cadillac Miller-Meteor Futura Duplex [1] limo-style endloader combination car (ambulance conversion) used in the 1984 film Ghostbusters and other Ghostbusters fiction.[2][3] The original vehicle design was the creation of Steven Dane, credited as a Hardware Consultant in the credits. In the original movie, Stantz pays $4800 (equivalent to $11,812 in 2019) for it and claims it needs a plethora of repairs.[4] In Stantz's own words, "it needs "suspension work and shocks, brakes, brake pads, lining, steering box, transmission, rear end... maybe new rings, also mufflers, a little wiring...." After the necessary reconstruction, it is used to carry the Ghostbusters and their ghost-capturing equipment through New York City. Its features include a special pull-out rack utilizing the old ambulance's gurney in the rear containing the staff's proton packs. There are also various gadgets mounted on the top, whose function is never revealed in the movies. A cartoon episode features the proton cannon, presumably a more powerful version of a proton pack, mounted on top for use against extra-large or even giant-sized paranormal entities. Earlier versions of scripts written by Aykroyd for the first Ghostbusters also includes mentions of the Ectomobile having the power of interdimensional travel. The shooting script for the movie describes the Ectomobile as being black, with purple and white strobe lights that gave the vehicle a "purple aura". A miniature replica of the vehicle was mass-produced as a children's toy. Polar Lights released a 1/24 scale model kit of the Ecto-1 in 2002. In 2010, Hot Wheels released a "Ghostbusters Ecto-1" as part of the "2010 Hot Wheels Premiere" series. Hot Wheels Elite released a highly detailed 1/18 diecast of the Ecto-1 in 2010 and in early 2013, they released a 1/18 Ecto-1A as seen in Ghostbusters II.[5][6] The repaired Ectomobile is named on-screen with the license plate shown reading "Ecto-1". The word Ectomobile was only used in the song "Cleaning Up The Town" from the film's soundtrack. The filmmakers planned to have the Ecto-1 painted black, but the color of the vehicle was changed to white when it was decided a black car would be too difficult to see during night scenes. Three cars have played the vehicle in the movies; the third 1959 Miller-Meteor was purchased after the second died during shooting of Ghostbusters II. The black Miller-Meteor seen at the beginning of the first movie was leased and used only for that scene and never converted for filming, though it was later purchased by the studio and completely converted to a full Ecto-1 for touring. Both of the other Ectomobiles are currently sitting in a Sony pictures backlot, having undergone a full restoration after years of deterioration.[citation needed] Universal Studios "Spooktacular" stage show featured an Ectomobile replica built by a man from Tennessee.[7] The Universal Studios Ecto-1 Replica was sold at the Barrett-Jackson auto auction in Scottsdale Arizona on January 22, 2010 for $80,000.[8] Another replica was made by Peter Mosen and bought by George Barris. Another replica currently resides at Historic Auto Attractions museum in Roscoe, Illinois.[9] Other versions[edit] Throughout other Ghostbusters fiction, a number of other Ectomobiles are introduced. In the 1984 computer game adaptation, players are given the choice between the 1959 hearse (which looked the most like Ecto-1), a cheap VW Beetle, a spacious station wagon and a high performance (but low-capacity) sports car. Ecto-1a is an upgraded version of the Ecto-1, seen only in Ghostbusters II, which includes more technical equipment on the vehicle's roof and digital announcement boards on each side of it. The logo is updated and added to the hood. The vehicle also sports strips of yellow and black along either side. A new Ecto-1 based on a 1984 Cadillac de Ville appears in the 2016 reboot, originating as a hearse borrowed by Patty Tolan from her uncle's funeral home. Even after being repainted, modified to carry the team's equipment, and fitted with a nuclear reactor, it retains its original pink roof color. They deliberately destroy it by overloading its systems with beams from their proton packs, in order to force a swarm of invading ghosts back through the portal they had used to enter the material world. Ecto-1b is featured in Ghostbusters: The Video Game; the 1b is similar to the 1a, but features upgraded equipment and the addition of the Super Slammer Trap, an enhanced capacity ghost trap, on its roof. Ectotron is a Cybertronian who can transform into the Ecto-1. He was first introduced in the Ghostbusters/Transformers crossover comic "Ghosts of Cybertron" published by IDW Publishing, and was released as a Transformers figure by Hasbro and Takara Tomy as a GameStop and Hasbro Pulse exclusive. It was released alongside a Ghostbusters-themed MP-10 Optimus Prime. Ecto-2 is a small open-topped two-seater autogyro is seen in the cartoons and the comic based on them, and was released as a toy. In the 2016 reboot film, Ecto-2 is a white Ghostbusters motorbike provided by Kevin just before Rowan possesses him. Ecto-3 has been the name of three different vehicles: a motorized unicycle and sidecar that slips into the Ecto-1's rear fender in the Real Ghostbusters episode "The Joke's on Ray"[10][unreliable source] a time-distortion jet-like vehicle invented by Egon in the comics that is renamed Ecto-4 after the cartoon's unicycle version debuted a go-kart-like vehicle sold as a toy Ecto-Bomber is an airplane based on the Kenner toy. Extreme Ecto-1 is seen in the Extreme Ghostbusters TV series. The vehicle is equipped with new detection equipment and emergency lights, and has wheelchair access for Garrett Miller. It is mentioned that before the adaptations were made it was a 1970s Cadillac hearse. Ecto-Ichi (ichi means "one" in Japanese) is an extremely high tech six-wheeled Ectomobile supplied to the Ghostbusters by the Japanese government for a job in Tokyo. It can fly and travel on water, but is destroyed when a Godzilla-esque monster stepped on it. Ecto-8 is featured in the 2009 video game, and is a tugboat used to transport the team to Shandor island. It is driven by Ray, who refers to it as "Marine Ecto-8". Ecto-8 is identical in body to a traditional tugboat, but has a white paint scheme and the logo on the side. A Ghostbusters video game in development in 2007 featured a more modern version of the Ectomobile based on a stretched Chrysler 300C. References[edit] ^ "1959 Cadillac Ambulance Miller-Meteor Futura in "Ghost Busters, 1984"". IMCDb.org. Retrieved September 9, 2013. ^ "1959 Cadillac Ambulance Miller-Meteor Futura in "Ghostbusters II, 1989"". IMCDb.org. Retrieved September 9, 2013. ^ "1959 Cadillac Ambulance Miller-Meteor in "The Real Ghostbusters, 1986–1991"". IMCDb.org. Retrieved September 9, 2013. ^ "United States Bureau of Labor and Statistics Inflation Calculator". United States Bureau of Labor and Statistics. Retrieved June 15, 2009. ^ "Hot Wheels Elite Ghostbusters 1/18 Ecto-1". Hot Wheels. Retrieved March 5, 2013. ^ "Hot Wheels Elite Ghostbusters 1/18 Ecto-1A". Hot Wheels. Retrieved March 5, 2013. ^ LeBlond, Gerard (February 28, 2014). "Ghostbusters Ectomobile LEGO Replica". Daily Orbit. Archived from the original on September 28, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Fans Start Petition To Restore Ecto-1A From Ghostbusters II". Edmunds. Retrieved 2019-12-21. ^ "Historic Auto Attractions". www.historicautoattractions.com. Retrieved 2019-12-21. ^ "The Ectos". Ecto Containment. Archived from the original on June 29, 2009. Retrieved December 4, 2017. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ecto-1. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) v t e Ghostbusters Ghost Corps Films Ghostbusters Ghostbusters II Ghostbusters (2016) Ghostbusters: Afterlife Television The Real Ghostbusters episodes Extreme Ghostbusters Comics The Real Ghostbusters Ghostbusters: Legion Video games Ghostbusters (1984) The Real Ghostbusters (1987) Ghostbusters (1990) Ghostbusters II NES Ghostbusters II The Computer Game New Ghostbusters II The Real Ghostbusters (1993) Ghostbusters: The Video Game Ghostbusters: Sanctum of Slime Ghostbusters (2016) Characters Peter Venkman Ray Stantz Egon Spengler Winston Zeddemore Janine Melnitz Stay Puft Marshmallow Man Slimer Music Ghostbusters "Ghostbusters" Ghostbusters II "On Our Own" 2016 soundtrack "Good Girls" "Girls Talk Boys" 2016 score Ghostbusters: Afterlife Related Ghostheads Proton pack Ectomobile 55 Central Park West Firehouse interior Role-playing game Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue The Earth Day Special Casper Zuul Lego Ghostbusters Category v t e Cars starring in movies and TV series 1 Movies 1 Aston Martin DB5 James Bond Chevrolet Camaro Transformers DeLorean time machine Back to the Future Dodge Challenger Vanishing Point Dodge Charger Fast & Furious Dodge Monaco "Bluesmobile" The Blues Brothers Ford Falcon "Pursuit Special" Mad Max Ford Mustang Bullitt Ford Mustang "Eleanor" Gone in 60 Seconds Ford Torino Gran Torino Ectomobile Ghostbusters Plymouth Fury Christine Pontiac Firebird Smokey and the Bandit Porsche 917 Le Mans Toyota 2000GT You Only Live Twice Volkswagen Beetle Bumblebee Volkswagen Beetle "Herbie" Herbie TV series Buick Century Kojak Dodge Charger "General Lee" The Dukes of Hazzard Ferrari 308 Magnum, P.I. Ferrari Daytona Miami Vice Ford Capri The Professionals Ford Torino "Striped Tomato" Starsky & Hutch GMC Vandura The A-Team Imperial Crown "Black Beauty" The Green Hornet Lincoln Futura "Batmobile" Batman Lotus Elan The Avengers Mach 5 Speed Racer Oldsmobile Vista Cruiser That '70s Show Pontiac Firebird "KITT" Knight Rider Pontiac GTO "Monkeemobile" The Monkees Porter My Mother the Car Reliant Regal Only Fools and Horses 1 Movies based on TV series (and vice versa) are not listed to avoid redundancy