This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2015) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In the Kabbalah, Eisheth Zenunim (Heb. אֵשֶׁת זְנוּנִים, "Woman of Whoredom") is a princess of the Qliphoth who rules Sathariel, the order of the Qliphoth of Binah.[1] She is found in the Zohar 1:5a-b as "isheth zennanim" or "qodeshah." In Jewish mythology, she is said to eat the souls of the damned. In Jacqueline Carey's Kushiel's Legacy saga, Eisheth is one of eight angels who follow Elua. She was noted for being gentle. In the series, she is noted as the patron angel of music, medicine, and art, and associated with the sea. Her province is Eisande. See also[edit] Many Waters References[edit] ^ Crowley, Aleister. Liber 777. p. 23. v t e Angels in Abrahamic religions Angels in Judaism Individuals Michael Gabriel Raphael Uriel Angel of the Lord Azrael Ariel Arariel Azazel Camael Cassiel Dobiel Dumah Eisheth Hadraniel Haniel Jerahmeel Jophiel Kushiel Mastema Metatron Nuriel Pravuil Raziel Sachiel Samael Samyaza Tzaphqiel Yahoel Zadkiel Zerachiel Groups Seraphim Chayot Ophanim Cherubim Ishim Recording angels Angels in Christianity Individuals Michael Gabriel Abaddon Raphael Uriel Ariel Azazel Sariel Sandalphon Raguel Ramiel Selaphiel Barachiel Jegudiel Camael Guardian Angel of Portugal Jerahmeel Jophiel Metatron Samyaza Pravuil Sachiel Zadkiel Sarathiel Zerachiel Phanuel Aker Gabuthelon Arphugitonos Beburos Zebuleon Daniel Kerubiel Kokabiel Kushiel Leliel Muriel Pahaliah Seraphiel Shamsiel Moroni* Chazaqiel Groups Archangels Seraphim Ophanim Cherubim Thrones Dominions Virtues Powers Principalities Recording angels Guardian angels Angels in Islam Individuals Mikha'il Jibra'il (Holy Spirit) Israfil Azazil Azra'il Artiya'il Darda'il Dumah Habib Iblis Harut and Marut Kalqa'il Maalik Munkar and Nakir Riḍwan Groups Archangels Bearers of the Throne Cherubim Darda'il Hafaza Mu'aqqibat Nāzi'āt and Nāshiṭāt Nineteen Angels of Hell Praying angels Recording angels Seraphim Related Hierarchy of angels Heavenly host Seven Archangels Three Angels' Messages Watcher Fallen angels List of angels in theology Angels in art Films about angels This Kabbalah-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e