The Pleiades This article is about one of the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione. For other uses, see Electra (Greek myth). The Pleiad Electra (/ɪˈlɛktrə/; Greek: Ἠλέκτρα, Ēlektra "amber", "shining," and "bright.") of Greek mythology was one of the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione. Electra was the wife of Corythus, to whom she bore Iasion. She was seduced by Zeus and gave birth to Dardanus.[1] One author claim that Dardanus' real father was Corythus.[2] Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e Contents 1 Mythology 2 Family tree 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Mythology[edit] According to one legend, she was the lost Pleiad, disappearing in grief after the destruction of Troy. She was called Atlantis by Ovid, personifying the family of Pleiades. Family tree[edit] v t e Trojan race Oceanus Tethys Atlas Pleione Scamander Idaea Simoeis Zeus/Jupiter Electra Teucer Dardanus Batea Ilus Erichthonius Astyoche Callirrhoe Tros Ilus Ganymede Assaracus Hieromneme Laomedon Themiste Capys Priam Anchises Aphrodite/Venus Latinus Creusa of Troy Aeneas Lavinia Ascanius Silvius Silvius Aeneas Silvius Brutus of Britain Latinus Silvius Alba Atys Capys Capetus Tiberinus Silvius Agrippa Romulus Silvius Aventinus Procas Numitor Amulius Ares/Mars Rhea Silvia Hersilia Romulus Remus See also[edit] 130 Elektra, asteroid Notes[edit] ^ Servius, Commentary on Virgil's Aeneid 3.167, 7.207, 10.719 ^ Lactantius, Divine Institutes 1.23 "But according to some authorities, Dardanus and Iasius were sons of Coritus, not of Jupiter. For if it had been so, Jupiter could not have formed that unchaste connection with Ganymede, his own descendant." References[edit] Lactantius, Divine Institutes, Translated by William Fletcher (1810-1900). From Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 7. Edited by Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson, and A. Cleveland Coxe. (Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co., 1886.) Online version at the Topos Text Project. Maurus Servius Honoratus, In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. External links[edit] Theoi Project - Electra, Pleiad Star-Nymph of Mount Saon This article relating to a Greek deity is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e