Genus of carnivores "Sea elephant" redirects here. For the superfamily of sea slugs, see Pterotracheoidea. Elephant seal Male and female northern elephant seals Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Carnivora Clade: Pinnipediformes Clade: Pinnipedia Family: Phocidae Tribe: Miroungini Muizon, 1981 Genus: Mirounga Gray, 1827 Species M. angustirostris M. leonina Elephant seals are large, oceangoing earless seals in the genus Mirounga. The two species, the northern elephant seal (M. angustirostris) and the southern elephant seal (M. leonina), were both hunted to the brink of extinction by the end of the 19th century, but their numbers have since recovered. They are the largest extant carnivorans. The northern elephant seal, somewhat smaller than its southern relative, ranges over the Pacific coast of the U.S., Canada and Mexico. The most northerly breeding location on the Pacific Coast is at Race Rocks, at the southern tip of Vancouver Island in the Strait of Juan de Fuca. The southern elephant seal is found in the Southern Hemisphere on islands such as South Georgia and Macquarie Island, and on the coasts of New Zealand, South Africa, and Argentina in the Peninsula Valdés. In southern Chile, there is a small colony of 120 animals at Jackson Bay, Admiralty Sound (Seno Almirantazgo), Tierra del Fuego.[1] The oldest known unambiguous elephant seal fossils are fragmentary fossils of an unnamed member of the tribe Miroungini described from the late Pliocene Petane Formation of New Zealand.[2] Teeth originally identified as representing an unnamed species of Mirounga have been found in South Africa, and dated to the Miocene epoch;[3][4] however Boessenecker & Churchill (2016) considered these teeth to be almost certainly misidentified odontocete teeth.[2] The elephant seals evolved in the Pacific Ocean during the Pliocene period.[2][5][6] Elephant seals breed annually and are seemingly faithful to colonies that have established breeding areas.[7] Contents 1 Taxonomy 2 Description 3 Extant species 4 Physiology 5 Adaptations 6 Breeding season 7 Life history 8 Molting 9 Predators 10 Status 11 Gallery 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Taxonomy[edit] John Edward Gray established the genus Mirounga in 1827.[8] The generic name Mirounga is a Latinization of miouroung, which is said to have been a term for the seal in an Australian Aboriginal language. However, it is not known which language this represents.[9] Description[edit] Elephant seals are marine mammals classified under the order Pinnipedia, which, in Latin, means feather- or fin-footed.[10] Elephant seals are considered true seals, and fall under the family Phocidae.[11] Phocids (true seals) are characterized by having no external ear and reduced limbs.[11] The reduction of their limbs helps them be more streamlined and move easily in the water.[10] However, it makes navigating on land more difficult because they cannot turn their hind flippers forward to walk like the Otariids.[10] In addition, the hind flipper of elephant seals have a lot of surface area, which helps propel them in the water.[10] Elephant seals spend the majority of their life (90%) underwater in search of food, and can cover 100 kilometres (60 miles) a day when they head out to sea.[11] When elephant seals are born, they can weigh up to 36 kilograms (79 pounds) and reach lengths up to 122 cm (4 ft 0 in).[11] Sexual dimorphism is extreme, with male elephant seals weighing up to 10 times more than females,[12] and having a prominent proboscis.[11] Elephant seals take their name from the large proboscis of the adult male (bull), reminiscent of an elephant's trunk, and considered a secondary sexual characteristic.[13] The bull's proboscis is used in producing extraordinarily loud roaring noises, especially during the mating season. More importantly, however, the nose acts as a sort of rebreather, filled with cavities designed to reabsorb moisture from their exhalations.[14] This is important during the mating season when the seals do not leave the beach to feed, and must conserve body moisture as there is no incoming source of water. They are very much larger than other pinnipeds, with southern elephant seal bulls typically reaching a length of 5 m (16 ft) and a weight of 3,000 kg (7,000 lb), and are much larger than the adult females (cows), with some exceptionally large males reaching up to 6 m (20 ft) in length and weighing 4,000 kg (9,000 lb); cows typically measure about 3 m (10 ft) and 900 kg (2,000 lb). Northern elephant seal bulls reach a length of 4.3 to 4.8 m (14 to 16 ft) and the heaviest weigh about 2,500 kg (5,500 lb).[15][16] The northern and southern elephant seal can be distinguished by various external features. On average, the southern elephant seal tends to be larger than the northern species.[12] Adult male elephant seals belonging to the northern species tend to have a larger proboscis, and thick chest area with a red coloration compared to the southern species.[12] Females do not have the large proboscis and can be distinguished between species by looking at their nose characteristics.[12] Southern females tend to have a smaller, blunt nose compared to northern females.[12] Extant species[edit] Species Distribution Northern elephant seal M. angustirostris (Gill, 1866) Southern elephant seal Mirounga leonina (Linnaeus, 1758) Physiology[edit] Skull of a northern elephant seal Elephant seals spend up to 80% of their lives in the ocean. They can hold their breath for more than 100 minutes[17][18] – longer than any other noncetacean mammal. Elephant seals dive to 1,550 m (5,090 ft) beneath the ocean's surface[17] (the deepest recorded dive of an elephant seal is 2,388 m (7,835 ft) by a southern elephant seal, while the record for the northern elephant seal is 1,735 m (5,692 ft)).[19][20][21] The average depth of their dives is about 300 to 600 m (1,000 to 2,000 ft), typically for around 20 minutes for females and 60 minutes for males, as they search for their favorite foods, which are skates, rays, squid, octopuses, eels, small sharks and large fish. Their stomachs also often contain gastroliths. They spend only brief amounts of time at the surface to rest between dives (2–3 minutes).[11] Females tend to dive a bit deeper due to their prey source.[11] Play media Male elephant seals fighting for mates Elephant seals are shielded from extreme cold more by their blubber than by fur. Their hair and outer layers of skin molt in large patches. The skin has to be regrown by blood vessels reaching through the blubber. When molting occurs, the seal is susceptible to the cold, and must rest on land, in a safe place called a "haul out". Northern males and young adults haul out during June to July to molt; northern females and immature seals during April to May. Elephant seals have a very large volume of blood, allowing them to hold a large amount of oxygen for use when diving. They have large sinuses in their abdomens to hold blood and can also store oxygen in their muscles with increased myoglobin concentrations in muscle. In addition, they have a larger proportion of oxygen-carrying red blood cells. These adaptations allow elephant seals to dive to such depths and remain underwater for up to two hours.[22] Elephant seals are able to slow down their heartbeat (bradycardia) and divert blood flow from the external areas of the body to important core organs.[11] They can also slow down their metabolism while performing deep dives.[11] Elephant seals have a helpful feature in their bodies known as the countercurrent heat exchanger to help conserve energy and prevent heat loss.[11] In this system, arteries and veins are organized in a way to maintain a constant body temperature by having the cool blood flowing to the heart warmed by blood going to external areas of the animal.[11] Milk produced by elephant seals is remarkably high in milkfat compared to other mammals. After an initially lower state, it rises to over 50% milkfat (human breast milk is about 4% milkfat, and cow milk is about 3.5% milkfat).[23] Adaptations[edit] Elephant seals have large circular eyes that have more rods than cones to help them see in low light conditions when they are diving.[10][11] These seals also possess a structure called the tapetum lucidum, which helps their vision by having light reflected back to the retina to allow more chances for photoreceptors to detect light.[10] Their body is covered in blubber, which helps them keep warm and reduce drag while they are swimming.[11] The shape of their body also helps them maneuver well in the water, but limits their movement on land.[11] Also, elephant seals have the ability to fast for long periods of time while breeding or molting.[11] The turbinate process, another unique adaptation, is very beneficial when these seals are fasting, breeding, molting, or hauling out.[11] This unique nasal structure recycles moisture when they breathe and helps prevent water loss.[11] Elephant seals have external whiskers called vibrissae to help them locate prey and navigate their environment.[11] The vibrissae are connected to blood vessels, nerves, and muscles making them an important sensing tool.[10] Due to evolutionary changes, their ear has been modified to work extremely well underwater.[10] The structure of the inner ear helps amplify incoming sounds, and allows these seals to have good directional hearing due to the isolation of the inner ear.[10] In addition to these adaptations, tissues in the ear canal allow the pressure in the ear to be adjusted while these seals perform their deep dives.[10] Breeding season[edit] Dominant males arrive at potential breeding sites in spring, and fast to ensure that they can mate with as many females as possible.[11] Male elephant seals use fighting, vocal noises, and different positions to determine who will be deemed the dominant male.[11][24] When males reach eight to nine years of age, they have developed a pronounced long nose, in addition to a chest shield, which is thickened skin in their chest area.[11] They display their dominance by showing their noses, making loud vocalisations, and altering their postures.[11][24] They fight each other by raising themselves and ramming each other with their chests and teeth.[11] When females arrive, the dominating males have already selected their territory on the beach.[11] Females cluster in groups called harems, which could consist of up to 50 females surrounding one alpha male.[11] Outside of these groups, a beta bull is normally roaming around on the beach.[11] The beta bull helps the alpha by preventing other males accessing the females.[11] In return, the beta bull might have an opportunity to mate with one of the females while the alpha is occupied.[11] Birth on average only takes a few minutes, and the mother and pup have a connection due to each other's unique smell and sound.[11] The mothers will fast and nurse up to 28 days, providing their pups with rich milk.[11] The last two to three days, however, females will be ready to mate, and the dominant males will pounce on the opportunity.[11] Males and females lose up to a third of their body weight during the breeding season.[11] The gestation period for females is 11 months, and the pupping seasons lasts from mid to late summer.[11] The new pups will spend up to 10 additional weeks on land learning how to swim and dive.[11] Life history[edit] The average lifespan of a Northern Elephant Seal is 9 years, while the average lifespan of a Southern Elephant Seal is 21 years.[25] Males reach maturity at five to six years, but generally do not achieve alpha status until the age of eight, with the prime breeding years being between ages 9 and 12. The longest life expectancy of a male northern elephant seal is approximately 14 years. Females begin breeding at age 3–6 (median=4), and have one pup per breeding attempt.[26] Most adult females breed each year.[27] Breeding success is much lower for first-time mothers relative to experienced breeders.[27] Annual survival probability of adult females is 0.83 for experienced breeding females, but only 0.66 for first-time breeders indicating a significant cost of reproduction.[27] More male pups are produced than female pups in years with warmer sea surface temperature in the northeastern Pacific Ocean.[28] Molting[edit] Once a year, elephant seals go through a process called molting where they shed the outer layer of hair and skin.[11] This molting process takes up to a month to complete.[11] When it comes time to molt, they will haul out on land to shed their outer layer, and will not consume any food during this time.[11] The females and juveniles will molt first, followed by the sub adult males, and finally the large mature males.[11] Predators[edit] The main predator of elephant seals is the great white shark.[11] Orcas are also another predator of elephant seals.[11] Cookie cutter sharks can take bites from their skin.[11] Status[edit] The IUCN lists both species of elephant seal as being of least concern, although they are still threatened by entanglement in marine debris, fishery interactions, and boat collisions. Though a complete population count of elephant seals is not possible because all age classes are not ashore at the same time, the most recent estimate of the California breeding stock was approximately 124,000 individuals. The animal is protected in most countries where it lives. Gallery[edit] South Georgia elephant seal Elephant seals (Mirounga angustirostris) on Piedras Blancas beach, near San Simeon, California Male, female and pup Northern elephant seals during molting season at Piedras Blancas beach, near San Simeon, California Two bulls fighting Elephant seal snout Juvenile southern elephant seal Beachmasters, the dominant bulls fighting at Macquarie Island Elephant seals at Piedras Blancas, California See also[edit] Marine Mammal Center Penelope Seal Marine Life References[edit] ^ "WCS Chile > Especies > Elefantes marinos". programs.wcs.org. Retrieved 2016-05-27. ^ a b c Boessenecker, RW; Churchill, M (2016). "The origin of elephant seals: implications of a fragmentary late Pliocene seal (Phocidae: Miroungini) from New Zealand". New Zealand Journal of Geology and Geophysics. 59 (4): 544–550. doi:10.1080/00288306.2016.1199437. S2CID 133343398. ^ Pickford, Martin; Senut, Brigitte (1997). "Cainozoic mammals from coastal Namaqualand, South Africa". Palaeontologia Africana. 34: 199–217. hdl:10539/16409. ^ Berta, A.; Churchill, M. (2012). "Pinniped Taxonomy: evidence for species and subspecies". Mammal Review. 42 (3): 207–234. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2907.2011.00193.x. ^ Rule, James P.; Adams, Justin W.; Rovinsky, Douglass S.; Hocking, David P.; Evans, Alistair R.; Fitzgerald, Erich M. G. (November 2020). "A new large-bodied Pliocene seal with unusual cutting teeth". Royal Society Open Science. 7 (11): 201591. doi:10.1098/rsos.201591. ISSN 2054-5703. ^ Rule, James P.; Adams, Justin W.; Marx, Felix G.; Evans, Alistair R.; Tennyson, Alan J. D.; Scofield, R. Paul; Fitzgerald, Erich M. G. (2020-11-11). "First monk seal from the Southern Hemisphere rewrites the evolutionary history of true seals". Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 287 (1938): 20202318. doi:10.1098/rspb.2020.2318. PMC 7735288. PMID 33171079. ^ De Bruyn, Mark; Hall, Brenda L.; Chauke, Lucas F.; Baroni, Carlo; Koch, Paul L.; Hoelzel, A. Rus (2009). "Rapid Response of a Marine Mammal Species to Holocene Climate and Habitat Change". PLOS Genetics. 5 (7): e1000554. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000554. PMC 2700269. PMID 19593366. ^ Gray, John Edward (1827). "Synopsis of the species of the class Mammalia". In Baron Cuvier (ed.). The Animal Kingdom Arranged in Conformity with its Organization, by the Baron (G) Cuvier, with additional descriptions by Edward Griffith and others. 5. Printed for G.B. Whittaker. p. 180. ^ Threatened Species Scientific Committee (7 December 2016). "Conservation Advice: Mirounga leonina, southern elephant seal" (PDF). Australian Government, Department of Agriculture, Water, and the Environment. Retrieved 16 May 2020. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Macdonald, David (2009). Princeton Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals. Princeton University Press. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao Elephant seals. Friends of the Elephant Seal. San Luis Obispo, Calif.: Central Coast Press. 1999. ISBN 9780965877695. OCLC 44446823.CS1 maint: others (link) ^ a b c d e Thewissen, Würsig, and Perrin, J.M., B.G., and W.F. (2009). Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals. Amsterdam: Academic Press.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Mirounga. "Elephant Seal, Elephant Seal Profile, Facts, Information, Photos, Pictures, Sounds, Habitats, Reports, News – National Geographic". Animals.nationalgeographic.com. Retrieved 2009-01-08. ^ Huntley, A. C.; Costa, D. P.; Rubin, R. D. (1984). "The contribution of nasal countercurrent heat exchange to water balance in the northern elephant seal, Mirounga angustirostris". Journal of Experimental Biology. 113: 447–454. PMID 6527090. ^ "Elephant Seals". Parks.ca.gov. 2007-05-23. Retrieved 2009-01-08. ^ "Elephant Seal – MSN Encarta". Encarta.msn.com. Archived from the original on 2009-10-28. Retrieved 2009-12-29. ^ a b Amos, Jonathan (2006-02-21). "Elephant seals dive for science". 2006. BBC News. Retrieved 23 April 2013. ^ "Southern Elephant Seals of Sea Lion Island – A Long-term Research Project" (PDF). www.eleseal.org. Retrieved 2010-05-21. ^ Gregory S. Schorr; Erin A. Falcone; David J. Moretti; Russel D. Andrews (2014). "First long-term behavioral records from Cuvier's beaked whales (Ziphius cavirostris) reveal record-breaking dives". PLOS ONE. 9 (3): e92633. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0092633. PMC 3966784. PMID 24670984. ^ "Census of Marine Life – From the Edge of Darkness to the Black Abyss" (PDF). Coml.org. Retrieved 2009-12-15. ^ Robinson PW, Costa DP, Crocker DE, Gallo-Reynoso JP, Champagne CD, Fowler MA, Goetsch C, Goetz KT, Hassrick JL, Hückstädt LA, Kuhn CE, Maresh JL, Maxwell SM, McDonald BI, Peterson SH, Simmons SE, Teutschel NM, Villegas-Amtmann S, Yoda K (2012-05-15). "Foraging behavior and success of a mesopelagic predator in the northeast Pacific Ocean: insights from a data-rich species, the northern elephant seal". PLOS ONE. 7 (5): e36728. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...736728R. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0036728. PMC 3352920. PMID 22615801. ^ "5.4 Seals". Classroom Antarctica. Archived from the original on 2011-06-01. ^ "Northern Elephant Seal Fact Sheet" (PDF). Coastside State Parks Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. ^ a b Laws, R (1956). "The Elephant Seal: General, Social, and Reproductive Behavior". Falkland Islands Dependencies Survey. 13. ^ http://www.nationalgeographic.com/animals/mammals/group/elephant-seals/ ^ Huber, Harriet R. (1987-06-01). "Natality and weaning success in relation to age of first reproduction in northern elephant seals". Canadian Journal of Zoology. 65 (6): 1311–1316. doi:10.1139/z87-207. ISSN 0008-4301. ^ a b c Lee, Derek E. (2011-06-09). "Effects of environmental variability and breeding experience on northern elephant seal demography". Journal of Mammalogy. 92 (3): 517–526. doi:10.1644/10-MAMM-A-042.1. ISSN 0022-2372. ^ Lee, Derek E.; Sydeman, William J. (2009). "North Pacific Climate Mediates Offspring Sex Ratio in Northern Elephant Seals". Journal of Mammalogy. 90 (1): 1–8. doi:10.1644/08-MAMM-A-130.1. ISSN 0022-2372. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mirounga. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Tagging of Pacific Predators, Elephant Seals Friends of the Elephant seal Elephant Seal Research Group Elephant seals -California State Parks Dr. Daniel Costa's Research Laboratory Elephant Seals at Race Rocks, Canada Teen Spots Hagfish-Slurping Elephant Seal – YouTube (2:11) Elephant Seals - National Geographic v t e Genera of pinnipeds and their stem-allies Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Carnivora Suborder: Caniformia Infraorder: Arctoidea Pan-Pinnipedia †Amphicynodontidae Allocyon Amphicticeps Amphicynodon Drassonax Kolponomos Pachycynodon Parictis Wangictis †Semantoridae Necromites Potamotherium Puijila Semantor Pinnipedimorpha †Enaliarctos Pinnipediformes †Pacificotaria †Pinnarctidion †Pteronarctos Pinnipedia Phocidae †Devinophoca Monachinae Monachini †Afrophoca †Auroraphoca †Messiphoca Monachus Neomonachus †Noriphoca †Palmidophoca †Pliophoca †Pontophoca †Pristiphoca †Terranectes Miroungini †Callophoca Mirounga Lobodontini †Acrophoca †Australophoca †Hadrokirus †Homiphoca Hydrurga Leptonychotes Lobodon Ommatophoca †Piscophoca †Properiptychus †Virginiaphoca Phocinae †Cryptophoca †Frisiphoca †Kawas †Leptophoca †Monachopsis †Monotherium †Phocanella †Prophoca †Sarmatonectes Erignathini Erignathus †Platyphoca Cystophorini Cystophora †Miophoca †Pachyphoca Phocini †Batavipusa †Gryphoca Halichoerus Histriophoca †Nanophoca Pagophilus Phoca †Praepusa Pusa Otarioidea see below↓ Otarioidea †Desmatophocidae Allodesmus Atopotarus Desmatophoca Eodesmus Odobenidae †Archaeodobenus †Imagotaria †Kamtschatarctos †Nanodobenus †Neotherium †Osodobenus †Pelagiarctos †Pontolis †Proneotherium †Prototaria †Pseudotaria †Titanotaria Neodobenia †Dusignathinae Dusignathus Gomphotaria Odobeninae †Aivukus Odobenus †Ontocetus †Pliopedia †Protodobenus †Valenictus Panotariidae †Eotaria Otariidae Callorhinae Callorhinus †Pithanotaria Otariinae †Thalassoleon Zalophini Eumetopias †Oriensarctos †Proterozetes Zalophus Otariini Arctocephalus Arctophoca †Hydrarctos Neophoca Otaria Phocarctos Lists List of pinnipeds List of fossil pinnipedimorphs v t e Extant Carnivora species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Suborder Feliformia Nandiniidae Nandinia African palm civet (N. binotata) Herpestidae (Mongooses) Atilax Marsh mongoose (A. paludinosus) Bdeogale Bushy-tailed mongoose (B. crassicauda) Jackson's mongoose (B. jacksoni) Black-footed mongoose (B. nigripes) Crossarchus Alexander's kusimanse (C. alexandri) Angolan kusimanse (C. ansorgei) Common kusimanse (C. obscurus) Flat-headed kusimanse (C. platycephalus) Cynictis Yellow mongoose (C. penicillata) Dologale Pousargues's mongoose (D. dybowskii) Galerella Angolan slender mongoose (G. flavescens) Black mongoose (G. nigrata) Somalian slender mongoose (G. ochracea) Cape gray mongoose (G. pulverulenta) Slender mongoose (G. sanguinea) Helogale Ethiopian dwarf mongoose (H. hirtula) Common dwarf mongoose (H. parvula) Herpestes Small Indian mongoose (H. auropunctatus) Short-tailed mongoose (H. brachyurus) Indian grey mongoose (H. edwardsii) Indian brown mongoose (H. fuscus) Egyptian mongoose (H. ichneumon) Javan mongoose (H. javanicus) Long-nosed mongoose (H. naso) Collared mongoose (H. semitorquatus) Ruddy mongoose (H. smithii) Crab-eating mongoose (H. urva) Stripe-necked mongoose (H. vitticollis) Ichneumia White-tailed mongoose (I. albicauda) Liberiictus Liberian mongoose (L. kuhni) Mungos Gambian mongoose (M. gambianus) Banded mongoose (M. mungo) Paracynictis Selous' mongoose (P. selousi) Rhynchogale Meller's mongoose (R. melleri) Suricata Meerkat (S. suricatta) Hyaenidae (Hyenas) Crocuta Spotted hyena (C. crocuta) Hyaena Brown hyena (H. brunnea) Striped hyena (H. hyaena) Proteles Aardwolf (P. cristatus) Felidae Large family listed below Viverridae Large family listed below Eupleridae Small family listed below Family Felidae Felinae Acinonyx Cheetah (A. jubatus) Caracal Caracal (C. caracal) African golden cat (C. aurata) Catopuma Bay cat (C. badia) Asian golden cat (C. temminckii) Felis European wildcat (F. silvestris) African wildcat (F. lybica) Jungle cat (F. chaus) Black-footed cat (F. nigripes) Sand cat (F. margarita) Chinese mountain cat (F. bieti) Domestic cat (F. catus) Herpailurus Jaguarundi (H. yagouaroundi) Leopardus Ocelot (L. pardalis) Margay (L. wiedii) Pampas cat (L. colocola) Geoffroy's cat (L. geoffroyi) Kodkod (L. guigna) Andean mountain cat (L. jacobita) Oncilla (L. tigrinus) Southern tigrina (L. guttulus) Leptailurus Serval (L. serval) Lynx Canada lynx (L. canadensis) Eurasian lynx (L. lynx) Iberian lynx (L. pardinus) Bobcat (L. rufus) Otocolobus Pallas's cat (O. manul) Pardofelis Marbled cat (P. marmorata) Prionailurus Leopard cat (P. bengalensis) Sunda leopard cat (P. javanensis) Flat-headed cat (P. planiceps) Rusty-spotted cat (P. rubiginosus) Fishing cat (P. viverrinus) Puma Cougar (P. concolor) Pantherinae Panthera Lion (P. leo) Jaguar (P. onca) Leopard (P. pardus) Tiger (P. tigris) Snow leopard (P. uncia) Neofelis Clouded leopard (N. nebulosa) Sunda clouded leopard (N. diardi) Family Viverridae Paradoxurinae Arctictis Binturong (A. binturong) Arctogalidia Small-toothed palm civet (A. trivirgata) Macrogalidia Sulawesi palm civet (M. musschenbroekii) Paguma Masked palm civet (P. larvata) Paradoxurus Asian palm civet (P. hermaphroditus) Brown palm civet (P. jerdoni) Golden palm civet (P. zeylonensis) Hemigalinae Chrotogale Owston's palm civet (C. owstoni) Cynogale Otter civet (C. bennettii) Diplogale Hose's palm civet (D. hosei) Hemigalus Banded palm civet (H. derbyanus) Prionodontinae (Asiatic linsangs) Prionodon Banded linsang (P. linsang) Spotted linsang (P. pardicolor) Viverrinae Civettictis African civet (C. civetta) Genetta (Genets) Abyssinian genet (G. abyssinica) Angolan genet (G. angolensis) Bourlon's genet (G. bourloni) Crested servaline genet (G. cristata) Common genet (G. genetta) Johnston's genet (G. johnstoni) Letaba genet (G. letabae) Rusty-spotted genet (G. maculata) Pardine genet (G. pardina) Aquatic genet (G. piscivora) King genet (G. poensis) Servaline genet (G. servalina) Hausa genet (G. thierryi) Cape genet (G. tigrina) Giant forest genet (G. victoriae) Poiana Central African oyan (P. richardsonii) West African oyan (P. leightoni) Viverra Malabar large-spotted civet (V. civettina) Large-spotted civet (V. megaspila) Malayan civet (V. tangalunga) Large Indian civet (V. zibetha) Viverricula Small Indian civet (V. indica) Family Eupleridae Euplerinae Cryptoprocta Fossa (C. ferox) Eupleres Eastern falanouc (E. goudotii) Western falanouc (E. major) Fossa Malagasy civet (F. fossana) Galidiinae Galidia Ring-tailed mongoose (G. elegans) Galidictis Broad-striped Malagasy mongoose (G. fasciata) Grandidier's mongoose (G. grandidieri) Mungotictis Narrow-striped mongoose (M. decemlineata) Salanoia Brown-tailed mongoose (S. concolor) Durrell's vontsira (S. durrelli) Suborder Caniformia (cont. below) Ursidae (Bears) Ailuropoda Giant panda (A. melanoleuca) Helarctos Sun bear (H. malayanus) Melursus Sloth bear (M. ursinus) Tremarctos Spectacled bear (T. ornatus) Ursus American black bear (U. americanus) Brown bear (U. arctos) Polar bear (U. maritimus) Asian black bear (U. thibetanus) Mephitidae (Skunks) Conepatus (Hog-nosed skunks) Molina's hog-nosed skunk (C. chinga) Humboldt's hog-nosed skunk (C. humboldtii) American hog-nosed skunk (C. leuconotus) Striped hog-nosed skunk (C. semistriatus) Mephitis Hooded skunk (M. macroura) Striped skunk (M. mephitis) Mydaus Sunda stink badger (M. javanensis) Palawan stink badger (M. marchei) Spilogale (Spotted skunks) Southern spotted skunk (S. angustifrons) Western spotted skunk (S. gracilis) Eastern spotted skunk (S. putorius) Pygmy spotted skunk (S. pygmaea) Procyonidae (Raccoons, coatis, olingos) Bassaricyon (Olingos) Eastern lowland olingo (B. alleni) Northern olingo (B. gabbii) Western lowland olingo (B. medius) Olinguito (B. neblina) Bassariscus Ring-tailed cat (B. astutus) Cacomistle (B. sumichrasti) Nasua (Coatis inclusive) White-nosed coati (N. narica) South American coati (N. nasua) Nasuella (Coatis inclusive) Western mountain coati (N. olivacea) Eastern mountain coati (N. meridensis) Potos Kinkajou (P. flavus) Procyon Crab-eating raccoon (P. cancrivorus) Raccoon (P. lotor) Cozumel raccoon (P. pygmaeus) Ailuridae Ailurus Red panda (A. fulgens) Suborder Caniformia (cont. above) Otariidae (Eared seals) (includes fur seals and sea lions) (Pinniped inclusive) Arctocephalus South American fur seal (A. australis) Australasian fur seal (A. forsteri) Galápagos fur seal (A. galapagoensis) Antarctic fur seal (A. gazella) Juan Fernández fur seal (A. philippii) Brown fur seal (A. pusillus) Guadalupe fur seal (A. townsendi) Subantarctic fur seal (A. tropicalis) Callorhinus Northern fur seal (C. ursinus) Eumetopias Steller sea lion (E. jubatus) Neophoca Australian sea lion (N. cinerea) Otaria South American sea lion (O. flavescens) Phocarctos New Zealand sea lion (P. hookeri) Zalophus California sea lion (Z. californianus) Galápagos sea lion (Z. wollebaeki) Odobenidae (Pinniped inclusive) Odobenus Walrus (O. rosmarus) Phocidae (Earless seals) (Pinniped inclusive) Cystophora Hooded seal (C. cristata) Erignathus Bearded seal (E. barbatus) Halichoerus Grey seal (H. grypus) Histriophoca Ribbon seal (H. fasciata) Hydrurga Leopard seal (H. leptonyx) Leptonychotes Weddell seal (L. weddellii) Lobodon Crabeater seal (L. carcinophagus) Mirounga (Elephant seals) Northern elephant seal (M. angustirostris) Southern elephant seal (M. leonina) Monachus Mediterranean monk seal (M. monachus) Neomonachus Hawaiian monk seal (N. schauinslandi) Ommatophoca Ross seal (O. rossi) Pagophilus Harp seal (P. groenlandicus) Phoca Spotted seal (P. largha) Harbor seal (P. vitulina) Pusa Caspian seal (P. caspica) Ringed seal (P. hispida) Baikal seal (P. sibirica) Canidae Large family listed below Mustelidae Large family listed below Family Canidae (includes dogs) Atelocynus Short-eared dog (A. microtis) Canis Golden jackal (C. aureus) Coyote (C. latrans) African golden wolf (C. lupaster) Grey wolf (C. lupus) Ethiopian wolf (C. simensis) Cerdocyon Crab-eating fox (C. thous) Chrysocyon Maned wolf (C. brachyurus) Cuon Dhole (C. alpinus) Lupulella Side-striped jackal (L. adustus) Black-backed jackal (L. mesomelas) Lycalopex Culpeo (L. culpaeus) Darwin's fox (L. fulvipes) South American gray fox (L. griseus) Pampas fox (L. gymnocercus) Sechuran fox (L. sechurae) Hoary fox (L. vetulus) Lycaon African wild dog (L. pictus) Nyctereutes Raccoon dog (N. procyonoides) Otocyon Bat-eared fox (O. megalotis) Speothos Bush dog (S. venaticus) Urocyon Gray fox (U. cinereoargenteus) Island fox (U. littoralis) Vulpes (Foxes) Bengal fox (V. bengalensis) Blanford's fox (V. cana) Cape fox (V. chama) Corsac fox (V. corsac) Tibetan sand fox (V. ferrilata) Arctic fox (V. lagopus) Kit fox (V. macrotis) Pale fox (V. pallida) Rüppell's fox (V. rueppelli) Swift fox (V. velox) Red fox (V. vulpes) Fennec fox (V. zerda) Family Mustelidae Helictidinae (Ferret-badgers) Melogale Bornean ferret-badger (M. everetti) Chinese ferret-badger (M. moschata) Javan ferret-badger (M. orientalis) Burmese ferret-badger (M. personata) Vietnam ferret-badger (M. cucphuongensis) Guloninae (Martins and wolverines) Eira Tayra (E. barbara) Gulo Wolverine (G. gulo) Martes (Martens) American marten (M. americana) Yellow-throated marten (M. flavigula) Beech marten (M. foina) Nilgiri marten (M. gwatkinsii) European pine marten (M. martes) Japanese marten (M. melampus) Sable (M. zibellina) Pekania Fisher (P. pennanti) Ictonychinae (African polecats and grisons) Galictis Lesser grison (G. cuja) Greater grison (G. vittata) Ictonyx Saharan striped polecat (I. libyca) Striped polecat (I. striatus) Lyncodon Patagonian weasel (L. patagonicus) Poecilogale African striped weasel (P. albinucha) Vormela Marbled polecat (V. peregusna) Lutrinae (Otters) Aonyx African clawless otter (A. capensis) Asian small-clawed otter (A. cinerea) Congo clawless otter (A. congicus) Enhydra Sea otter (E. lutris) Hydrictis Spotted-necked otter (H. maculicollis) Lontra North American river otter (L. canadensis) Marine otter (L. felina) Neotropical otter (L. longicaudis) Southern river otter (L. provocax) Lutra Eurasian otter (L. lutra) Hairy-nosed otter (L. sumatrana) Lutrogale Smooth-coated otter (L. perspicillata) Pteronura Giant otter (P. brasiliensis) Melinae (Eurasian badgers) Arctonyx Hog badger (A. collaris) Meles Japanese badger (M. anakuma) Asian badger (M. leucurus) European badger (M. meles) Mellivorinae Mellivora Honey badger (M. capensis) Mustelinae (Weasels and minks) Mustela (Weasels and ferrets) Amazon weasel (M. africana) Mountain weasel (M. altaica) Stoat/short-tailed weasel (M. erminea) Steppe polecat (M. eversmannii) Colombian weasel (M. felipei) Long-tailed weasel (M. frenata) Japanese weasel (M. itatsi) Yellow-bellied weasel (M. kathiah) European mink (M. lutreola) Indonesian mountain weasel (M. lutreolina) Black-footed ferret (M. nigripes) Least weasel (M. nivalis) Malayan weasel (M. nudipes) European polecat (M. putorius) Siberian weasel (M. sibirica) Back-striped weasel (M. strigidorsa) Egyptian weasel (M. subpalmata) Neovison American mink (N. vison) Taxidiinae Taxidea American badger (T. taxus) Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q185231 Wikispecies: Mirounga ADW: Mirounga BOLD: 4162 EoL: 42397 Fossilworks: 53277 GBIF: 2434812 iNaturalist: 41727 IRMNG: 1350702 ITIS: 180670 MSW: 14001047 NCBI: 9714 NZOR: 4e3844f6-1b71-4cd8-a677-3dd7327a0510 WoRMS: 231398 Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125