Examples, origins, and histories in various parts of English folklore This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article contains an enumeration of examples, but lacks a general overview of its topic. You can help by adding an appropriate introductory section. Editing help is available. (April 2018) This article is in list format, but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this article, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (April 2018) This article may contain indiscriminate, excessive, or irrelevant examples. Please improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further suggestions. (April 2018) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Poor little birdie teased, by the 19th-century English illustrator Richard Doyle depicts an elf as imagined in English folktales. Culture of England History People Languages Traditions Country clothing Fête Morris Dancing Pub Mythology and folklore Mythology folklore Cuisine Festivals Saint George's Day Commonwealth Day Guy Fawkes Night Harvest Festival Lady Day May Day Plough Monday Plough Sunday Whitsun Religion Art Literature Music and performing arts Music Performing arts Abbots Bromley Horn Dance Country dance English folk music Garland dance Long Sword dance Morris dance Mummers play Media Radio Television Cinema Newspapers Magazines Sport Badminton Cricket Croquet Field hockey Football Lawn bowls Lawn tennis Netball Rugby Table tennis Monuments World Heritage Sites Symbols Flag Coat of arms English cultural icons English inventions and discoveries  England portal v t e English folklore consists of the myths and legends of England, including the English region's mythical creatures, traditional recipes, urban legends, and folktales. English folklore encompasses the traditional Robin Hood tales, the Brythonic-inspired Arthurian legend, and the more contemporary urban legends and monsters such as the Beast of Bodmin Moor. English folklore takes a heavy influence from Pagan tradition, with a number of figures, legends, and creatures being adapted from the pre-Christian traditions of the region. This Pagan influence means that English folklore generally differs between regions in the country, however some myths pervade most of the country. Contents 1 Folklore found throughout much of England 1.1 Folklore of East Anglia 1.2 Folklore of London and the South East 1.3 Folklore of the Midlands 1.4 Folklore of Yorkshire and the North East 1.5 Folklore of the North West 1.6 Folklore of the South West 2 Folklore and paganism in traditional song 3 Other remnants of paganism 4 In other media 5 See also 6 Bibliography 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Folklore found throughout much of England[edit] Black dog – Often said to be associated with the Devil, and its appearance was regarded as a portent of death. It is generally supposed to be larger than a normal dog, and often has large, glowing eyes. It is a common feature of British Isles and Northern European folklore. Boggart – A boggart is, depending on local or regional tradition, either a household spirit or a malevolent genius loci inhabiting fields, marshes or other topographical features. The household boggart causes things to disappear, milk to sour, and dogs to go lame. Always malevolent, the boggart will follow its family wherever they flee. In Northern England, at least, there was the belief that the boggart should never be named, for when the boggart was given a name, it would not be reasoned with nor persuaded, but would become uncontrollable and destructive. Brownie – In folklore, a brownie is a type of hob, similar to a hobgoblin. Brownies are said to inhabit houses and aid in tasks around the house. However, they do not like to be seen and will only work at night, traditionally in exchange for small gifts or food. Among food, they especially enjoy porridge and honey. They usually abandon the house if their gifts are called payments, or if the owners of the house misuse them. Brownies make their homes in an unused part of the house. Chime hours – According to English folklore, those born at certain hours could see ghosts. Countless stones – Associated with megalithic monuments Corn dolly – Corn dollies are a form of straw work made as part of harvest customs of Europe before mechanization. Before Christianization, in traditional pagan European culture it was believed that the spirit of the corn lived amongst the crop, and that the harvest made it effectively homeless. Crop circles - mysteriously flattened circle or geometric crops whose origin remains unknown [1] Cunning folk – The term "cunning man" or "cunning woman" was most widely used in southern England and the Midlands, as well as in Wales. Such people were also frequently known across England as "wizards", "wise men". Dragons- Giant winged reptiles that breathe fire or poison. There are many dragon legends in England. Somerset and the North East being very rich. Drake's Drum – Shortly before he died, Drake ordered the drum to be taken to Buckland Abbey, where it still is today, and vowed that if England was ever in danger someone was to beat the drum and he would return to defend the country. According to legend it can be heard to beat at times when England is at war or significant national events take place. Dwarfs- a dwarf is a human-shaped entity that dwells in mountains and in the earth, and is variously associated with wisdom, smithing, mining, and crafting. Elves Ettin English Country Dance – English Country Dance is a form of folk dance. It is a social dance form, which has earliest documented instances in the late 16th century. Father Time Flibbertigibbet Four Winds – Shown on old maps they are usually shown as faces blowing out wind from their mouths. There are generally 4 of them (North Wind, South Wind, East Wind and West Wind) although in some cases only 2 are shown and in others the whole outside of the map has been surrounded by smaller heads with 4 larger ones. Green Man – A Green Man is a sculpture, drawing, or other representation of a face surrounded by or made from leaves. Hag Stone Hag Stone is a type of stone, usually glassy, with a naturally occurring hole through it. Such stones have been discovered by archaeologists in both Britain and Egypt. Havelok the Dane Johnny Noddy – The dancing light reflected from a mirror or reflective object such as a watch face. King Arthur Legendary king of the Britons, the Once and Future King and True Born King of England. Legend of the Mistletoe Bough – The Legend of the Mistletoe Bough is a ghost story which has been associated with many mansions and stately homes in England. The tale tells how a new bride, playing a game of hide-and-seek during her wedding breakfast, hid in a chest in an attic and was unable to escape. She was not discovered by her family and friends, and suffocated. The body was allegedly found many years later in the locked chest. Lob – The lubber fiend, Lob, lubberkin, lurdane or Lob Lie-By-The-Fire was a legendary creature of English folklore that was similar in attributes to the "brownie". He is typically described as a large, hairy man with a tail, who performs housework in exchange for a saucer of milk and a place in front of the fire. One story claims he is the giant son of a witch and the Devil. May Queen Maypole dance Maypole Mother Nature Oak Apple Day Ogres (or Trolls) Parish Ale Petrifying well Rabbit rabbit rabbit Redcap a groups of trolls, gobins, and even ugly elves with red caps. Reynardine Robin Goodfellow is a troublesome elf or hobgoblin Robin Hood – a legendary English outlaw and hero who supposedly lived in Sherwood forest along with his merry men. He was known for his skill with the bow and stealing from the rich in order to give back the poor Sin-eater - a person who would "eat" the sins of a recently deceased person and take them upon themselves so that the deceased could go directly to heaven. This custom existed in many parts of England, but particularly in the Marches. Saint Swithun – English weather lore Standing stones and chalk figures are the focus for folktales and beliefs. Tom Thumb Wandering Jew Well dressing – An ancient practice of decorating wells in the Peak District and surrounding areas. Wild Hunt Will-o'-the-wisp A folk explanation of strange lights seen around marshes and bogs. Wyvern – Smaller relatives of dragons with two legs rather than four. Folklore of East Anglia[edit] St. Audrey Babes in the Wood at Wayland Wood The Black Shuck – A Black Dog Borley Rectory Caxton Gibbet St. Edmund of East Anglia Green children of Woolpit St. Guthlac of Croyland Hereward the Wake Hyter sprites Jack Valentine The mermaid of Upper Sheringham Molly dance King Cole and St. Helena The Pedlar of Swaffham Religious visions at Walsingham Tom Hickathrift Turpin's Cave Witch Bottles Bottles filled with nails buried under the hearth to ward off evil spirits. Gnome A small fat creature depicted with a white beard and moustache. (Female: Wombies). Folklore of London and the South East[edit] Sir Bevis of Hampton Biddenden Maids Bran the Blessed's Head at the Tower of London Brutus of Troy, the legendary founder of London Clapham Wood, an area of strange activity Devil's Jumps, Churt Devil's Jumps, Treyford Devil's Punch Bowl Electric Horror of Berkeley Square Ghost of Rahere Gog and Magog, legendary giants and guardians of the City of London Hengest and Horsa, legendary founders of Saxon England Herne the Hunter – a related to the Wild Hunt Highgate Vampire Hoodening Kit's Coty House Lady Lovibond London Bridge is falling down London Stone King Lud, connected with the City of London Mallard Song Mowing-Devil of Hertfordshire Oranges and Lemons The Ratman of Southend Theatre Royal, Drury Lane Ravens of the Tower of London Rollright Stones Stockwell ghost Spring Heeled Jack Swan Upping Swearing on the Horns Wayland the Smith Folklore of the Midlands[edit] Alkborough Turf Maze Belgrave Hall and its ghosts Black Annis Black Lady of Bradley Woods Border Morris Bottle-kicking Byard's Leap The Derby Ram Dun Cow St. Frideswide Fulk FitzWarin Godiva Guy of Warwick Haxey Hood Game Jack of Kent Lincoln Imp Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln Madam Pigott Major Oak Mermaid's Pool Nanny Rutt Old Jeffrey Relics of St. Oswald Robin Hood Royal Shrovetide Football Stiperstones Tiddy Mun Wise Men of Gotham Witches of Belvoir The Giant of the Wrekin Yallery-Brown Folklore of Yorkshire and the North East[edit] The Barghest The Cauld Lad of Hylton St. Cuthbert The Devil's Arrows Duergar The Hedley Kow Jack-In-Irons Jenny Greenteeth Jingling Geordie's Hole Halifax Gibbet Kilburn White Horse Laidly Worm The Lambton Worm Legend of Upsall Castle Long Sword dance My Own Self Peg Powler Rapper sword Redcap Robin Hood Sedgefield Ball Game Ursula Southeil Folklore of the North West[edit] The Wizard of Alderley Edge Folklore of Lancashire Furness Abbey and its ghosts Gytrash Long Meg and Her Daughters Pendle Witches Samlesbury Witches Wild Boar of Westmorland Folklore of the South West[edit] Abbotsbury Garland Day Barber surgeon of Avebury Tom Bawcock Belas Knap Bowerman's Nose Cerne Abbas Giant Cheese rolling Childe's Tomb Corineus, legendary founder of Cornwall Crazywell Pool Devil's Footprints Dorset Ooser St. Dunstan is the origin of the lucky horseshoe Folklore of Stonehenge Glastonbury and its abbey Glastonbury Thorn Goblin Combe Hairy hands Hunky punk Jack the Giant Killer and Galligantus Jan Tregeagle Jay's Grave Lyonesse Moonrakers, the story of how the inhabitants of Wiltshire got their nickname The Obby Oss of Padstow Pixies Punkie Night The Great Thunderstorm, Widecombe Three hares (Tinners' Rabbits) Tintagel, legendary birthplace of King Arthur Warren House Inn Widecombe Fair Witch of Wookey Hole Folklore and paganism in traditional song[edit] Thousands upon thousands of folk songs in England have been collected from traditional singers, including the famous Child Ballads which were collected in the 19th century. Some of these provide evidence pertaining to other folk tales including the Arthurian legends and the tales of Robin Hood. Others contain mystical elements which probably stem from Anglo Saxon paganism or Celtic paganism, such as "The Elfin Knight" (of which "Scarborough Fair" is a variant), "John Barleycorn", "The Wife of Usher's Well", "Thomas the Rhymer", "Tam Lin" and "King Henry". Some festive songs use imagery that hints at a pagan origin, such as The Holly and the Ivy and certain wassailing songs. Other remnants of paganism[edit] Many parts of English and British folklore still contain evidence of Europe’s pre-Christian past. In common with most other regions of Europe, some aspects of past Pagan religions survive in English Folklore. Examples of this include the Wild Hunt and Herne the Hunter which relate to the Germanic deity Woden. The Abbots Bromley Horn Dance may represent a pre-Christian festival and the practice of Well dressing in the Peak District, which may date back to Anglo-Saxon or even Celtic times. May Day celebrations such as the Maypole survive across much of England and Northern Europe. Many Christmas traditions appear to have their roots in Paganism, such as decorating trees, the significance of holly, and Christmas carolling itself. In other media[edit] English folklore crops up in books, films and comic books and these appearances include: Lancre and The Chalk, the settings for the Witches and Tiffany Aching story arcs of the Discworld fantasy book series, are heavily inspired by British mythology and folklore, described by author Terry Pratchett as 'solid folklore'. Characters such as Jenny Greenteeth, The Black Shuck and Black Annis have made an appearances in the comic 2000 AD, and in the short story London Falling by Simon Spurrier and Lee Garbett. Herne the Hunter and other references to English folklore and Arthurian legend can be found in Susan Cooper's books, The Dark Is Rising. The name Springheel Jack is used in the Bethesda Softworks game Oblivion in a Thieves Guild Quest line There are several mentions of British folklore creatures in the Harry Potter series by J.K Rowling such as Boggarts and Redcaps. The 1989 manga Berserk takes inspiration from various aspects of English folklore. See also[edit] Anglo-Saxon mythology Matter of England Cecil Sharp Celtic mythology Donas de fuera English mythology Irish folklore Matter of Britain Merry England Nursery rhyme Once upon a time Sabine Baring-Gould Scottish folklore St George's Day in England Thunderstone (folklore) Welsh mythology Bibliography[edit] Hutton, Ronald, The Stations of the Sun: A History of the Ritual Year in England, 1999 Opie, Iona, and Peter Opie, The Lore and Language of Schoolchildren, 1959 Opie, Iona, and Peter Opie, The Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes, (2nd edn) 1997 Opie, Iona, and Moira Tatem, A Dictionary of Superstitions, 1989 Paynter, William H. and Jason Semmens, The Cornish Witch-finder: William Henry Paynter and the Witcher, Ghosts, Charms and Folklore of Cornwall, 2008 Roud, Steve, The Penguin Guide to the Superstitions of Great Britain and Ireland, 2004 Simpson, Jacqueline, and Steve Roud, A Dictionary of English Folklore, 2000 Vickery, Roy, A Dictionary of Plant Lore, 1995 Westwood, Jennifer, and Jacqueline Simpson, The Lore of the Land: A Guide to England's legends, 2005 Wright, Arthur Robinson, English Folklore 1900 Fee, Christopher R, Gods, Heroes, & Kings: The Battle for Mythic Britain, 2004 References[edit] ^ Delgado, Pat. (1990) [1989]. Circular evidence : a detailed investigation of the flattened swirled crops phenomenon. Andrews, Colin. (Pbk. ed.). London: Bloomsbury. ISBN 0-7475-0635-3. OCLC 221059059. Further reading[edit] Briggs, K. M. "Possible Mythological Motifs in English Folktales." Folklore 83, no. 4 (1972): 265-71. Accessed June 18, 2020. www.jstor.org/stable/1259424. External links[edit] Popular Rhymes and Nursery Tales (1849), by James Halliwell, a discussion on the origin of English folk tales and rhymes. Weather and Folk Lore of Peterborough and District, by Charles Dack, 1911, from Project Gutenberg Project-IONA a repository of folk tales from England and the islands of the North Atlantic Website of the Folklore Society (UK) Pretanic World – Folklore and Folkbeliefs Dartmoor Legends