This article is about fictional tree people. For other uses, see ENT (disambiguation). Ents "Treebeard and Hobbits." Illustration by Tom Loback, 2007 Also known as Onodrim, Shepherds of the Trees, Tree-folk Information Created date First Age Home world Middle-earth Base of operations Fangorn Forest Language Entish Leader Treebeard Ents are a species of beings in J. R. R. Tolkien's fantasy world Middle-earth who closely resemble trees. They are similar to the talking trees in folklore around the world. Their name is derived from the Old English word for giant. The Ents appear in The Lord of the Rings as ancient shepherds of the forest and allies of the free peoples of Middle-earth during the War of the Ring. The Ent who figures most prominently in the book is Treebeard, who (credibly) claims to be the oldest creature in Middle-earth. At the time The Lord of the Rings takes place, there are no young Ents (Entings) because the Entwives (female Ents) were lost. The Ents are akin to Huorns, whom Treebeard describes as a transitional form of trees which become animated or, conversely, as Ents who grow more "treelike" over time.[T 1] Inspired by Tolkien and similar traditions, animated or anthropomorphic tree creatures appear in a variety of media and works of fantasy. Contents 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 Internal history 3.1 First Age 3.2 Entwives 3.3 The Last March of the Ents 4 Adaptations 4.1 Ents in other media 4.2 Ent-like creatures 5 See also 6 References 6.1 Primary 6.2 Secondary 7 External links Etymology[edit] The word "Ent" was taken from the Old English ent or eoten, meaning "giant". Tolkien borrowed the word from a phrase in the Anglo-Saxon poems The Ruin and Maxims II, orþanc enta geweorc ("cunning work of giants"),[1] which describes Roman ruins.[T 2][2] In Sindarin, one of Tolkien's invented Elvish languages, the word for Ent is Onod (plural Enyd). Sindarin Onodrim refers to the Ents as a race.[T 3] Description[edit] Further information: Treebeard Treebeard, called by Gandalf the oldest living Ent and the oldest living thing that walks in Middle-earth,[T 4] is described as being around 14 feet (4 m) tall:[T 5] [A] large Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen foot high, very sturdy, with a tall head, and hardly any neck. Whether it was clad in stuff like green and grey bark, or whether that was its hide, was difficult to say. At any rate the arms, at a short distance from the trunk, were not wrinkled, but covered with a brown smooth skin. The large feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy at the roots, thin and mossy at the ends. But at the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes. These deep eyes were now surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating.[T 5] Ents are an old race that appeared in Middle-earth when the Dwarves did. They were apparently created by Eru Ilúvatar at the behest of Yavanna: when she learned of Aulë's children, the Dwarves, she foresaw that they would fell trees, and desired creatures to serve as Shepherds of the Trees to protect the forests from Dwarves and other perils. Although the Ents were sentient beings from the time of their awakening, they did not know how to speak until the Elves taught them. Treebeard said that the Elves "cured us of dumbness", calling that a great gift that could not be forgotten. ("They always wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did.") In the Third Age of Middle-earth, the forest of Fangorn was the only place still inhabited by Ents.[T 5] Ents vary widely in personal traits (height, heft, colouring, even the number of digits), having come to resemble somewhat the specific types of trees that they shepherded. Quickbeam, for example, guarded rowan trees and bore some resemblance to rowans: tall and slender, smooth-skinned, with ruddy lips and grey-green hair. Some Ents, such as Treebeard, were like[T 5] beech-trees or oaks. But there were other kinds. Some recalled the chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick legs. Some recalled the ash: tall straight grey Ents with many-fingered hands and long legs; some the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, ... and the linden.[T 5] Like the roots of trees, but far more rapidly, Tolkien's Ents could break stone.[T 1] Ents share some of the strengths and weaknesses of trees. Their skin is extraordinarily tough, and very much like wood; they can erode stone extremely rapidly, in the manner of tree roots, but they are vulnerable to fire and chopping blows from axes. Ents are an extremely patient and cautious race, with a sense of time more suited to trees than to short-lived mortals. For example, in the Entmoot regarding the attack on Isengard, some of them considered their three-day deliberation to be "hasty".[T 5] Ents are tall and very strong, capable of tearing apart rock and stone (though they use their full strength only when they are "roused"). Tolkien describes them as tossing great slabs of stone about, and ripping down the walls of Isengard "like bread-crust".[T 1] Treebeard boasted of their strength to Merry and Pippin; he said that Ents were much more powerful than Trolls, which Morgoth made in the First Age in mockery of Ents. The book further lays out the power of Ents; their bark-like skin and flesh make them difficult to harm even with axes, and a single punch from an Ent can kill; although they do hurl stones, they use no other weapons.[T 5] Tolkien has Treebeard say that "Trolls are only counterfeits, made by the Enemy in the Great Darkness, in mockery of Ents, as orcs were of elves".[3] Internal history[edit] First Age[edit] Almost nothing is known of the early history of the Ents. After the Dwarves were put to sleep by Eru to await the coming of the Elves, the Vala Aulë told his wife Yavanna, "the lover of all things that grow in the earth,"[T 6] of the Dwarves. She replied, "They will delve in the earth, and the things that grow and live upon the earth they will not heed. Many a tree shall feel the bite of their iron without pity."[T 7] She went to Manwë and appealed to him to protect the trees, and they realized that Ents, too, were part of the Song of Creation. Yavanna then warned Aulë, "Now let thy children beware! For there shall walk a power in the forests whose wrath they will arouse at their peril." The Ents are called "the Shepherds of the Trees".[T 7] Much later, when Beren Erchamion and a force of Green Elves waylay the force of Dwarves returning from the sack of Doriath, the Dwarves are routed and scatter into the wood, where the Shepherds of the Trees ensure that none escape.[T 8] Treebeard tells of a time when much of Eriador was forested and part of his domain, but these immense forests dwindled over time. Treebeard's statement is corroborated by Elrond: "Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what is now the Shire to Dunland west of Isengard."[T 9] Of this vast forest, according to Treebeard, Fangorn forest was "just the East End".[T 5] Entwives[edit] Treebeard says that the Entwives began to move farther away from the Ents because they liked to plant and control things, while the Ents preferred forests and liked to let things take their natural course. The Entwives moved away to the region that would later become the Brown Lands across the Great River Anduin, although the male Ents still visited them. The Entwives, unlike the Ents, interacted with the race of Men and taught them much about the art of agriculture. The Entwives lived in peace until their gardens were destroyed by Sauron, whereupon the Entwives themselves disappeared. The Ents looked for them but never found them. It was sung by the Elves (as the Ents were content simply to "chant their beautiful names")[T 5] that one day the Ents and Entwives would find each other. Indeed, in The Return of the King, Treebeard implored the Hobbits not to forget to send word to him if they "hear any news" of the Entwives "in your land".[T 10] In The Fellowship of the Ring, Samwise Gamgee mentions his cousin Hal claims to have seen a treelike giant, which resembled an elm not only in size but also in actual appearance, in the north of the Shire.[T 11] During the Fangorn episode, Merry and Pippin told Treebeard about the Shire. Treebeard said that the Entwives would have liked that land. This, combined with the giant-sighting by Sam's cousin Hal mentioned above, has led to some speculation by readers that the Entwives may have lived near the Shire. Tolkien himself spent much time considering what actually happened to the Entwives (at one point saying that even he did not know), but eventually he stated in Letters #144: "I think that in fact the Entwives have disappeared for good, being destroyed with their gardens in the War of the Last Alliance...some may have fled east, or even have become enslaved..."[T 12] At the end of the story after Aragorn is crowned king, he promised Treebeard that the Ents could prosper again and spread to new lands with the threat of Mordor gone, and renew their search for the Entwives. However, Treebeard lamented that forests may spread but the Ents would not, and he predicted that the few remaining Ents would remain in Fangorn forest until they slowly dwindled in number or became "treeish", saying: "Sheep get like shepherds, and shepherds get like sheep. [...] But it is quicker and closer, with trees and Ents."[T 5] The Last March of the Ents[edit] Further information: Isengard, Battle of Helm's Deep, and Environmentalism in The Lord of the Rings Tolkien wrote that he "longed to devise a setting in which the trees might really march to war", unlike what he felt to be the "shabby" treatment of the story in Shakespeare's Macbeth.[T 13] In The Two Towers, the second volume of Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, the Ents – usually a very patient, deliberate people – become roused with their long simmering anger at Saruman, whose armies are cutting down large numbers of their trees. They convene an Entmoot, a meeting of the Ents of Fangorn forest at Derndingle.[T 5] After lengthy deliberation (three days; though from the perspective of the Ents this was almost no time at all), they march on Saruman's fortress at Isengard - 'the last march of the Ents'. Led by Treebeard, the oldest Ent, and accompanied by the hobbits Meriadoc Brandybuck and Peregrin Took, the Ents numbered about 50, plus an army of Huorns.[T 5] They destroy Isengard, tearing down the wall around it:[T 1] "If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and fallen on the hills with storm, it could have worked no greater ruin".[T 14]) Saruman is trapped in the tower of Orthanc.[T 1] Tolkien noted in a letter that he had created Ents in response to his "bitter disappointment and disgust from schooldays with the shabby use made in Shakespeare's Macbeth of the coming of 'Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane hill': I longed to devise a setting in which the trees might really march to war".[T 13][4] As well as destroying Isengard, Treebeard ensured victory at the Battle of Helm's Deep, in which Saruman tried to destroy Rohan. On the morning after the long night of battle, both armies saw that a forest of angry, tree-like Huorns now filled the valley, trapping Saruman's army of Orcs. The Orcs fled into the Huorn forest and were destroyed.[T 15] Commentators have observed that this represented a wish-fulfilment on Tolkien's part, concerned as he was with the increasing damage to the English countryside in the 20th century.[5][6] Adaptations[edit] Ents in other media[edit] In Peter Jackson's films The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002) and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003), Treebeard is a combination of a large animatronic model and a CGI construct; he is voiced by John Rhys-Davies, who also portrays Gimli.[7] The Fall of Troy has a song entitled "The Last March of the Ents" on their self-titled debut album released in 2003.[8] Permission was granted for a statue of Treebeard by Tim Tolkien, near his great-uncle J. R. R. Tolkien's former home in Moseley, Birmingham.[9][10] Ent-like creatures[edit] A "treant" from World of Warcraft Ents appeared in the earliest edition of the roleplaying game Dungeons & Dragons in the 1974 white box set, where they were described as tree-like creatures able to command trees, and lawful in nature.[11] In 1975, Elan Merchandising, which owned the game license to the Tolkien estate, issued a cease-and-desist order regarding the use of the word "ent", so the Dungeons & Dragons creatures were renamed "treants".[12][13] Heroes of Might and Magic III and V include Treants as a part of the Elven alliance; however, in Heroes of Might and Magic V, due to copyright infringement issues, their look was changed[14] between the beta phase and the retail version, making them quadrupedal[15] instead of bipedal.[16] In the Guardians of the Galaxy comic book and film, Groot is a member of an alien species resembling Tolkien's Ents called the Flora Colossi, sentient trees that can regenerate body parts.[17] See also[edit] List of tree deities References[edit] Primary[edit] This list identifies each item's location in Tolkien's writings. ^ a b c d e The Two Towers, book 3, ch. 9: "Flotsam and Jetsam". ^ Letters #163 to W. H. Auden, 7 June 1955 ^ Unfinished Tales, Index, entries for Ent, Enyd, and Onodrim. ^ The Two Towers, book 3, ch. 5: "The White Rider". ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l The Two Towers, book 3, ch. 4: "Treebeard". ^ The Silmarillion, Valaquenta ^ a b The Silmarillion, "Quenta Silmarillion" ch. 2: "Of Aulë and Yavanna" ^ The Silmarillion, "Quenta Silmarillion", ch. 22 "Of the Ruin of Doriath" ^ The Fellowship of the Ring, book 2, ch. 2: "The Council of Elrond". ^ The Return of the King, book 6, ch. 6 "Many Partings" ^ The Fellowship of the Ring, book 1, ch. 2: "The Shadow of the Past". ^ Letters #144 to Naomi Mitchison, 25 April 1954 ^ a b Letters, No. 163, footnote, pp. 211–212. ^ The Two Towers, book 3, ch. 8: "The Road to Isengard" ^ The Two Towers, book 3, ch. 7 "Helm's Deep" Secondary[edit] ^ Shippey, Tom (2001). J.R.R. Tolkien – Author of the Century. Houghton Mifflin. p. 88. ISBN 978-0-618-12764-1. ^ Shippey, Tom (2005) [1982]. The Road to Middle-Earth (Third ed.). Grafton (HarperCollins). p. 149. ISBN 0261102753. To the North are the Ents, another Old English word which had interested Tolkien ... [he] identified them with the orþanc enta geweorc, the 'skilful work of Ents' of the poem Maxims II. ^ Shippey, Tom (2005) [1982]. The Road to Middle-Earth (Third ed.). Grafton (HarperCollins). p. 159. ISBN 0261102753. ^ Day, David (2019). A Dictionary of Sources of Tolkien. Octopus. p. 345. ISBN 978-0-7537-3406-3. ^ Shippey, Tom (2005) [1982]. The Road to Middle-Earth (Third ed.). Grafton (HarperCollins). p. 184. ISBN 0261102753. ^ Niiler, Lucas P. (1999). "Green Reading: Tolkien, Leopold and the Land Ethic". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 10 (3 (39)): 276–285. JSTOR 43308393. ^ Nathan, Ian (23 October 2012) [2002]. "The Making Of The Two Towers". Empire. Retrieved 28 March 2020. Treebeard will mainly be a CGI creation; this animatronic version is used for the close-ups with Hobbit actors Billy Boyd and Dominic Monaghan. ^ "The Fall of Troy at AllMusic". ^ "Moseley Statue". 5 September 2007. Archived from the original on 3 November 2005. Retrieved 25 March 2014. ^ "Tolkien statue gets the go ahead". BBC News. 2 March 2007. The statue was approved by Birmingham City Council planners at a meeting on Thursday [1 March 2007] night. ^ Gygax, Gary, and Dave Arneson. Dungeons & Dragons (3-Volume Set) (TSR, 1974) ^ Witwer, Michael; Newman, Kyle; Witwer, Sam (2018). Dungeons & Dragons Art & Arcana: A Visual History. Ten Speed Press. p. 71. ISBN 978-0399580949. ^ Gygax, Gary. "Gary Gygax (Interview)". TheOneRing.net. Retrieved 7 October 2008. ^ "Mods and fixes". Heroes of Might and Magic. Retrieved 2 October 2020. ^ "Sylvan creatures". Heroes of Might and Magic. Retrieved 2 October 2020. ^ "Rampart creatures". Heroes of Might and Magic. Retrieved 2 October 2020. ^ Zambrano, Mark (5 May 2017). "Guardians of the Galaxy: 15 Things You Didn't Know About Groot". Screen Rant. Retrieved 2 October 2020. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ents. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth Bibliography Canon Legendarium Outline Works The Adventures of Tom Bombadil Beren and Lúthien Bilbo's Last Song The Children of Húrin The Fall of Gondolin The Hobbit The Lord of the Rings The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King "The Scouring of the Shire" "The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen" The Road Goes Ever On "The Road Goes Ever On" The Silmarillion "Ainulindalë" Unfinished Tales "Narn i Chîn Húrin" "The Quest of Erebor" History of composition The History of The Hobbit The History of Middle-earth 1–2 The Book of Lost Tales 3 The Lays of Beleriand The Lay of the Children of Húrin The Lay of Leithian 4 The Shaping of Middle-earth 5 The Lost Road and Other Writings 6–9 The History of The Lord of the Rings 10 Morgoth's Ring 11 The War of the Jewels 12 The Peoples of Middle-earth Fictional universe Peoples, Monsters Ainur Maiar Balrogs Wizards Valar Dragons Dwarves Eagles Elves Half-elven Noldor Sundering Ents Hobbits Men Beornings Drúedain Dúnedain Orcs Trolls Characters Celebrimbor Eärendil and Elwing Elendil Elrond Fëanor Finrod Felagund Finwë and Míriel Galadriel Gandalf Glorfindel Goldberry Húrin Isildur Lúthien and Beren Maedhros Melian Morgoth Saruman Sauron Thingol Tom Bombadil Tuor and Idril Túrin Turambar Ungoliant Locations Beleriand Bree-land Gondor Harad Isengard Lonely Mountain Lothlórien Mirkwood Mordor Moria Mount Doom Númenor Rivendell Rohan The Shire Valinor Objects Mithril Palantír Red Book of Westmarch Rings of Power One Ring Three Rings Silmarils Two Trees of Valinor Weapons and armour Named weapons Themes Artwork Beowulf Christianity Cosmology Decline and fall England Family trees Heraldry Languages Magic Music Maps Plants Poetry Style Trees and forests Adaptations and legacy Artists Jenny Dolfen Alan Lee John Howe Ted Nasmith Film Video games Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien Things named after Tolkien and his works Maps, atlases The Atlas of Middle-earth Journeys of Frodo A Map of Middle-earth Literary criticism J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century The J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia The Road to Middle-Earth Tolkien: A Look Behind "The Lord of the Rings" Tolkien: Maker of Middle-earth Tolkien's Legendarium The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion The Complete Guide to Middle-earth A Companion to J. R. R. Tolkien The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide Tolkien and the Great War Category v t e The Lord of the Rings J. R. R. Tolkien Influences Middle-earth Film versus book About Volumes The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King Stories "The Scouring of the Shire" "The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen" Translations Russian Swedish Responses Reception Works inspired Fandom Oxonmoot Tolkienmoot Study Structure Elements Artwork Family trees Heraldry Languages Quenya Sindarin Maps Poetry A Elbereth Gilthoniel Namárië Song of Eärendil The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late The Road Goes Ever On A Walking Song Prose Themes Addiction to power Beowulf Christianity Decline and fall England Environmentalism Heroism Magic Music Named weapons Plants Sexuality Race Trees and forests Women Literary devices Character pairing Impression of depth Interlacing Prose style Peoples Maiar Balrogs Sauron Wizards Gandalf Radagast Saruman Free peoples Dwarves Balin Gimli Elves Galadriel Glorfindel Half-elven Arwen Elrond Legolas Thranduil Ents Treebeard Hobbits Bilbo Frodo Merry Pippin Sam Men Beornings Drúedain Dúnedain Aragorn of Gondor Boromir Denethor Faramir of Rohan Éomer Éowyn Wormtongue Théoden Monsters Barrow-wight Gollum Nazgûl Old Man Willow Orcs Shelob Trolls Wargs Watcher in the Water Other Eagles Goldberry Tom Bombadil Geography Eriador Bree Old Forest Rivendell The Shire Gondor Harad Lothlórien Mirkwood Dol Guldur Moria Mordor Barad-dûr Mount Doom Rohan Isengard Battles Helm's Deep Pelennor Fields Morannon Objects Mithril Palantírs Rings of Power One Ring Three Rings Weapons and armour Related works The Hobbit The Adventures of Tom Bombadil Errantry Fastitocalon The Sea-Bell The Road Goes Ever On Bilbo's Last Song The Silmarillion Unfinished Tales The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien The History of Middle-earth The Children of Húrin The History of The Hobbit The Sea-Bell Beren and Lúthien The Fall of Gondolin Adaptations and derivative works Books Bored of the Rings (1969) The Last Ringbearer (1999) Muddle Earth (2003) Illustrations A Map of Middle-earth Pauline Baynes Barbara Remington John Howe Alan Lee Margrethe II of Denmark Ted Nasmith Theatre Fellowship! (2005) Lord of the Rings (2006) Radio The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1955) The Lord of the Rings (NPR, 1979) Hordes of the Things (1980) The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1981) Der Herr der Ringe (1992) Film Animated The Lord of the Rings (Bakshi, 1978) The Return of the King (Rankin/Bass, 1980) Peter Jackson series (Production) The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Two Towers (2002) The Return of the King (2003) Music "Concerning Hobbits" "Into the West" "May It Be" Other Khraniteli (1991) Hobitit (1993) The Lord of the Rings (2021) Fan-made The Hunt for Gollum (2009) Born of Hope (2009) Video games Journey to Rivendell Game One Game Two: Shadows of Mordor War in Middle Earth Vol. I (1990) Vol. I (SNES) Riders of Rohan Elendor Volume II The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King War of the Ring The Third Age The Battle for Middle-earth Tactics The Battle for Middle-earth II The Rise of the Witch-king Conquest Aragorn's Quest War in the North Lego The Lord of the Rings Guardians of Middle-earth Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor Middle-earth: Shadow of War The Lord of the Rings: Gollum The Lord of the Rings Online Mines of Moria Siege of Mirkwood Rise of Isengard Riders of Rohan Helm's Deep Mordor Minas Morgul War of Three Peaks Tabletop role- playing games The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game Middle-earth Role Playing The One Ring Roleplaying Game Adventures in Middle-earth Board games Middle Earth Lord of the Rings Risk: The Lord of the Rings Trilogy Edition War of the Ring Other games Middle Earth Strategy Battle Game The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game Middle-earth Collectible Card Game Lego The Lord of the Rings v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category