Clean Ocean Project poster The practice of protecting the natural environment Environmental protection is the practice of protecting the natural environment by individuals, organizations and governments.[1] Its objectives are to conserve natural resources and the existing natural environment and, where possible, to repair damage and reverse trends.[2] Due to the pressures of overconsumption, population growth and technology, the biophysical environment is being degraded, sometimes permanently. This has been recognized, and governments have begun placing restraints on activities that cause environmental degradation. Since the 1960s, environmental movements have created more awareness of the multiple environmental problems. There is disagreement on the extent of the environmental impact of human activity, so protection measures are occasionally debated. Contents 1 Approaches to environmental protection 1.1 Voluntary environmental agreements 1.2 Ecosystems approach 1.3 International environmental agreements 2 Government 2.1 Tanzania 2.2 China 2.3 European Union 2.3.1 Ireland 2.4 Middle East 2.5 Russia 2.6 Latin America 2.6.1 Brazil 2.6.2 Mexico 2.7 Oceania 2.7.1 Australia 2.7.2 New Zealand 2.8 Switzerland 2.9 United States 2.10 India 3 In literature 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Approaches to environmental protection[edit] Voluntary environmental agreements[edit] In the industrial countries, voluntary environmental agreements often provide a platform for companies to be recognized for moving beyond the minimum regulatory standards and thus support the development of the best environmental practice. For instance, in India, Environment Improvement Trust (EIT) has been working for environmental and forest protection since 1998. A group of Green Volunteers gets a goal of Green India Clean India concept. CA Gajendra Kumar Jain a Chartered Accountant, is the founder of Environment Improvement Trust in Sojat city a small village of State of Rajasthan in India [3] In developing countries, such as Latin America, these agreements are more commonly used to remedy significant levels of non-compliance with mandatory regulation. Ecosystems approach[edit] An ecosystems approach to resource management and environmental protection aims to consider the complex interrelationships of an entire ecosystem in decision making rather than simply responding to specific issues and challenges. Ideally, the decision-making processes under such an approach would be a collaborative approach to planning and decision making that involves a broad range of stakeholders across all relevant governmental departments, as well as industry representatives, environmental groups, and community. This approach ideally supports a better exchange of information, development of conflict-resolution strategies and improved regional conservation. Religions also play an important role in the conservation of the environment.[4] International environmental agreements[edit] Kyoto Protocol Commitment map 2010 Many of the earth's resources are especially vulnerable because they are influenced by human impacts across different countries. As a result of this, many attempts are made by countries to develop agreements that are signed by multiple governments to prevent damage or manage the impacts of human activity on natural resources. This can include agreements that impact factors such as climate, oceans, rivers and air pollution. These international environmental agreements are sometimes legally binding documents that have legal implications when they are not followed and, at other times, are more agreements in principle or are for use as codes of conduct. These agreements have a long history with some multinational agreements being in place from as early as 1910 in Europe, America and Africa.[5] Many of the international technical agencies formed after 1945 addressed environmental themes. By the late 1960s, a growing environmental movement called for coordinated and institutionalized international cooperation. The landmark United Nations Conference on the Human Environment was held in Stockholm in 1972, establishing the concept of a right to a healthy environment. It was followed by the creation of the United Nations Environment Programme later that year.[6] Some of the most well-known international agreements include the Kyoto Protocol of 1997 and the Paris Agreement of 2015. Government[edit] Top five countries by biological diversity Discussion concerning environmental protection often focuses on the role of government, legislation, and law enforcement. However, in its broadest sense, environmental protection may be seen to be the responsibility of all the people and not simply that of government. Decisions that impact the environment will ideally involve a broad range of stakeholders including industry, indigenous groups, environmental group and community representatives. Gradually, environmental decision-making processes are evolving to reflect this broad base of stakeholders and are becoming more collaborative in many countries.[7] Tanzania[edit] Many constitutions acknowledge Tanzania is recognised as having some of the greatest biodiversity of any African country. Almost 40% of the land has been established into a network of protected areas, including several national parks.[8] The concerns for the natural environment include damage to ecosystems and loss of habitat resulting from population growth, expansion of subsistence agriculture, pollution, timber extraction and significant use of timber as fuel.[9] Environmental protection in Tanzania began during the German occupation of East Africa (1884-1919) — colonial conservation laws for the protection of game and forests were enacted, whereby restrictions were placed upon traditional indigenous activities such as hunting, firewood collecting, and cattle grazing.[10] In the year 1948, Serengeti has officially established the first national park for wild cats in East Africa. Since 1983, there has been a more broad-reaching effort to manage environmental issues at a national level, through the establishment of the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) and the development of an environmental act. In 1998 Environment Improvement Trust (EIT) start working for environment & forest protection in India from a small city Sojat. Founder of Environment Improvement Trust is CA Gajendra Kumar Jain working with volunteers.[11] Zebras at the Serengeti savana plains in northern part of Tanzania Division of the biosphere is the main government body that oversees protection. It does this through the formulation of policy, coordinating and monitoring environmental issues, environmental planning and policy-oriented environmental research. The National Environment Management Council (NEMC) is an institution that was initiated when the National Environment Management Act was first introduced in year 1983. This council has the role to advise governments and the international community on a range of environmental issues. The NEMC the following purposes: provide technical advice; coordinate technical activities; develop enforcement guidelines and procedures; assess, monitor and evaluate activities that impact the environment; promote and assist environmental information and communication; and seek advancement of scientific knowledge.[12] The National Environment Policy of 1997 acts as a framework for environmental decision making in Tanzania. The policy objectives are to achieve the following: Ensure sustainable and equitable use of resources without degrading the environment or risking health or safety. Prevent and control degradation of land, water, vegetation and air Conserve and enhance natural and man-made heritage, including biological diversity of unique ecosystems Improve condition and productivity of degraded areas Raise awareness and understanding of the link between environment and development Promote individual and community participation Promote international cooperation[12] Use ecofriendly resources. Tanzania is a signatory to a significant number of international conventions including the Rio Declaration on Development and Environment 1992 and the Convention on Biological Diversity 1996. The Environmental Management Act, 2004, is the first comprehensive legal and institutional framework to guide environmental-management decisions. The policy tools that are parts of the act include the use of environmental-impact assessments, strategics environmental assessments, and taxation on pollution for specific industries and products. The effectiveness of shifting of this act will only become clear over time as concerns regarding its implementation become apparent based on the fact that, historically, there has been a lack of capacity to enforce environmental laws and a lack of working tools to bring environmental-protection objectives into practice. China[edit] The Longwanqun National Forest Park is a nationally protected nature area in Huinan County, Jilin, China Formal environmental protection in China House was first stimulated by the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held in Stockholm, Sweden. Following this, they began establishing environmental protection agencies and putting controls on some of its industrial waste. China was one of the first developing countries to implement a sustainable development strategy. In 1983 the State Council announced that environmental protection would be one of China's basic national policies and in 1984 the National Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA) was established. Following severe flooding of the Yangtze River basin in 1998, NEPA was upgraded to the State Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) meaning that environmental protection was now being implemented at a ministerial level. In 2008, SEPA became known by its current name of Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People's Republic of China (MEP).[13] Command-and-control Economic incentives Voluntary instruments Public participation Concentration-based pollution discharge controls Pollution levy fee Environmental labeling system Clean-up campaign Mass-based controls on total provincial discharge Non-compliance fines ISO 14000 system Environmental awareness campaign Environmental impact assessments (EIA) Discharge permit system Cleaner production Air pollution index Three synchronization program Sulfur emission fee NGOs Water quality disclosure Deadline transmission trading Administrative permission hearing Centralized pollution control Subsidies for energy saving products Two compliance policy Regulation on refuse credit to high-polluting firms Environmental compensation fee Pollution control instruments in China Environmental pollution and ecological degradation has resulted in economic losses for China. In 2005, economic losses (mainly from air pollution) were calculated at 7.7% of China's GDP. This grew to 10.3% by 2002 and the economic loss from water pollution (6.1%) began to exceed that caused by air pollution.[14] China has been one of the top performing countries in terms of GDP growth (9.64% in the past ten years).[14] However, the high economic growth has put immense pressure on its environment and the environmental challenges that China faces are greater than most countries. In 2010 China was ranked 121st out of 163 countries on the Environmental Performance Index. China has taken initiatives to increase its protection of the environment and combat environmental degradation: China's investment in renewable energy grew 18% in 2007 to $15.6 billion, accounting for ~10% of the global investment in this area;[15] In 2008, spending on the environment was 1.49% of GDP, up 3.4 times from 2000;[15] The discharge of CO (carbon monoxide) and SO2 (sulfur dioxide) decreased by 6.61% and 8.95% in 2008 compared with that in 2005;[15] China's protected nature reserves have increased substantially. In 1978 there were only 34 compared with 2,538 in 2010. The protected nature reserve system now occupies 15.5% of the country; this is higher than the world average.[15] Rapid growth in GDP has been China's main goal during the past three decades with a dominant development model of inefficient resource use and high pollution to achieve high GDP. For China to develop sustainably, environmental protection should be treated as an integral part of its economic policies.[16] Quote from Shengxian Zhou, head of MEP (2009): "Good economic policy is good environmental policy and the nature of environmental problem is the economic structure, production form and develop model."[15] European Union[edit] Environmental protection has become an important task for the institutions of the European Community after the Maastricht Treaty for the European Union ratification by all of its member states. The EU is active in the field of environmental policy, issuing directives such as those on environmental impact assessment and on access to environmental information for citizens in the member states. Ireland[edit] The Environmental Protection Agency, Ireland (EPA) The EPA has a wide range of functions to protect the environment, with its primary responsibilities including:[17] Environmental licensing Enforcement of environmental law Environmental planning, education, and guidance Monitoring, analyzing and reporting on the environment Regulating Ireland's greenhouse gas emissions Environmental research development Strategic environmental assessment Waste management Radiological protection Middle East[edit] The Middle Eastern countries become part of the joint Islamic environmental action, which was initiated in 2002 in Jeddah. Under the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the member states join the Islamic Environment Ministers Conference in every two years, focusing on the importance of environment protection and sustainable development. The Arab countries are also awarded the title of best environment management in the Islamic world.[18] In August 2019, the Sultanate of Oman won the award for 2018–19 in Saudi Arabia, citing its project 'Verifying the Age and Growth of Spotted Small Spots in the Northwest Coast of the Sea of Oman'.[19] Russia[edit] In Russia, environmental protection is considered an integral part of national safety. There is an authorized state body, the Federal Ministry of Natural Resources and Ecology. However, there are a lot of environmental issues in Russia. Latin America[edit] The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has identified 17 megadiverse countries. The list includes six Latin American countries: Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela. Mexico and Brazil stand out among the rest because they have the largest area, population and number of species. These countries represent a major concern for environmental protection because they have high rates of deforestation, ecosystems loss, pollution, and population growth. Brazil[edit] Panorama of the Iguazu falls in Brazil Brazil has the largest amount of the world's tropical forests, 4,105,401 km2 (48.1% of Brazil), concentrated in the Amazon region.[20] Brazil is home to vast biological diversity, first among the megadiverse countries of the world, having between 15%-20% of the 1.5 million globally described species.[21] The organization in charge of environment protection is the Brazilian Ministry of the Environment (in Portuguese: Ministério do Meio Ambiente, MMA).[22] It was first created in the year 1973 with the name Special Secretariat for the Environment (Secretaria Especial de Meio Ambiente), changing names several times, and adopting the final name in the year 1999. The Ministry is responsible for addressing the following issues: A national policy for the environment and for water resources; A policy for the preservation, conservation and sustainable use of ecosystems, biodiversity, and forests; Proposing strategies, mechanisms, economic and social instruments for improving environmental quality, and sustainable use of natural resources; Policies for integrating production and the environment; Environmental policies and programs for the Legal Amazon; Ecological and economic territorial zoning. In 2011, protected areas of the Amazon covered 2,197,485 km2 (an area larger than Greenland), with conservation units, like national parks, accounting for just over half (50.6%) and indigenous territories representing the remaining 49.4%.[23] Mexico[edit] The axolotl is an endemic species from the central part of Mexico With over 200,000 different species, Mexico is home to 10–12% of the world's biodiversity, ranking first in reptile biodiversity and second in mammals[24]—one estimate indicates that over 50% of all animal and plant species live in Mexico.[25] The history of environmental policy in Mexico started in the 1940s with the enactment of the Law of Conservation of Soil and Water (in Spanish: Ley de Conservación de Suelo y Agua). Three decades later, at the beginning of the 1970s, the Law to Prevent and Control Environmental Pollution was created (Ley para Prevenir y Controlar la Contaminación Ambiental). In the year 1972 was the first direct response from the federal government to address eminent health effects from environmental issues. It established the administrative organization of the Secretariat for the Improvement of the Environment (Subsecretaría para el Mejoramiento del Ambiente) in the Department of Health and Welfare. The Secretariat of Environment and Natural Resources (Secretaría del Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales, SEMARNAT[26]) is Mexico's environment ministry. The Ministry is responsible for addressing the following issues: Promote the protection, restoration, and conservation of ecosystems, natural resources, goods, and environmental services and facilitate their use and sustainable development. Develop and implement a national policy on natural resources Promote environmental management within the national territory, in coordination with all levels of government and the private sector. Evaluate and provide determination to the environmental impact statements for development projects and prevention of ecological damage Implement national policies on climate change and protection of the ozone layer. Direct work and studies on national meteorological, climatological, hydrological, and geohydrological systems, and participate in international conventions on these subjects. Regulate and monitor the conservation of waterways In November 2000 there were 127 protected areas; currently there are 174, covering an area of 25,384,818 hectares, increasing federally protected areas from 8.6% to 12.85% its land area.[27] Oceania[edit] Australia[edit] The Great Barrier Reef in Australia is the largest barrier reef in the world In 2008, there was 98,487,116 ha of terrestrial protected area, covering 12.8% of the land area of Australia.[28] The 2002 figures of 10.1% of terrestrial area and 64,615,554 ha of protected marine area[29] were found to poorly represent about half of Australia's 85 bioregions.[30] Environmental protection in Australia could be seen as starting with the formation of the first national park, Royal National Park, in 1879.[31] More progressive environmental protection had it start in the 1960s and 1970s with major international programs such as the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972, the Environment Committee of the OECD in 1970, and the United Nations Environment Programme of 1972.[32] These events laid the foundations by increasing public awareness and support for regulation. State environmental legislation was irregular and deficient until the Australian Environment Council (AEC) and Council of Nature Conservation Ministers (CONCOM) were established in 1972 and 1974, creating a forum to assist in coordinating environmental and conservation policies between states and neighbouring countries.[33] These councils have since been replaced by the Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council (ANZECC) in 1991 and finally the Environment Protection and Heritage Council (EPHC) in 2001.[34] At a national level, the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 is the primary environmental protection legislation for the Commonwealth of Australia. It concerns matters of national and international environmental significance regarding flora, fauna, ecological communities and cultural heritage.[35] It also has jurisdiction over any activity conducted by the Commonwealth, or affecting it, that has significant environmental impact.[36] The act covers eight main areas:[37] National Heritage Sites World Heritage Sites Ramsar wetlands Nationally endangered or threatened species and ecological communities Nuclear activities and actions Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Migratory species Commonwealth marine areas There are several Commonwealth protected lands due to partnerships with traditional native owners, such as Kakadu National Park, extraordinary biodiversity such as Christmas Island National Park, or managed cooperatively due to cross-state location, such as the Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves.[38] At a state level, the bulk of environmental protection issues are left to the responsibility of the state or territory.[33][36] Each state in Australia has its own environmental protection legislation and corresponding agencies. Their jurisdiction is similar and covers point-source pollution, such as from industry or commercial activities, land/water use, and waste management. Most protected lands are managed by states and territories[38] with state legislative acts creating different degrees and definitions of protected areas such as wilderness, national land and marine parks, state forests, and conservation areas. States also create regulation to limit and provide general protection from air, water, and sound pollution. At a local level, each city or regional council has responsibility over issues not covered by state or national legislation. This includes non-point source, or diffuse pollution, such as sediment pollution from construction sites. Australia ranks second place on the UN 2010 Human Development Index[39] and one of the lowest debt to GDP ratios of the developed economies.[40] This could be seen as coming at the cost of the environment, with Australia being the world leader in coal exportation[41] and species extinctions.[42][43] Some have been motivated to proclaim it is Australia's responsibility to set the example of environmental reform for the rest of the world to follow.[44][45] New Zealand[edit] At a national level, the Ministry for the Environment is responsible for environmental policy and the Department of Conservation addresses conservation issues. At a regional level the regional councils administer the legislation and address regional environmental issues. Switzerland[edit] See also: Environmental protection in Switzerland The environmental protection in Switzerland is mainly based on the measures to be taken against global warming. The pollution in Switzerland is mainly the pollution caused by vehicles and the litteration by tourists.[citation needed] United States[edit] Yosemite National Park in California, one of the first protected areas in the United States. Since 1969, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has been working to protect the environment and human health.[46] The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is an independent public body under the aegis of the Department of Communications, Climate Action & Environment established under the Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1992. All US states have their own state-level departments of environmental protection,[47] which may issue regulations more stringent than the federal ones. In January 2010, EPA Administrator Lisa P. Jackson published via the official EPA blog her "Seven Priorities for EPA's Future", which were (in the order originally listed):[48] Taking action on climate change Improving air quality Assuring the safety of chemicals Cleaning up [US] communities Protecting America's waters Expanding the conversation on environmentalism and working for environmental justice Building strong state and tribal partnerships As of 2019,[update] it is unclear whether these still represent the agency's active priorities, as Jackson departed in February 2013, and the page has not been updated in the interim. India[edit] The Constitution of India has a number of provisions demarcating the responsibility of the Central and State governments towards Environmental Protection. The state's responsibility with regard to environmental protection has been laid down under article 48-A of our constitution which stated that " The states shall endeavor to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forest and wildlife of the country".[49] Environmental protection has been made a fundamental duty of every citizen of India under Article 51-A (g) of the constitution which says "It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures".[50] Article 21 of the constitution is a fundamental right, which states that "No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law".[51] In literature[edit] There are numerous works of literature that contain the themes of environmental protection but some have been fundamental to its evolution. Several pieces such as A Sand County Almanac by Aldo Leopold, "Tragedy of the commons" by Garrett Hardin, and Silent Spring by Rachel Carson have become classics due to their far reaching influences.[52] The subject of environmental protection is present in fiction as well as non-fictional literature. Books such as Antarctica and Blockade have environmental protection as subjects whereas The Lorax has become a popular metaphor for environmental protection. "The Limits of Trooghaft"[53] by Desmond Stewart is a short story that provides insight into human attitudes towards animals. Another book called The Martian Chronicles by Ray Bradbury investigates issues such as bombs, wars, government control, and what effects these can have on the environment. See also[edit] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Anti-consumerism Biodiversity Biocentrism (ethics) Carbon offset Citizen Science, cleanup projects that people can take part in. Conservation biology Conservation movement Earth Day Ecology movement Environmentalism Environmental globalization Environmental governance Environmental law Environmental movement Environmental organizations Environmental personhood Environmental racism Green party Green politics Green solutions List of environmental organizations List of environmental issues List of environmental topics List of international environmental agreements Natural capital Natural resource management Participation (decision making) Public information and participation Renewable resource Sustainability Sustainable development References[edit] ^ "Environmental-protection dictionary definition | environmental-protection defined". yourdictionary.com. Retrieved 2018-11-21. ^ "What is Environmental Protection? definition of Environmental Protection (Black's Law Dictionary)". The Law Dictionary. 2012-10-19. Retrieved 2018-11-21. ^ Karamanos, P., Voluntary Environmental Agreements: Evolution and Definition of a New Environmental Policy Approach. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 2001. 44(1): p. 67-67-84. ^ The California Institute of Public Affairs (CIPA) (August 2001). "An ecosystem approach to natural resource conservation in California". CIPA Publication No. 106. InterEnvironment Institute. Archived from the original on 2012-04-02. Retrieved 10 July 2012. ^ Mitchell, R.B., International Environmental Agreements: A Survey of Their Features, Formation, and Effects. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 2003. 28(1543-5938, 1543-5938): p. 429-429-461. ^ Iriss Borowy, "Before UNEP: who was in charge of the global environment? The struggle for institutional responsibility 1968–72." Journal of Global History 14.1 (2019): 87-106. ^ Harding, R., Ecologically sustainable development: origins, implementation and challenges. Desalination, 2006. 187(1-3): p. 229-239 ^ Earth Trends (2003). "Biodiversity and Protected Areas-- Tanzania" (PDF). Earth Trends Country Profiles. Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Retrieved 10 July 2012. ^ Jessica Andersson; Daniel Slunge (16 June 2005). "Tanzania – Environmental Policy Brief" (PDF). Development Partners Group Tanzania. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-07-10. Retrieved 10 July 2012. ^ Goldstein, G., Legal System and Wildlife Conservation: History and the Law's Effect on Indigenous People and Community Conservation in Tanzania, The. Georgetown International Environmental Law Review, 2005. Georgetown University Law Center (Spring). ^ Pallangyo, D.M. (2007). "Environmental Law in Tanzania; How Far Have We Gone?".LEAD: Law, Environment & Development Journal 3 (1). ^ a b Tanzania Government. "Environment Tanzania". Tanzania Government. Retrieved 20/9/2011. ^ Zhang, Kunmin; Wen, Peng (2008). "Review on environmental policies in China: Evolvement, features, and evaluation". Environ. Sci. Engin. China. 2 (2): 129–141. doi:10.1007/s11783-008-0044-6. ^ a b Zhang, Kun-min; Wen, Zong-guo. (2008). "Review and challenges of policies of environmental protection and sustainable development in China". Journal of Environmental Management. 88 (4): 1249–1261. doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.06.019. PMID 17767999. ^ a b c d e Chunmei, Wang; Zhaolan, Lin. (2010). "Environmental Policies in China over the past 10 Years: Progress, Problems and Prospects". International Society for Environmental Information Sciences 2010 Annual Conference (ISEIS). 2: 1701–1712. doi:10.1016/j.proenv.2010.10.181. ^ Liu, Jianguo; Diamond, Jared. (2008). "Revolutionizing China's Environmental Protection". Science. 319 (5859): 37–38. doi:10.1126/science.1150416. PMID 18174421. S2CID 2903206. ^ Agency (EPA), Environmental Protection. "What We Are Responsible For". Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). ^ "7th Islamic Conference of Environment Ministers" (PDF). ISESCO. Retrieved 25 October 2017. ^ "Oman wins award for environment management in Islamic world". Muscat Daily. Retrieved 26 August 2019. ^ Ministério do Meio Ambiente (MMA) Secretaria de Biodiversidade e Florestas (2002), ' Biodiversidade Brasileira', http://www.biodiversidade.rs.gov.br/arquivos/BiodiversidadeBrasileira_MMA.pdf, retrieved September 2011 ^ Lewinsohn, T. M.; Prado, P. I. (2004) 'Biodiversidade Brasileira: Síntese do Estado Atual do Conhecimento', Contexto Academico ^ Ministério do Meio Ambiente (2012). "Ministério do Meio Ambiente" (in Portuguese). Ministério do Meio Ambiente. Archived from the original on 2012-03-02. Retrieved 10 July 2012. ^ Veríssimo, A., Rolla, A., Vedoveto, M. & de Furtada, S.M. (2011) Áreas Protegidas na Amazônia Brasileira: avanços e desafios, Imazon/ISA ^ Mittermeier, R. y C. Goettsch (1992) 'La importancia de la diversidad biológica de México', Conabio, México ^ Viva Natura. "Principal ecosystems in Mexico". Viva Natura. Viva Natura. Retrieved 10 July 2012. ^ Official site: http://www.semarnat.gob.mx/ ^ Official site: http://www.conanp.gob.mx/ ^ "Collaborative Australian Protected Areas Database 2008". Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ "Collaborative Aus tralian Protected Areas Database 2002". Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ Paul Sattler and Colin Creighton. "Australian Terrestrial Biodiversity Assessment 2002". National Land and Water Resources Audit. Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Archived from the original on 2011-09-11. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ "Royal National Park". NSW Office of Environment and Heritage. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ Australian achievements in environment protection and nature conservation 1972-1982. Canberra: Australian Environment Council and Council of Nature Conservation Ministers. 1982. pp. 1–2. ISBN 0-642-88655-5. ^ a b "Background to the Councils". Australian Government Primary Industries Ministerial Council and Natural Resource Management Ministerial Council. Archived from the original on 2011-08-22. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ "ANZECC". Environment Protection and Heritage Council. Archived from the original on 2011-09-27. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ "Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act". Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ a b "About the EPBC Act". Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ "Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act) fact sheet". Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ a b "Protected areas". Commonwealth of Australia. Retrieved 21 September 2011. ^ "Human Development Index (HDI) - 2010 Rankings" (PDF). Human Development Report Office; United Nations Development Programme. Retrieved 24 September 2011. ^ "Overview of the Australian Government's Balance Sheet". Budget Strategy and Outlook 2011-12. Commonwealth of Australia. Archived from the original on 6 April 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2011. ^ "The Australian Coal Industry - Coal Exports". Australian Coal Association. Archived from the original on 2 October 2011. Retrieved 25 September 2011. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Jeff Short and Andrew Smith (1994). "Mammal Decline and Recovery in Australia". Journal of Mammalogy. 75 (2): 288–297. doi:10.2307/1382547. JSTOR 1382547. ^ Johnson, Chris (2006). Australia's Mammal Extinctions. Melbourne: Cambridge University Press. pp. vii. ISBN 0-521-84918-7. ^ Murphy, Cameron. "Australia as International Citizen - From past failure to future Distinction". 22nd Lionel Murphy Memorial Lecture. The Lionel Murphy Foundation. Retrieved 26 September 2011. ^ "Climate Change and Energy". The Australian Greens. Archived from the original on 2011-09-16. Retrieved 26 September 2011. ^ The United States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved on (August 23, 2008). "About Us (section)". U.S. EPA. ^ "State Environmental Agencies". United States Environmental Protection Agency. Accessed May 2010. ^ "Seven Priorities for EPA's Future" Archived 2012-08-18 at the Wayback Machine. United States Environmental Protection Agency. Accessed May 2010. ^ The Government of India. Constitution of India/Part IV  – via Wikisource. ^ The Government of India. Constitution of India/Part IVA  – via Wikisource. ^ The Government of India. Constitution of India/Part III  – via Wikisource. ^ Environmental Psychology: Principles and Practices. Bankston Cotton. p. 310. ISBN 9781839474088. ^ Stewart, Desmond (February 1972). "The Limits of Trooghaft". Encounter. London. 38 (2): 3–7. Retrieved 24 September 2011. External links[edit] Media related to Environmental protection Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Conservation of species Conservation biology Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation status Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Nature conservation Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Conservation areas Conservation designation Conservation development Conservation district Conservation easement Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area National conservation area Open space reserve Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Special Area of Conservation Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding By taxon Amphibians and reptiles Birds burrowing owls raptors Insects bumblebees butterflies Land mammals bats bats 2 bears cheetahs cheetahs 2 gorillas painted dogs slow lorises small cats tigers (in India) wolves Marine Antarctic seals cetaceans (in Chile) manatees migratory sharks salmon sea otters sea turtles sturgeons Plants forests fungi orchids By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Hong Kong Iceland India Bhopal Tigers Ireland Italy New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea Uganda United Kingdom (Scotland) United States Other Biodiversity Conservation agriculture Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation officer Conservation organisations Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conservation refugee Conspicuous conservation De-extinction Myth of superabundance NatureServe conservation status Planetary boundaries Index of conservation articles List of conservation issues Category v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Land reform Labor rights Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Brandt Branting Brown Callaghan Lázaro Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Webb Wilson Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism "The Internationale" Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125