Genus of fishes "Pike (fish)" redirects here. For other fishes known by this name, see Pike. API Temporal range: Upper Cretaceous–recent[1] PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Northern pike (E. lucius) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Actinopterygii Order: Esociformes Family: Esocidae G. Cuvier, 1817 Genus: Esox Linnaeus, 1758 Type species Esox lucius Linnaeus, 1758 Esox is a genus of freshwater fish, the only living genus in the family Esocidae—the esocids which were endemic to North America and Eurasia during the Paleogene through present.[2] The species of this genus are known as pike and pickerel.[3][4] The type species is E. lucius, the northern pike. The big pike species are native to the Palearctic and Nearctic realms, ranging across northern North America and from Western Europe to Siberia in Eurasia. Pikes have the elongated, torpedo-like form of predatory fishes, with sharply pointed heads and sharp teeth. Their coloration is typically grey-green with a mottled or spotted appearance with stripes along their backs, providing camouflage among weeds. Individual pike marking patterns are unique, like fingerprints. Pike can grow to a maximum recorded length of 1.83 m (6 ft), reaching a maximum recorded weight of 35 kg (77 lb).[citation needed] Contents 1 Etymology 2 Species 3 Fossil species 4 Diet 5 Angling 6 Cuisine 7 In mythology 8 Submarines and tanks 9 Heraldry 10 References 11 External links Etymology[edit] The generic name Esox (pike fish) derives from the Greek ἴσοξ (ee-soks, a large fish) and appears to be both profoundly archaic and cognate with Celtic, Welsh eog and Irish Gaelic iasc (fish), as well as alpine Gaulic *esosk which is consistent with the original indoeuropean root for the common word for fish, *pei(k)sk. Pliny uses the Latin form Esox in reference to a large fish in the Rhine normally identified with Salmonidae (lax or salmon). Carolus Linnæus attributes Esox to the pike fish which is of similar form and appearance but taxonomically different from the salmoniformes, whereas the first mention of Esox as a marine animal appears in the writings of Hesych(ius). A young E. lucius specimen—a "Chain pickerel" in the original sense—in an aquarium. The English common name "pike" is an apparent shortening of "pike-fish", in reference to its pointed head, Old English píc originally referring to a pickaxe. The plural of pike is pike. A northern English and Lowland Scots name for the pike, ged, similarly derives from Old Norse gaddr (spike) (cf. the modern Swedish name for the pike, gädda, the Danish "gedde", the Norwegian "gjedde" and Scottish Gaelic: geadais). The Dutch name for the pike (snoek) has been given to a wide variety of fish reminding sailors of the pike (see snoek, snook). The English "pike" originally referred specifically to the adult fish, the diminutive form "pickerel" (now used to name some of the smaller pike, E. americanus and E. niger) referring to the young. The walleye (Sander vitreus) is sometimes called a pickerel, but it is unrelated to the pike, being a member of the perch family (Percidae). Pike are not to be confused with the unrelated pikeminnows (traditionally known as squawfish) of genus Ptychocheilus (family Cyprinidae) or pikeperch (Sander lucioperca) which is more akin to walleye than to pike. Pike are also called "jackfish" in North America and informally "slough shark" in Western Canada. Species[edit] Currently, seven recognized species are placed in this genus: Image Scientific name Common Name Subspecies Distribution Esox aquitanicus Denys, Dettai, Persat, Hautecœur & Keith, 2014 Aquitanian pike[5] Charente to the Adour drainages in France Esox americanus J. F. Gmelin, 1789 American pickerel Esox americanus americanus J. F. Gmelin, 1789 (Redfin pickerel) Esox americanus vermiculatus Lesueur, 1846 (Grass pickerel) the Saint Lawrence drainage in Quebec down to the Gulf Coast, from Mississippi to Florida,the Great Lakes Basin, from Ontario to Michigan, down to the western Gulf Coast, from eastern Texas to Mississippi. Esox cisalpinus Bianco & Delmastro, 2011 Southern pike[6] central and northern Italy, southeastern France and Switzerland, and it might also occur in western Balkan. Esox lucius Linnaeus, 1758 Northern pike Britain, Ireland, northern Europe, most of Canada, and most parts of the United States Esox masquinongy Mitchill, 1824 Muskellunge Esox masquinongy masquinongy (Great Lakes muskellunge or Spotted muskellunge ) Esox masquinongy ohioensis (Chautauqua muskellunge or Barred muskellunge) Esox masquinongy immaculatus (Clear muskellunge) mesotrophic lakes and large rivers from northern Michigan, northern Wisconsin, and northern Minnesota through the Great Lakes region, north into Canada Esox niger Lesueur, 1818 Chain pickerel southern Canada to Florida, and west to Texas. On the Atlantic Coast, in Maine, New Hampshire, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia Esox reichertii Dybowski, 1869 Amur pike the Amur River system in east Asia Hybrids between Esox masquinongy and Esox lucius are well-known and referred to as the tiger muskellunge. Fossil species[edit] One fossil species, Esox kronneri, is known from the Eocene of the Green River formation,[7] and a second, Esox nogaicus, is known from the Pleistocene of the Ukraine. Additional species are found in Miocene (Esox sibiricus) and Pliocene (Esox moldavicus) deposits from the Ukraine, Poland, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Moldavia.[8] Two additional fossil species, both from the Cretaceous of Alberta, Canada, are placed in their own genera: Estesesox foxi[9] (Santonian to Campanian[10]), and Oldmanesox canadensis[9][7] (Campanian to Maastrichtian[11]). Diet[edit] Pike in Haus des Meeres, Vienna Pike feed on a wide range of food sources, predominantly smaller shoal fish. Pike are also cannibalistic, sometimes preying upon smaller members of their own species. This can be seen clearly in the northern pike. They will also prey on insects and amphibians such as newts or frogs in times when their usual food is scarce, and occasionally on small mammals like moles or mice when caught water-borne. Small birds such as ducklings may become a target for hungry pike. Pike are also known to prey on swimming snakes. They are, however, undeserving of their reputation for being overly vicious predators. There are few substantiated incidents of pike "attacks" on people. Pike's further reputation as a pest seems to lie predominantly amongst a small handful of anglers and fishery managers who think, perhaps unfairly, that pike are a threat to native rough fish and also other sport fish. Angling[edit] Sign on the River Shannon, Ireland A caught pike Effective methods for catching this hard-fighting fish include dead baits, live baits, and lure fishing. Pike can easily be damaged when handled since they are not as robust as their reputation would suggest. Colour of lure can be influenced by water clarity and weather conditions. Since pike have numerous sharp teeth it is wise to take extreme care when unhooking them. The use of a wet leather gauntlet and surgical forceps to remove hooks is highly recommended on safety grounds. If practicing catch and release fishing, care for the pike should be the pike angler's utmost concern. The formerly recommended practice of grasping a pike by its eye sockets (misinterpreted as "its eyes") resulted in numerous released pike that quickly died from inability to see prey any longer. The current recommended method of grasping pike is to close the hand firmly over the gill covers, and to make the period of handling as short as possible before release. Grabbing a pike by the gill covers is not feasible when a pike is very big, but it is easy to handle a pike by inserting the fingers at the bottom of the gill opening and grabbing the lower jaw. Big pike should also be supported at the belly. When a pike is held this way it is also easier to keep the mouth open to remove a hook. Some anglers now use special grips to grab the pike's front lower jaw, which can add to the safety of an anglers because of the danger imposed by the hooks of the lure or tackle and the pike's teeth. However these can cause serious damage to a pike's lower jaw. The Pike Anglers Club was formed in 1977 to campaign for the preservation of pike and the sport of pike fishing. Pike are susceptible to gut hooking when fished for with natural bait. Upon taking the bait, the pike will hold it for a short time in its mouth as it moves off. The pike will then, usually, turn the bait in its mouth, so that it sits in alignment with its throat to ease swallowing. It is recommended that when pike fishing the process is not allowed to go this far and a strike is recommended as soon as a bite is indicated. Otherwise, what is known as gut hooking will result, which will normally kill or seriously injure the fish. Dutch research shows that cutting the line immediately when the fish is gut hooked will still give low mortality (14%). The hooks in the gut or stomach were either encapsulated or removed from the body.[12] Placing hooks near the rear of the bait reduces the risk of deep hooking.[13] Other methods of catching and handing pike that are now frowned upon are the gaff and the gag. The gaff is a metal hook on the end of a pole used to hook through the fish's body in place of a more humane landing net. A gag is a device for holding open the pike's mouth whilst unhooking. These are now illegal in Scotland, as they put a huge amount of pressure on a pike's jaw, thus causing irreparable damage. Cuisine[edit] The taste of pike and pickerel is highly esteemed, but the "multitude of long, fine, forked bones" are problematic.[14] [15] The dish of quenelles de brochet (pike dumplings), which puts the meat through a sieve, was invented to deal with this.[16] Indeed, Escoffier believed, falsely, that quenelles had completely displaced the whole fish from the menu.[14] In mythology[edit] Fossil Esox Russian mythology holds that the pike is one of several forms assumed by evil water spirits called vodyanoy, and a ravenous mythical pike is traditionally blamed for decimating the fish population in the Sheksna River. Russian fairy tales, on the other hand, also tell about an old wise pike that can fulfil wishes of the one who catches it, if its catcher releases it back into its habitat.[17] In the Finnish Kalevala, Väinämöinen creates a kantele (string instrument) from the jawbone of a pike. Submarines and tanks[edit] Two United States Navy submarines have been named Pike – SS-6 of 1903 and SS-173 of 1935 – and three – SS-22 of 1912, SS-177 of 1936, and SS-524 of 1944 – named Pickerel. In addition, the Soviet submarines known to NATO as the Victor III class and Akula class are called the Shchuka (Щука, "pike") class in Russian. The Soviet Iosif Stalin tank (IS-3) was also nicknamed Shchuka, in reference to its sharply pointed hull front. Heraldry[edit] In heraldry, the pike is called a lucy (English heraldry) or a ged (Scottish heraldry).[3] It is usually blazoned either naiant (swimming), embowed (bowed) or hauriant (jumping), though pairs of lucies may appear addorsed (back to back), as in the arms of the Finnish town of Uusikaupunki (Argent, two lucies addorsed azure).[citation needed] Uusikaupunki coat of arms The canting arms of Lucie de Cockermouth: Gules, three lucies in pale argent, (2 and 1). Coat of arms of Gimte, in Lower Saxony, Germany. References[edit] ^ Froese, Rainer, and Daniel Pauly, eds. (2008). "Esocidae" in FishBase. December 2008 version. ^ PaleoBiology Database: Esox, basic info ^ a b Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1909). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. London: T.C. & E.C. Jack. p. 255. LCCN 09023803. ^ Woodward, John (1892). A treatise on heraldry, British and foreign. Edinburgh: W. & A.K. Johnston. p. 694. LCCN 02020303. Archived from the original on 2 November 2007. Retrieved 29 May 2009. ^ Denys, Gaël Pierre Julien; Dettai, Agnès; Persat, Henri; Hautecœur, Mélyne; Keith, Philippe (2014). "Morphological and Molecular Evidence of Three Species of Pikes Esox spp. (Actinopterygii, Esocidae) in France, including the Description of A New Species". Comptes Rendus Biologies. 337 (9): 521–34. doi:10.1016/j.crvi.2014.07.002. PMID 25242691. ^ Lucentini, Puletti, Ricciolini, Gigliarelli, Fontaneto, Lanfaloni, Bilò, Natali, Panara (2011). Molecular and Phenotypic Evidence of a New Species of Genus Esox (Esocidae, Esociformes, Actinopterygii): The Southern Pike, Esox flaviae. PLoS ONE 6(12): e25218. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025218 ^ a b Grande, L. (1999). "The First Esox (Esocidae: Teleostei) from the Eocene Green River Formation, and a Brief Review of Esocid Fishes". Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. 19 (2): 271–292. doi:10.1080/02724634.1999.10011141. ^ Kovalchuk, Oleksandr M.; Wilson, Mark V.H.; Grande, Terry (2017). "A review of Neogene and Quaternary pikes of southeastern Europe and a new species from the early Pleistocene of Nogaisk, Ukraine". Acta Palaeontologica Polonica. 62. doi:10.4202/app.00311.2016. ^ a b Wilson, Brinkman & Neuman, 1992 ^ "Fossilworks: Estesesox". ^ "Fossilworks: Oldmanesox". ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 2009-02-07.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2013.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ a b Waverley Root, Food, 1996, p. 353 ^ 'Piscator', "Pike Fishing", The Sportsman (Second Series), 2:3:139 (March 1840) ^ Marthe Daudet, Shirley King, translator and adaptor, Pampille's Table: Recipes and Writings from the French Countryside from Marthe Daudet's Les Bons Plats de France [1934], p. 153 ^ "Emelya the Simpleton", russian folklore fairy tale. At the Pike's Behest External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Esox. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikispecies has information related to Esox. "Esox". Integrated Taxonomic Information System. Retrieved 5 December 2004. Oxford English Dictionary, s.vv. "Esox", "Ged1", and "Pike, n.4". Pike in Your Waters, the Pike Anglers Club, pub 2003 Pike Preservation - Fishing Equipment, Pike Fishing Scotland Float Tube Fishing In Ireland Pike Fishing from a Float Tube Pike Fishing in Denmark Coarse Fishing in Denmark Pike Fishing in Scotland Coarse Fishing in the Highlands River Swimming Water Safety mentions Pike attack as a risk of open water swimming. Accessed 21 October 2007 v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources v t e Seafood Fish Anchovy Barramundi Billfish Carp Catfish Cod Eel Flatfish Flounder Herring Mackerel Salmon Sardine Shark Sturgeon Swordfish Tilapia Trout Tuna Whitebait Shellfish Abalone Cockles Conch Crab meat Crayfish Geoduck Krill Lobster Mussels Oysters Scallops Shrimp Sea urchins Crustaceans Molluscs Other seafood Edible seaweed Jellyfish Marine mammals Octopus Sea cucumber Squid Whale meat Sea vegetables Algae List of seafoods more... Processed seafood Caviar Dried fish Hutki Shira Canned fish Cod liver oil Cured fish Fermented fish Fish fillet Fish head Fish oil Fish sauce Fish paste Fish steak Fish stock Lutefisk Salted fish Salted squid Shark liver oil Shrimp paste Smoked fish Stockfish Surimi Roe more... Seafood dishes List of seafood dishes List of crab dishes List of fish dishes List of raw fish dishes List of tuna dishes Bisque Chowder Fish and chips Fish pie Fish soup Fried fish Seafood boil Shark fin soup Sushi more... Health hazards Ciguatera Fish diseases and parasites Mercury in fish Metagonimiasis Scombroid food poisoning Shellfish poisoning Advisory services Seafood mislabelling Sustainable seafood Sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification Animal welfare Declawing of crabs Eyestalk ablation Eating live seafood Live fish trade Pain in fish Pain in crustaceans Shark finning Related topics Fish preservation Fish processing Gathering seafood by hand History of seafood History of sushi List of seafood companies Pescetarianism Raw bar Salmon cannery Seafood restaurant  Food portal  Category: Seafood v t e Meat Main articles: Fish Game Insects Livestock Meat Poultry Seafood Poultry Cassowary Chicken Duck Emu Goose Grouse Ostrich Partridge Pheasant Pigeon Quail Rhea Turkey Livestock Alpaca Beef Beefalo Bison Buffalo Camel Cat Chevon (goat meat) Dog Elephant Escargot Frog Guinea pig Cuy Horse Lamb and mutton Llama Pork Veal Yak Żubroń Game Alligator Bat Bear Boar Crocodile Kangaroo Monkey Pangolin Rat Hare and rabbit Snake Turtle Venison Wolf Fish Anchovy Basa Bass Carp Catfish Cod Crappie Eel Flounder Grouper Haddock Halibut Herring Kingfish Mackerel Mahi Mahi Marlin Milkfish Orange roughy Pacific saury Perch Pike Pollock Salmon Sardine Shark Sole Swai Swordfish Tilapia Trout Tuna Walleye Shellfish and other seafood Abalone Calamari Clams Crab Crayfish Dolphin Lobster Mussel Octopus Oyster Scallop Seal meat Shrimp/prawn Sea urchin Whale Insects Black soldier fly maggots Cicada Crickets Grasshoppers (locust) Mealworm Silkworm Mopane worm Palm grub Cuts and preparation Aged Bacon Barbecued Biltong Braised Burger Charcuterie Chop Corned Cured Cutlet Dried Dum Fillet/supreme Fried Ground Ham Kebab Liver Luncheon meat Marinated Meatball Meatloaf Offal Pickled Poached Roasted Salt-cured Salumi Sausage Smoked Steak Stewed Tandoor Tartare List articles Beef dishes Chicken dishes Countries by meat consumption Fish dishes Food and drink prohibitions Goat dishes Lamb dishes Meatball dishes Pork dishes Ham dishes Sausage dishes Sausages Seafood dishes Smoked foods Steaks Veal dishes Related subjects Animal rights Arachnophagy Bushmeat Butcher Cannibalism Carnism Case-ready meat Christian vegetarianism Cultured meat Entomophagy Ethics of eating meat Factory farming Feed conversion ratio Environmental impact of meat production List of meat dishes Marbled Meat analogue Meat cutter Meat science Meat tenderness Pescetarianism Pink slime Plant-based diet Preservation Psychology of eating meat Meat paradox Red meat Semi-vegetarianism Slaughter Slaughterhouse Veganism Vegetarianism White meat  Food portal  Category: Meat Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q191674 Wikispecies: Esox ADW: Esox BOLD: 4299 EPPO: 1ESOXG Fauna Europaea: 304649 Fauna Europaea (new): acdb58d1-280a-4220-88ae-1a828c482ec7 Fossilworks: 83215 GBIF: 2346628 iNaturalist: 51370 IRMNG: 1024764 ITIS: 162138 NBN: NHMSYS0000544670 NCBI: 8009 Plazi: EBD9E7DC-3FFF-4988-4978-C8E26A4B9DFD WoRMS: 154208 ZooBank: 14F7B916-4DB7-4C78-978B-E70E458F827F Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125