Endless time, an infinite duration For other uses, see API (disambiguation). "Sempiternal" redirects here. For the album by Bring Me the Horizon, see Sempiternal (album). This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: more citations and consideration of merger with Eternalism (philosophy of time) as wikipedia is not a dictionary is required Please help improve this article if you can. (October 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Eternity in common parlance means infinite time that never ends (or the quality, condition or fact of being eternal).[1] In classical philosophy, however, it is defined as what exists outside time as describing supernatural beings and forces, whereas sempiternity corresponds to the infinitely temporal, non-metaphoric definitions, as recited in requiem prayers for the dead.[clarification needed] Thomas Hobbes and many others in the Age of Enlightenment drew on the classical distinction to put forward metaphysical hypotheses such as "eternity is a permanent Now".[2] Eternity as infinite duration is an important concept in many religions, where the god or gods are said to endure eternally. Some, such as Aristotle, would say the same about the natural cosmos in regard to both past and future eternal duration, and like the eternal Platonic forms, immutability was considered essential.[3] Today cosmologists, philosophers, and others look to analyses of the concept from across cultures and history. They debate, among other things, whether an absolute concept of eternity has real application such for the fundamental laws of physics such as the arrow of time in entropy. Contents 1 Philosophy 2 Symbolism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Philosophy[edit] See also: Philosophy of space and time Aristotle argued that the cosmos has no beginning. In Aristotle's Metaphysics, eternity is the unmoved mover, understood as the gradient of total synergy ("produces motion by being loved").[4] Boethius defined eternity as "simultaneously full and perfect possession of interminable life".[5] Symbolism[edit] See also: Engagement ring, eternity ring, and wheel of time Eternity is often symbolized by the endless snake, swallowing its own tail, the ouroboros (or oroboros). The circle, band or ring is also commonly used as a symbol for eternity, as is the mathematical symbol of infinity, ∞ {\displaystyle \infty } . Symbolically these are reminders that eternity has no beginning/end. The Ouroboros The "endless knot," a symbol of eternity used in Tibetan Buddhism Infinity symbol variations Folk-art allegorical map "The 3 Roads to Eternity" from Matthew 7:13-14 by the woodcutter Georgin François in 1825. An allegorical classical woman c.1670s, representing eternity. She holds up an hourglass, her elbow above a human skull and in her lower hand two flowers in maturity, one of which is a dandelion blowball or clock (seed head), reminders of transience. An Ouroboros, snake swallowing its own tail, floats above her head as a halo - symbols of eternity. See also[edit] Aeon Akal (Sikh term) Armenian eternity sign Chronology of the universe Eternalism (philosophy of time) Eternal return God and eternity Kalpa Philosophical presentism Planck epoch Time perception Temporal finitism References[edit] ^ "eternity, n." 1. and 2. OED Online. September 2019. Oxford University Press. https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/64704 (accessed October 26, 2019). ^ Mr. Hobbes Considered in his Loyalty, Religion, Reputation, and Manners. By way of Letter to Dr. Wallis (English autobiography) T. Hobbes, 1662 at p.50 ^ "Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Eternity". Plato.stanford.edu. Retrieved 2016-06-13. ^ Yu, Jiyuan The Structure of Being in Aristotle’s Metaphysics Springer, 2003, p. 188 ^ Boedder, Bernard. "Natural Theology". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2015. Aeternitas est interminablis vitae tota simul et perfecta possessio External links[edit] Look up eternity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/eternity/ Entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy on Eternity. http://www.iep.utm.edu/g/god-time.htm Entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy on the relationship between God and Time. v t e Time Key concepts Past history deep time Present Future Futures studies Far future in religion Timeline of the far future Eternity Eternity of the world Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC UT TAI Unit of time Planck time New Earth Time Second Minute Hour Day Week Month Season Year Decade Century Millennium Tropical year Sidereal year Samvatsara Measurement systems 6-hour clock (Italian) 6-hour clock (Thai) 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Daylight saving time Decimal Hexadecimal Metric Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Lunar Solar Hijri Mayan Intercalation Leap second Leap year Clocks Horology History of timekeeping devices Main types astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial sundial markup schema watch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Chronicle Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Religion Mythology Dreamtime Kaal Kalachakra Prophecy Time and fate deities Wheel of time Immortality Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Causality Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Multiple time dimensions Perdurantism Presentism Static interpretation of time Temporal finitism Temporal parts "The Unreality of Time" Human experience and use of time Accounting period Chronemics Fiscal year Generation time Mental chronometry Music Procrastination Punctuality Temporal database Term Time discipline Time management Time perception Specious present Time-tracking software Time-use research Time-based currency Time value of money Time clock Timesheet Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Imaginary time Planck epoch Planck time Proper time Rate Spacetime Theory of relativity Time dilation gravitational Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other subject areas Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Dating methodologies in archaeology Time geography Related topics Carpe diem Clock position Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time complexity Time signature Time travel Category Commons v t e Time in religion and mythology Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Deterministic system Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Free will Growing block universe Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Theories of time B-theory of time Compatibilism and incompatibilism Determinism Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Temporal finitism Indeterminism Perdurantism Presentism Static interpretation of time Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology "The Unreality of Time" The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Modern spirituality Spirituality Outline of spirituality Category:Spirituality Concepts Afterlife Akashic Records Atman Awakening Bodhi Chakra Consciousness Cosmogony Cosmology Creation myths Deity Dharma Ekam Emanationism Enlightenment Epigenesis Eschatology Eternal return Eternity Ethic of reciprocity Existence God Guru Inner peace Involution Jihad Karma Lataif-e-sitta Meaning of life Metaphysics Mind's eye Moksha Nature Nirvana Parapsychology Planes of existence Prophecy Qi Reality Reincarnation Revelation Salvation Samadhi Satguru Satori Shabd Shunyata Soul Spirit Spiritual evolution Spiritualism Spiritual possession Synchronicity Tao Tatvas Yana Yuga Practices Ahimsa Aikido Altruism Ancestor worship Asceticism Astrology Bearing testimony Being born again Bhajan Bhakti Blessing Celibacy Channelling Chanting Contemplation Dhikr Entheogen Epiphany Exorcism Faith healing Fasting Glossolalia Hymn Iconolatry Japa kinomichi Koan practice Mantra Meditation Martyrdom Ministering Miracles Monasticism Muraqaba Nonresistance Nonviolence Pacifism Pilgrimage Prayer Qawwali Qigong Religious ecstasy Religious music Repentance Revivalism Ritual Sacrament Sacrifice Sādhanā Sahaj marg Sainthood Self-realization Shamanism Simple living Simran Supplication Sufi whirling T'ai chi ch'uan Theosis Tithing Vegetarianism Veneration Vipassana Wabi-sabi Wearing vestments Worship Yoga Zazen Belief systems Advaita Anthroposophy Darshana Deism Esotericism Eutheism, dystheism, and maltheism Gnosticism Henotheism Kathenotheism Monotheism Monolatry Mysticism New Age Nondualism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Religion Spiritualism Sufism Taoism Theism Transcendentalism Vedanta Texts A Course in Miracles Akilattirattu Ammanai Bible Book of Mormon The Cloud of Unknowing Dhammapada Hindu scripture Guru Granth Sahib I Ching Qur'an Sufi texts Tao Te Ching Torah The Urantia Book Zhuangzi Virtues Awareness Charity Compassion / Empathy Faith Forgiveness Gratitude Honesty Hope Intuition Kindness Love Mercy Mettā Moral courage Patience Seven virtues Wisdom Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125