Legendary sword of King Arthur For other uses, see Excalibur (disambiguation) and The Sword in the Stone (disambiguation). Excalibur Excalibur the Sword by Howard Pyle (1903) Plot element from the Matter of Britain In-story information Type Legendary sword Element of stories featuring King Arthur, Merlin, Lady of the Lake, Morgan le Fay, Bedivere Excalibur (/ɛkˈskælɪbər/) is the legendary sword of King Arthur, sometimes also attributed with magical powers or associated with the rightful sovereignty of Britain. It was associated with the Arthurian legend very early on. Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone (the proof of Arthur's lineage) are in some versions said to be different, though in most incarnations they are the same. In Welsh, it is called Caledfwlch; in Cornish, Calesvol (in Modern Cornish: Kalesvolgh); in Breton, Kaledvoulc'h; and in Latin, Caliburnus. Contents 1 Forms and etymologies 2 Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone 3 Other roles and attributes 4 Excalibur as a relic 5 Similar weapons 6 Arthur's other weapons 7 References 7.1 Notes 7.2 Citations 7.3 Sources 7.4 Further reading 8 External links Forms and etymologies[edit] A prop Excalibur exhibited at Castle of Almodóvar del Río in Spain The name Excalibur ultimately derives from the Welsh Caledfwlch (and Breton Kaledvoulc'h, Middle Cornish Calesvol), which is a compound of caled "hard" and bwlch "breach, cleft".[1] Caledfwlch appears in several early Welsh works, including the prose tale Culhwch and Olwen (c. 11-12th century). The name was later used in Welsh adaptations of foreign material such as the Bruts (chronicles), which were based on Geoffrey of Monmouth. It is often considered to be related to the phonetically similar Caladbolg, a sword borne by several figures from Irish mythology, although a borrowing of Caledfwlch from Irish Caladbolg has been considered unlikely by Rachel Bromwich and D. Simon Evans. They suggest instead that both names "may have similarly arisen at a very early date as generic names for a sword". This sword then became exclusively the property of Arthur in the British tradition.[1][2] Geoffrey of Monmouth, in his Historia Regum Britanniae (The History of the Kings of Britain, c. 1136), Latinised the name of Arthur's sword as Caliburnus (potentially influenced by the Medieval Latin spelling calibs of Classical Latin chalybs, from Greek chályps [χάλυψ] "steel"). Most Celticists consider Geoffrey's Caliburnus to be derivative of a lost Old Welsh text in which bwlch (Old Welsh bulc[h]) had not yet been lenited to fwlch (Middle Welsh vwlch or uwlch).[3][4][1] In the late 15th/early 16th-century Middle Cornish play Beunans Ke, Arthur's sword is called Calesvol, which is etymologically an exact Middle Cornish cognate of the Welsh Caledfwlch. It is unclear if the name was borrowed from the Welsh (if so, it must have been an early loan, for phonological reasons), or represents an early, pan-Brittonic traditional name for Arthur's sword.[5] In Old French sources this then became Escalibor, Excalibor, and finally the familiar Excalibur. Geoffrey Gaimar, in his Old French L'Estoire des Engleis (1134-1140), mentions Arthur and his sword: "this Constantine was the nephew of Arthur, who had the sword Caliburc" ("Cil Costentin, li niès Artur, Ki out l'espée Caliburc").[6][7] In Wace's Roman de Brut (c. 1150-1155), an Old French translation and versification of Geoffrey's Historia, the sword is called Calabrum, Callibourc, Chalabrun, and Calabrun (with variant spellings such as Chalabrum, Calibore, Callibor, Caliborne, Calliborc, and Escaliborc, found in various manuscripts of the Brut).[8] In Chrétien de Troyes' late 12th-century Old French Perceval, Arthur's knight Gawain carries the sword Escalibor and it is stated, "for at his belt hung Escalibor, the finest sword that there was, which sliced through iron as through wood"[9] ("Qu'il avoit cainte Escalibor, la meillor espee qui fust, qu'ele trenche fer come fust"[10]). This statement was probably picked up by the author of the Estoire Merlin, or Vulgate Merlin, where the author (who was fond of fanciful folk etymologies) asserts that Escalibor "is a Hebrew name which means in French 'cuts iron, steel, and wood'"[11] ("c'est non Ebrieu qui dist en franchois trenche fer & achier et fust"; note that the word for "steel" here, achier, also means "blade" or "sword" and comes from medieval Latin aciarium, a derivative of acies "sharp", so there is no direct connection with Latin chalybs in this etymology). It is from this fanciful etymological musing that Thomas Malory got the notion that Excalibur meant "cut steel"[12] ("'the name of it,' said the lady, 'is Excalibur, that is as moche to say, as Cut stele'"). Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone[edit] The drawing of the sword from the stone as depicted in Henrietta Elizabeth Marshall's Our Island Story (1906) "King Arthur asks the Lady of the Lake for the sword Excalibur." Walter Crane's illustration for Henry Gilbert's King Arthur's Knights: The Tales Retold for Boys and Girls (1911) In Arthurian romance, a number of explanations are given for Arthur's possession of Excalibur. In Robert de Boron's Merlin, the first tale to mention the "sword in the stone" motif c. 1200, Arthur obtained the British throne by pulling a sword from an anvil sitting atop a stone that appeared in a churchyard on Christmas Eve.[13] In this account, as foretold by Merlin, the act could not be performed except by "the true king," meaning the divinely appointed king or true heir of Uther Pendragon. As Malory related in his most famous English-language version of the Arthurian tales, the 15th-century Le Morte d'Arthur: "Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is rightwise king born."[14][note 1] After many of the gathered nobles try and fail to complete Merlin's challenge, the teenage Arthur (who up to this point had believed himself to be son of Sir Ector, not Uther's son, and went there as Sir Kay's squire) does this feat effortlessly by accident and then repeats it publicly. The identity of this sword as Excalibur is made explicit in the Prose Merlin, part of the Lancelot-Grail cycle of French romances (the Vulgate Cycle).[15] In the Vulgate Mort Artu, when Arthur at the brink of death he orders Griflet to throw the sword into the enchanted lake; after two failed attempts (as he felt such a great sword should not be thrown away), Griflet finally complies with the wounded king's request and a hand emerges from the lake to catch it. This tale becomes attached to Bedivere instead of Griflet in Malory and the English tradition.[16] However, in the Post-Vulgate Cycle and consequently Malory, early in his reign Arthur breaks the Sword from the Stone while in combat against King Pellinore, and then is given Excalibur by a Lady of the Lake in exchange for a later boon for her (some time later, she arrives at Arthur's court to demand the head of Balin). Malory records both versions of the legend in his Le Morte d'Arthur, naming both swords as Excalibur.[17][18] Other roles and attributes[edit] In Welsh legends, Arthur's sword is known as Caledfwlch. In Culhwch and Olwen, it is one of Arthur's most valuable possessions and is used by Arthur's warrior Llenlleawg the Irishman to kill the Irish king Diwrnach while stealing his magical cauldron. Though not named as Caledfwlch, Arthur's sword is described vividly in The Dream of Rhonabwy, one of the tales associated with the Mabinogion (as translated by Jeffrey Gantz): Then they heard Cadwr Earl of Cornwall being summoned, and saw him rise with Arthur's sword in his hand, with a design of two chimeras on the golden hilt; when the sword was unsheathed what was seen from the mouths of the two chimeras was like two flames of fire, so dreadful that it was not easy for anyone to look.[19] "Queen Morgana Loses Excalibur His Sheath." Howard Pyle's illustration for The Story of King Arthur and His Knights (1903) Geoffrey's Historia is the first non-Welsh source to speak of the sword. Geoffrey says the sword was forged in Avalon and Latinises the name "Caledfwlch" as Caliburnus. When his influential pseudo-history made it to Continental Europe, writers altered the name further until it finally took on the popular form Excalibur (various spellings in the medieval Arthurian romance and chronicle tradition include: Calabrun, Calabrum, Calibourne, Callibourc, Calliborc, Calibourch, Escaliborc, and Escalibor[20]). The legend was expanded upon in the Vulgate Cycle and in the Post-Vulgate Cycle which emerged in its wake. Both included the Prose Merlin, but the Post-Vulgate authors left out the Merlin continuation from the earlier cycle, choosing to add an original account of Arthur's early days including a new origin for Excalibur. In many versions, Excalibur's blade was engraved with phrases on opposite sides: "Take me up" and "Cast me away" (or similar). In addition, when Excalibur was first drawn, in the first battle testing Arthur's sovereignty, its blade blinded his enemies.[note 2] In several French works, such as Chrétien's Perceval and the Vulgate Lancelot, Excalibur is used by Gawain, Arthur's nephew and one of his best knights. This is in contrast to later versions, where Excalibur belongs solely to Arthur. In some tellings, Excalibur's scabbard was also said to have powers of its own, as any wounds received while wearing the scabbard would not bleed at all, thus preventing the death of the wearer. For this reason, Merlin chides Arthur for preferring the sword over the scabbard, saying that the latter was the greater treasure. In the later romance tradition, including Le Morte d'Arthur, the scabbard is stolen from Arthur by his half-sister Morgan le Fay in revenge for the death of her beloved Accolon during the Fake Excalibur plot and thrown into a lake, never to be found again. This act later enables the death of Arthur, deprived of magical protection, many years later in his final battle. Excalibur as a relic[edit] Historically, a sword identified as Excalibur (Caliburn) was supposedly discovered during the purported exhumation of Arthur's grave at Glastonbury Abbey in 1191.[21] On 6 March 1191, after the Treaty of Messina, either this or another claimed Excalibur was given as a gift of goodwill by Richard I of England (Richard the Lionheart) to his ally Tancred, King of Sicily.[22] Similar weapons[edit] See also: List of magical weapons "How Galahad drew out the sword from the floating stone at Camelot." Arthur Rackham's illustration for Alfred W. Pollard's The Romance of King Arthur (1917) The challenge of drawing a sword from a stone also appears in the later Arthurian stories of Galahad, whose achievement of the task indicates that he is destined to find the Holy Grail as foretold by Merlin. As told by Malory, this weapon (known as the Adventurous Sword among other names) had also come from Avalon; it had been originally wielded by Balin and eventually was used by Lancelot to give Gawain mortal wound in their duel. In Perlesvaus, Lancelot pulls other weapons from stone on two occasions. Morgan creates a copy of Excalibur itself as well as of its scabbard in the Post-Vulgate Merlin. In Welsh mythology, the Dyrnwyn ("White-Hilt"), one of the Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain, is said to be a powerful sword belonging to Rhydderch Hael,[23] one of the Three Generous Men of Britain mentioned in the Welsh Triads. When drawn by a worthy or well-born man, the entire blade would blaze with fire. Rhydderch was never reluctant to hand the weapon to anyone, hence his nickname Hael "the Generous", but the recipients, as soon as they had learned of its peculiar properties, always rejected the sword. There are other similar weapons described in other mythologies. Irish mythology mentions a weapon Caladbolg, the sword of Fergus mac Róich, which was also known for its incredible power and was carried by some of Ireland's greatest heroes. The name, which can also mean "hard cleft" in Irish, appears in the plural, caladbuilc, as a generic term for "great swords" in Togail Troi ("The Destruction of Troy"), a 10th-century Irish translation of the classical tale.[24][25] A sword named Claíomh Solais, which is an Irish term meaning "sword of light", or "shining sword", appears in a number of orally transmitted Irish folk-tales. The Sword in the Stone has an analogue in some versions of the story of Sigurd, whose father, Sigmund, draws the sword Gram out of the tree Barnstokkr where it is embedded by the Norse god Odin. A sword in the stone legend is also associated with the 12th-century Italian Saint Galgano in the tale of "Tuscany's Excalibur".[26] Arthur's other weapons[edit] Other weapons have been associated with Arthur. Welsh tradition also knew of a dagger named Carnwennan and a spear named Rhongomyniad that belonged to him. Carnwennan ("little white-hilt") first appears in Culhwch and Olwen, where Arthur uses it to slice the witch Orddu in half.[1][27] Rhongomyniad ("spear" + "striker, slayer") is also mentioned in Culhwch, although only in passing; it appears as simply Ron ("spear") in Geoffrey's Historia. Geoffrey also names Arthur's shield as Pridwen, but in Culhwch, Prydwen ("fair face") is the name of Arthur's ship while his shield is named Wynebgwrthucher ("face of evening").[1][3] The Alliterative Morte Arthure, a Middle English poem, mentions Clarent, a sword of peace meant for knighting and ceremonies as opposed to battle, which Mordred stole and then used to kill Arthur at Camlann.[28] The Prose Lancelot of the Vulgate Cycle mentions a sword called Sequence (also Secace or Seure) as borrowed from Arthur by Lancelot.[29] References[edit] Notes[edit] ^ This version also appears in the 1938 Arthurian novel The Sword in the Stone by British author T. H. White, and the Disney adaptation; they both quote the line from Thomas Malory in the 15th century. ^ Malory writes in the Winchester Manuscript: "thenne he drewe his swerd Excalibur, but it was so breyght in his enemyes eyen that it gaf light lyke thirty torchys." Nineteenth-century poet Alfred, Lord Tennyson, described the sword in full Romantic detail in his poem "Morte d'Arthur", later rewritten as "The Passing of Arthur", one of the Idylls of the King: "There drew he forth the brand Excalibur, / And o’er him, drawing it, the winter moon, / Brightening the skirts of a long cloud, ran forth / And sparkled keen with frost against the hilt / For all the haft twinkled with diamond sparks, / Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth-work / Of subtlest jewellery." Citations[edit] ^ a b c d e Bromwich & Simon Evans 1992, pp. 64–65. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBromwichSimon_Evans1992 (help) ^ Green 2007, p. 156. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGreen2007 (help) ^ a b Ford 1983, p. 271. sfn error: no target: CITEREFFord1983 (help) ^ MacKillop 1998, pp. 64–65, 174. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMacKillop1998 (help) ^ Koch, John. Celtic Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1, ABC-CLIO, 2006, p. 329. ^ Hardy, T.D. and Martin, C. T. (eds./trans.), Gaimar, Geoffrey. L'Estoire des Engles (lines 45-46), Eyre and Spottiswoode, London, 1889, p. 2. ^ Wright, T. (ed.); Gaimar, Geoffrey. Gaimar, Havelok et Herward, Caxton Society, London, 1850, p. 2 ^ De Lincy, Roux (ed.), Wace, Roman de Brut, v. II, Edouard Frère, Rouen, 1838, pp. 51, 88, 213, 215. ^ Bryant, Nigel (trans., ed.). Perceval: The Story of the Grail, DS Brewer, 2006, p. 69. ^ Roach, William. Chrétien De Troyes: Le Roman De Perceval ou Le Conte Du Graal, Librairie Droz, 1959, p. 173. ^ Loomis, R. S. Arthurian Tradition and Chrétien de Troyes, Columbia, 1949, p. 424. ^ Vinaver, Eugene (ed.) The works of Sir Thomas Malory, Volume 3. Clarendon, 1990, p. 1301. ^ Bryant, Nigel (ed, trans), Merlin and the Grail: Joseph of Arimathea, Merlin, Perceval : the Trilogy of Prose Romances Attributed to Robert de Boron, DS Brewer, 2001, p. 107ff. ^ Sir Thomas Malory, William Caxton "Morte Darthur: Sir Thomas Malory's Book of King Arthur and of His Noble Knights of the Round Table". p. 28. J.B. Lippincott and Company, 1868. ^ Micha, Alexandre (ed.). Merlin: roman du XIIIe siècle (Geneva: Droz, 1979). ^ Lacy 1996. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLacy1996 (help) ^ Malory 1997, p. 7. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMalory1997 (help) ^ Malory 1997, p. 46. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMalory1997 (help) ^ Gantz 1987, p. 184. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGantz1987 (help) ^ Zimmer, Heinrich. "Bretonische Elemente in der Arthursage des Gottfried von Monmouth", Zeitschrift für französische Sprache und Literatur, Volume 12, E. Franck's, 1890, p. 236. ^ Harper-Bill, Christopher; Vincent, Nicholas (August 20, 2007). Henry II: New Interpretations. Boydell Press. ISBN 9781843833406 – via Google Books. ^ Harper-Bill, Christopher (August 20, 1999). Anglo-Norman Studies XXI: Proceedings of the Battle Conference 1998. Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 9780851157450 – via Google Books. ^ Tri Thlws ar Ddeg, ed. and tr. Bromwich (1978): pp. 240–1. ^ Thurneysen, R. "Zur Keltischen Literatur und Grammatik", Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie, Volume 12, p. 281ff. ^ O'Rahilly, T. F. Early Irish history and mythology, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies, 1957, p. 68. ^ https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/sep/16/rorycarroll.theobserver ^ Jones & Jones 1949, p. 136. sfn error: no target: CITEREFJonesJones1949 (help) ^ Alliterative Morte Arthure, TEAMS, retrieved 26-02-2007 ^ Warren, Michelle. History On The Edge: Excalibur and the Borders of Britain, 1100-1300 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press) p. 212. Sources[edit] The Works of Sir Thomas Malory, Ed. Vinaver, Eugène, 3rd ed. Field, Rev. P. J. C. (1990). 3 vol. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-812344-2, ISBN 0-19-812345-0, ISBN 0-19-812346-9. Bromwich, R.; Simon Evans, D. (1992). Culhwch and Olwen. An Edition and Study of the Oldest Arthurian Tale. Cardiff: University of Wales Press. Ford, P.K. (1983). "On the Significance of some Arthurian Names in Welsh". Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies. 30: 268–73. Gantz, Jeffrey (1987). The Mabinogion. New York: Penguin. ISBN 0-14-044322-3. Green, T. (2007). Concepts of Arthur. Stroud: Tempus. ISBN 978-0-7524-4461-1. Jones, T.; Jones, G. (1949). The Mabinogion. London: Dent. Lacy, Norris J. (1996). Lancelot-Grail: The Old French Arthurian Vulgate and Post-Vulgate in Translation. New York: Garland. MacKillop, James (1998). Dictionary of Celtic Mythology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Malory, Thomas (1997). Le Morte D'Arthur. University of Michigan Humanities Text Initiative. Micha, Alexandre (1979). Merlin: roman du XIIIe siècle. Geneva: Droz. Further reading[edit] Lacy, N. J (ed). The New Arthurian Encyclopedia. (London: Garland. 1996). ISBN 0-8153-2303-4. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Excalibur. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) The Camelot Project at the University of Rochester: Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone v t e King Arthur and the Matter of Britain Family Agravain Cador Constantine Culhwch Ector Elaine of Garlot Hoel Gaheris Gareth Gawain Gingalain Guinevere Igraine Kay Mordred Morgan le Fay Morgause Ambrosius Aurelianus Uther Pendragon Urien Yvain Knights of the Round Table Bagdemagus Bedivere Bors the Younger Brunor Cligès Caradoc Dagonet Daniel Dinadan Galahad Galehaut Geraint Griflet Lamorak Lancelot Lanval Lionel Moriaen Palamedes Pelleas Pellinore Percival Sagramore Tristan Other characters Accolon Agrestes Anguish of Ireland Annowre Balin and Balan Ban Lady Bertilak Black Knight(s) Blanchefleur Bors the Elder Brangaine Brunor(s) Catigern Claudas Elaine of Astolat Elaine of Benoic Elaine of Corbenic Enide Feirefiz Fisher King(s) Garel Gorlois Green Knight(s) Guiomar Guiron le Courtois Gwenhwyfach Hellawes Hengist Iseult Lady/Ladies of the Lake Laudine Leodegrance Lohengrin Lot Lucius Lunete Lynette and Lyonesse Maleagant Mark of Cornwall Meliodas Merlin Nentres Nine sorceresses Olwen Percival's sister Red Knight(s) Rience Sebile Taliesin Vortigern Yniol Objects and animals Cavall Excalibur Gringolet Holy Grail Pridwen Prydwen Questing Beast Round Table Siege Perilous Twrch Trwyth Places Astolat Avalon Glastonbury Tor Brocéliande Val sans retour Caerleon Camelot Celliwig Chapel perilous Corbenic Joyous Gard Land/Castle of Maidens Logres Lyonesse Sarras Tintagel Tintagel Castle In media Bibliography List of works comics Topics Battle of Badon Battle of Camlann Dolorous Stroke Loathly lady Historicity of King Arthur King Arthur's messianic return  Wales portal  England portal  History portal v t e Celtic mythology series Welsh mythology Texts and tales Four Branches of the Mabinogi Pwyll Pendefig Dyfed Branwen ferch Llŷr Manawydan fab Llŷr Math fab Mathonwy Arthurian Culhwch and Olwen Preiddeu Annwfn Pa gur Owain, or the Lady of the Fountain Geraint and Enid Peredur son of Efrawg The Dream of Rhonabwy Geraint son of Erbin Other Taliesin Cad Goddeu Welsh Triads The Dream of Macsen Wledig Englynion y Beddau Giant tales Lludd and Llefelys Characters Afaon fab Taliesin Amaethon Arawn Arianrhod Arthur Afallach Beli Mawr Bleiddwn Blodeuwedd Bedwyr Bendigeidfran Branwen Cai Caradog ap Bran Caswallawn Ceridwen Cigfa Creiddylad Culhwch Cyhyraeth Cyledr Wyllt Cymidei Cymeinfoll Cynon Dôn Drudwas Dylan ail Don Dywel fab Erbin Edern ap Nudd Efnysien Elen Elffin ap Gwyddno Eliwlod Eufydd Euroswydd Geraint Gilfaethwy Glewlwyd Gafaelfawr Goewin Gofannon Goreu fab Custennin Gronw Pebr Gwawl Gwern Gwrhyr Gwyddno Garanhir Gwydion Gwyn ap Nudd Gwythyr Gwalchmei Hafgan Hefeydd Hueil mab Caw Hychddwn Hyddwn Iddog ap Mynio Idris Llefelys Lleu Llŷr Lludd Llwyd Mabon Madoc ap Uthyr Macsen Wledig Mallt-y-Nos Manawydan Math Matholwch Menw Modron Morfydd Morfran Nisien Olwen Penarddun Penpingion Peredur Pryderi Pwyll Rhiannon Saint Cyllin Saint Eigen Sanddef Seithenyn Taliesin Tegid Foel Teyrnon Ysbaddaden Animals and creatures Adar Llwch Gwin Adar Rhiannon Afanc Cavall (Cafall, Cabal) Ceffyl Dŵr Cewri Coblynau Coraniaid Cŵn Annwn Cyhyraeth Dreigiau Gwyllgi Gwyllion Llamhigyn y Dŵr Morgens Plentyn Newid Pwca Twrch Trwyth Tylwyth Teg Locations Annwn Cornwall (Celliwig) Caer Sidi Cantre'r Gwaelod Dyfed (Arberth, Gwales) Gwynedd (Aberffraw, Arfon, Ardudwy, Caer Dathyl) Ireland London (Ludgate) Miscellaneous Excalibur (Caledfwlch) Cauldron of rebirth Llech Ronw Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain v t e Geoffrey of Monmouth Works Prophetiae Merlini (c. 1135) Historia Regum Britanniae (c. 1136) Vita Merlini (c. 1150) Translations Roman de Brut Layamon's Brut Brut y Brenhinedd Characters Aeneas Saint Alban Albanactus Alhfrith of Deira Allectus Ambrosius Aurelianus Amphibalus Andragius Archgallo Archmail King Arthur Arvirargus Ascanius Augustine of Canterbury Aurelius Conanus Bedivere Beldgabred Beli Mawr Belinus Bladud Bledric ap Custennin Bledudo Brennius Brutus Greenshield Brutus of Troy Budic II of Brittany Cadfan ap Iago Cadoc Cador Cadwaladr Cadwallon ap Cadfan Camber (legendary king) Cap of Britain Capetus Silvius Capoir Caracalla Caradocus Carausius Cassivellaunus Catellus Catigern Cherin Claudius Cledaucus Clotenus Coel Hen Coilus Conan Meriadoc Constans II (usurper) Constantine the Great Constantine III (Western Roman Emperor) Constantine (Briton) Constantius Chlorus Cordelia of Britain Corineus Cunedagius Cunobeline Danius Saint David Digueillus Diocletian Dionotus Dunvallo Molmutius Ebraucus Edadus Edern ap Nudd Edwin of Northumbria Eldol Eldol, Consul of Gloucester Elidurus Eliud Enniaunus Estrildis Eudaf Hen Ferrex Fulgenius Gawain Gerennus Goffar the Pict Gogmagog (folklore) Goneril Gorboduc Gorbonianus Gorlois Gracianus Municeps Guiderius Guinevere Guithelin Gurgintius Gurguit Barbtruc Gurgustius Gwenddoleu ap Ceidio Gwenddydd Queen Gwendolen Helena (empress) Helenus Hengist and Horsa Hoel Humber the Hun Iago ap Beli Idvallo Igraine Ingenius of Britain Jago of Britain Julius and Aaron Julius Asclepiodotus Julius Caesar Sir Kay Keredic Kimarcus Kinarius Latinus Lavinia Leil Leir of Britain Locrinus King Lot Lucius of Britain Lucius Tiberius Lud son of Heli Maddan Maelgwn Gwynedd Magnus Maximus Mandubracius Queen Marcia Marganus Marganus II Marius of Britain Mempricius Merianus Merlin Millus Mordred Morgause Morvidus Myrddin Wyllt Nennius of Britain Octa of Kent Oenus Oswald of Northumbria Oswiu of Northumbria Owain mab Urien Penda of Mercia Peredur Peredurus Pir of the Britons Porrex I Porrex II Publius Septimius Geta Quintus Laberius Durus Redechius Redon of Britain Regan (King Lear) Rhydderch Hael Rience Rivallo Rud Hud Hudibras Runo Sawyl Penuchel Septimius Severus Silvius (mythology) Sisillius I Sisillius II Sisillius III Son of Gorbonianus Taliesin Tasciovanus Trahern Turnus Urianus Uther Pendragon Venissa Vespasian Vortigern Vortimer Vortiporius Wulfhere of Mercia Ywain Æthelberht of Kent Æthelfrith of Northumbria Œthelwald of Deira Topics Avalon Battle of Arfderydd Battle of Badon Battle of Camlann Battle of Guoloph Brut y Tywysogion Excalibur Lailoken List of legendary kings of Britain List of legendary rulers of Cornwall Logres Matter of Britain Molmutine Laws Nennius Pridwen Riothamus River Malvam Siege of Exeter (c. 630) Locations associated with Arthurian legend Treachery of the Long Knives Trinovantum Trojan genealogy of Nennius Walter of Oxford Wikiquote Wikisource texts v t e Notable swords Historical Eastern Seven-Branched Sword Sugari no Ontachi Sword of Goujian Sword of Osman Sword of Victory Tenka-Goken Western Ballinderry Sword Blessed swords Colada Curtana Curved saber of San Martín Grunwald Swords Joyeuse Lobera Legbiter Sword of Islam Sword of Peter Sword of Saint Wenceslas Sword of State of South Carolina Sword of Stalingrad Szczerbiec Tizona Ulfberht swords Wallace Sword Mythical or legendary Eastern Asi Cura Si Manjakini Gan Jiang and Mo Ye Kris Mpu Gandring Kris Setan Kober Kris Taming Sari Kusanagi Nandaka Shamshir-e Zomorrodnegar Thuận Thiên Totsuka-no-Tsurugi Zulfiqar Western Almace Caladbolg Carnwennan Claíomh Solais Clarent Dáinsleif Durendal Dyrnwyn Excalibur (Caledfwlch) Fragarach Gram Harpe Hauteclere Hǫfuð Hrotti Hrunting Kladenets Lævateinn Mimung Mistilteinn Murgleys Nægling Précieuse Ridill Skofnung Sword of Freyr Sword of Attila Sword of Damocles Tyrfing Note: some of the existing swords are named after earlier legendary ones.