Profession Executive producer (EP) is one of the top positions in the making of a commercial entertainment product. Depending on the medium, the executive producer may be concerned with management accounting or associated with legal issues (like copyrights or royalties).[1] In films, the executive producer generally contributes to the film's budget and their involvement depends on the project, with some simply securing funds and others being involved in the filmmaking process.[2][3] Contents 1 Motion pictures 2 Television 3 Music 4 Video games 5 Radio 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Motion pictures[edit] Main article: Film producer In films, executive producers may finance the film, participate in the creative effort, or work on set. Their responsibilities vary from funding or attracting investors into the movie project to legal, scripting, marketing, advisory and supervising capacities.[4] Executive producers vary in involvement, responsibility and power. Some executive producers have hands-on control over every aspect of production, some supervise the producers of a project, while others are involved in name only.[5] The crediting of executive producers in the film industry has risen over time. In the mid-to-late 1990s, there were an average of just under two executive producers per film. In 2000, the number jumped to 2.5 (more than the number of standard "film producers"). In 2013, there were an average of 4.4 executive producers per film, compared with 3.2 producers as of 2016.[6] Television[edit] Main article: Television producer In television, an executive producer usually supervises the creative content and the financial aspects of a production. Some writers, like Stephen J. Cannell, Tina Fey, and Ryan Murphy, have worked as both the creator and the producer of the same show.[7] In the case of multiple executive producers on a television show, the one outranking the others is called the showrunner,[8] or the leading executive producer. Music[edit] See also: Music executive In recorded music, record labels distinguish between an executive producer and a record producer. The executive producer is responsible for business decisions and more recently, organizing the recordings along with the music producer, whereas the record producer produces the music. Sometimes the executive producer organises the recording and selects recording-related crew, such as sound engineers and session musicians.[9] Video games[edit] Main article: Video game producer In the video game industry, the title "executive producer" is not well-defined. It may refer to an external producer working for the publisher, who works with the developers. For example, in 2012, Jay-Z was announced as executive producer for NBA 2K13. His role consisted of appearing in an introduction, picking songs for the game's soundtrack and contributing to the design of its in-game menus "and other visual elements".[10][11] Radio[edit] Main article: Radio producer An executive radio producer helps create, develop, and implement strategies to improve product and ratings.[12] See also[edit] Creative executive Development executive Line producer Showrunner Studio executive Unit production manager Music supervisor References[edit] ^ "Typically an executive producer may handle business and legal issues". IMDB. Archived from the original on 4 March 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2013.[unreliable source?] ^ "What is an Executive Producer?". WiseGEEK. Retrieved 21 January 2014. ^ "Executive Producer". CareersinFilm.com. Retrieved 16 May 2019. ^ "Executive Producer (aka Executive in Charge of Production)". Retrieved 12 January 2017. ^ "The Program Doctor". ^ "How many movie producers does a film need?". Retrieved 4 May 2016. ^ "In television, an Executive Producer may also be the Creator/Writer of a series". Retrieved 12 March 2013. ^ "There can be multiple executive producers on a series, but the one in charge is called the showrunner". Retrieved 10 March 2013. ^ "The executive producer usually chooses the musicians and technicians for a record, decides where and when to record, and the production budget and timetable". Archived from the original on 10 April 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013. ^ "Argent said Jay-Z's influence would be felt immediately in the game, starting during its video introduction. Jay-Z also handpicked the game's soundtrack". CNN. 1 August 2012. Retrieved 1 August 2012. ^ "Jay-Z NBA 2K13: Rapper Announced As 'Executive Producer'". Retrieved 2 August 2012. ^ "Executive Producer | Radio & Television Business Report". www.rbr.com. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 25 March 2018. External links[edit] "What is the point of executive producers?" BBC News. 19 October 2007. v t e Film crew (filmmaking) Above the line Actor Bit actor Cameo actor Character actor Leading actor Movie star Superstar Supporting actor Film director Screenwriter Film producer Executive producer Line producer Below the line Pre-production Unit production manager Production coordinator Production accountant Assistant director Script supervisor Script coordinator Casting director Production assistant Location manager Location scout Storyboard Storyboard artist Production design Production designer Art director Costume designer Greensman Hairdresser Make-up artist Set decorator Set dresser Property master / mistress ("props") Weapons master Visual arts Matte painter Illustrator Scenic design Photography Cinematographer / Director of photography Camera operator Focus puller Clapper loader Steadicam Digital imaging technician Second unit Gaffer Best boy (electrical) Lighting technician Key grip Best boy (grip) Grip Dolly grip Sound Director of audiography Production sound mixer Boom operator Utility sound technician Dialogue editor Re-recording mixer Foley artist Dubbing ADR Subtitles Composer Music supervisor Music editor Orchestrator Special effects Special effects supervisor Visual effects supervisor Animation Animator Visual effects Modeling Rigging Layout artist Talent Acting coach Body double Dialect coach Ensemble cast Movement director Choreographer Extra Talent agent Actor (voice) Cast member Stand-in Acting instructor Stage combat Stunt double Stunt performer Under-five Post-production Film editor Sound editor Colorist Animator Technical director Visual effects VFX creative director Visual effects editor Compositor Computer-generated imagery Rendering Other Unit still photographer v t e Television production Main / General Audience Broadcast network History of television Television crew Television show Television studio Places Central apparatus room Changing room Master control room Network operations center Production control room Stage (theatre) Transmission control room Profiles Celebrity Director of network programming Host News presenter Sports commentator News director Showrunner Pre-production Casting director Costume designer TV director Assistant director Location manager Make-up artist Production designer Researcher Set designer TV producer Television program creator Executive producer Line producer Production manager Writer Head writer Screenwriter Script editor Story editor Production Audio engineer Boom operator Camera operator Cinematographer Videographer Character generator (CG) Operator Studio floor manager Graphics coordinator Stage manager gaffer grip Key grip Dolly grip Unit production manager Production assistant Gofer Stunt coordinator Technical director Television director Broadcast engineering Technical director Post-production Sound editor Foley artist Composer Colorist Editor Publicist Visual effects artist Types, formats and genres Beauty pageant Broadcasting of sports events TV commercials Event television Game show Live television Reality television Television film Documentary film Mockumentary Television show Television special Series Animated series Limited-run series Miniseries Procedural drama Serial Sitcom Soap opera Talk show Late-night talk show News Breaking news Debate show News broadcasting Political commentary Traffic reports Weather forecasts Valuation Audience measurement List of television awards Television content rating system Television criticism Technical Broadcast reference monitor Character generator Digital on-screen graphic Mixing console Microphones Multiple-camera setup Outside broadcasting Production truck Professional video camera Stage lighting Lighting control console Vision mixer Issues Agenda-setting Censorship Concentration of media ownership Counterculture Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Influence of mass media Media activism Media bias Media manipulation Public opinion Regulation Broadcast law Bleep censor Communications law Entertainment law Fairness Doctrine Media policy Media reform Media regulation Pixelization Theory Media culture Media studies Television studies