Fictional depictions of extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrials in fiction Martian controlled Tripod, from War of the Worlds Grouping Science fiction Other name(s) Aliens, space aliens An extraterrestrial or alien is any extraterrestrial lifeform; a lifeform that did not originate on Earth. The word extraterrestrial means "outside Earth". The first published use of extraterrestrial as a noun occurred in 1956, during the Golden Age of Science Fiction.[1] Extraterrestrials are a common theme in modern science-fiction, and also appeared in much earlier works such as the second-century parody True History by Lucian of Samosata. Gary Westfahl writes: Science fiction aliens are both metaphors and real possibilities. One can probe the nature of humanity with aliens that by contrast illustrate and comment upon human nature. Still, as evidenced by widespread belief in alien visitors (see UFOs) and efforts to detect extraterrestrial radio signals, humans also crave companionship in a vast, cold universe and aliens may represent hopeful, compensatory images of the strange friends we have been unable to find. Thus, aliens will likely remain a central theme in science fiction until we actually encounter them.[2] Contents 1 History 1.1 Pre-modern 1.2 Early modern 2 Modern 2.1 Late 19th century-early 20th century 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links History[edit] Kaguya-hime returning to the Moon in The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter (c. 1650). Pre-modern[edit] Cosmic pluralism, the assumption that there are many inhabited worlds beyond the human sphere predates modernity and the development of the heliocentric model and is common in mythologies worldwide. The 2nd century writer of satires, Lucian, in his True History claims to have visited the moon when his ship was sent up by a fountain, which was peopled and at war with the people of the Sun over colonisation of the Morning Star.[3] Other worlds are depicted in such early works as the 10th-century Japanese narrative, The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter, and the medieval Arabic The Adventures of Bulukiya (from the One Thousand and One Nights).[4] Early modern[edit] The assumption of extraterrestrial life in the narrow sense (as opposed to generic cosmic pluralism) becomes possible with the development of the heliocentric understanding of the solar system, and later the understanding of interstellar space, during the Early Modern period, and the topic was popular in the literature of the 17th and 18th century. In Johannes Kepler's Somnium, published in 1634, the character Duracotus is transported to the moon by demons. Even if much of the story is fantasy, the scientific facts about the moon and how the lunar environment has shaped its non-human inhabitants are science fiction. The didactic poet Henry More took up the classical theme of Cosmic pluralism of the Greek Democritus in "Democritus Platonissans, or an Essay Upon the Infinity of Worlds" (1647).[5] With the new relative viewpoint that understood "our world's sunne / Becomes a starre elsewhere", More made the speculative leap to extrasolar planets, the frigid spheres that 'bout them fare; Which of themselves quite dead and barren are, But by the wakening warmth of kindly dayes, And the sweet dewie nights, in due course raise Long hidden shapes and life, to their great Maker's praise. The possibility of extraterrestrial life was a commonplace of educated discourse in the 17th century, though in Paradise Lost (1667)[6] John Milton cautiously employed the conditional when the angel suggests to Adam the possibility of life on the Moon: Her spots thou seest As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce Fruits in her softened soil, for some to eat Allotted there; and other Suns, perhaps, With their attendant Moons, thou wilt descry, Communicating male and female light, Which two great sexes animate the World, Stored in each Orb perhaps with some that live Fontanelle's "Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds" with its similar excursions on the possibility of extraterrestrial life, expanding rather than denying the creative sphere of a Maker, was translated into English in 1686.[7] In "The Excursion" (1728) David Mallet exclaimed, "Ten thousand worlds blaze forth; each with his train / Of peopled worlds."[8] In 1752 Voltaire published "Micromegas" that told of a giant that visits earth to impart knowledge and Washington Irving in his novel, A History of New York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty, spoke of earth being visited by Lunarians.[9] Camille Flammarion (1842-1925) who lived in a time where biological science had made further progress, made speculation about how life could have evolved on other planets in works such as La pluralité des mondes habités (The Plurality of Inhabited Worlds) (1862) and Recits de L'Infini (1872), translated as Stories of Infinity in 1873. Stories written before the genre of science fiction had found its form. Closer to the modern age is J.-H. Rosny, who wrote the short story Les Xipéhuz (1887), about a human encounter with extraterrestrials who turn out to be a mineral life form impossible to communicate with. Modern[edit] Lithograph from the Great Moon Hoax A bug-eyed monster, a trope of early science fiction Late 19th century-early 20th century[edit] Authors such as H. G. Wells, Olaf Stapledon and Edgar Rice Burroughs wrote both monitory and celebratory stories of encounting aliens in their science fiction and fantasies. Westfahl sums up: "To survey science fiction aliens, one can classify them by their physiology, character, and eventual relationships with humanity": Early works posited that aliens would be identical or similar to humans, as is true of Edgar Rice Burroughs's Martians (see Mars; A Princess of Mars), with variations in skin color, size, and number of arms. ... Later writers realized that such humanoid aliens would not arise through parallel evolution and hence either avoided them or introduced the explanation of ancient races that populated the cosmos with similar beings. The notion surfaces in Ursula K. Le Guin's Hainish novels (see The Left Hand of Darkness; The Dispossessed) and was introduced to justify the humanoid aliens of Star Trek (who even intermarry and have children) in the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "The Chase" (1993). Another common idea is aliens who closely resemble animals.[2] Among the many fictional aliens who resemble Earth's animals, Westfahl lists: Francis Flagg's The Lizard-Men of Buh-Lo (1930)[2] the winged Hawk-Men of the serial Flash Gordon (1936) and its sequels[2] the insect-like alien enemies of Robert A. Heinlein's Starship Troopers and Orson Scott Card's Ender's Game[2] the cat-like aliens of Fritz Leiber's The Wanderer (1964)[2] the "mog" - "half man, half dog" - of the farcical Spaceballs (1987)[2] Westfahl continues, "However, Stanley G. Weinbaum's A Martian Odyssey (1934) encouraged writers to create genuinely unusual aliens, not merely humans or animals in disguise. Olaf Stapledon also populated the universe with disparate aliens, including sentient stars, in Star Maker. Later, Hal Clement, a hard science fiction writer famed for strange but plausible worlds, also developed bizarre aliens in works like Cycle of Fire (1957)."[2] See also[edit] Articles related to the phenomenon of extraterrestrials in fiction and popular culture: History of science fiction Alien invasion Parasites in fiction List of fictional extraterrestrials List of films featuring extraterrestrials List of humanoid aliens Articles related to the purported or theorized existence of extraterrestrials: Main article: Extraterrestrial life Beliefs in extraterrestrial life Grey alien, frequently reported alien in field of ufology, now with some usage in fiction and popular culture References[edit] ^ Harper, Douglas. "extraterrestrial". Online Etymology Dictionary. ^ a b c d e f g h Westfahl, Gary (2005). "Aliens in Space". In Gary Westfahl (ed.). The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders. 1. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. pp. 14–16. ISBN 0-313-32951-6. ^ Grewell, Greg (2001). "Colonizing the Universe: Science Fictions Then, Now, and in the (Imagined) Future". Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature. 55 (2): 25–47. ^ Irwin, Robert (2003). The Arabian Nights: A Companion. Tauris Parke Paperbacks. p. 204 & 209. ISBN 1-86064-983-1.CS1 maint: postscript (link) ^ Democritus (1647). Democritus Platonissans, or an Essay Upon the Infinity of Worlds. ^ Milton, John (1667). Paradise Lost. ISBN 0-8414-2222-2. ^ Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier de (1686). Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds. ISBN 0-520-07171-9. ^ Mallet, David (1728). The Excursion. ^ Barger, Andrew (2013). Mesaerion: The Best Science Fiction Short Stories 1800-1849. USA: Bottletree Books LLC. pp. 43–44. ISBN 978-1-933747-49-1. Further reading[edit] Roth, Christopher F., "Ufology as Anthropology: Race, Extraterrestrials, and the Occult." In E.T. Culture: Anthropology in Outerspaces, ed. by Debbora Battaglia. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 2005. Sagan, Carl. 1996. The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark: chapter 4: "Aliens" External links[edit] UFO occupants - grey and reptilian alien pictures ufologie.net - The Filiberto Caponi close encounter of the 3rd kind, 1993 ufocasebook.com - Filiberto Caponi Close Encounter 1993 The Ilkley Moor encounter of the 3rd kind, 1987 UFO Magazine UK and Discussion Forum [1] Best Use of Aliens As Metaphor v t e Biology in fiction Aspects of biology Evolution in fiction Speculative evolution Disease in fiction Huntington's disease in popular culture Tuberculosis in human culture Genetics in fiction Parasites in fiction Symbiosis in fiction Fictional species Arthropods in film Bug-eyed monster Extraterrestrials in fiction Triffid Related Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction Artificial intelligence in fiction Living things in culture Science fiction v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects ALH77005 ALH84001 Cells in the stratosphere CI1 fossils Murchison meteorite Nakhla meteorite Polonnaruwa meteorite Red rain in Kerala Shergotty meteorite Viking lander biological experiments Yamato 000593 Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Habitability of Enceladus Habitability of Europa Habitability of Mars Habitability of Titan Habitability of Venus Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of orange dwarf systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Natural satellite habitability Planetary habitability Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Exhibitions The Science of Aliens Hypotheses Aestivation hypothesis Ancient astronauts Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Great Filter Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Neocatastrophism Panspermia Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Hard Soft History Timeline The Golden Age New Wave Subgenres Anthropological Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Christian Climate fiction Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Gothic Isekai Libertarian Mecha anime and manga Military Parallel worlds Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Scientific romance Social Space opera Space Western Superhero Tech noir Techno-thriller Tokusatsu kaiju Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Steampunk Dieselpunk Biopunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines Internet Speculative Fiction Database Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary/art/audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Illustrators of the Future Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers of the Future Zajdel Media Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Film Film history Films India Japanese anime tokusatsu Television TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese anime live-action U.S. Themes Applied Astroengineering AI takeover Artificial intelligence Cloaking device Holography Invisibility Maritime Megastructure Dyson sphere Matrioshka brain Stellar engine Space stations and habitats Mind uploading Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Prosthetics Robots Self-replicating machines Simulated consciousness Simulated reality Space warfare Tachyons Terraforming Technomancy Time viewer Formal Fermi paradox Grandfather paradox Time travel Life Biological warfare Energy being Evolution Extraterrestrials List Genetic engineering Gender Group mind Parasites Sex and sexuality Superhabitable planet Symbiosis Physical v t e Spacetime and spatial anomalies in fiction Spacetime phenomena Black holes Hyperspace Time travel Technologies Faster-than-light Ansible Boom tube Hyperspace Hyperdrive Inertialess Slipstream Space folding Teleportation Warp drive Wormhole Portable hole Stargate Ultrawave Universe Earth Heim theory Force field Multiverse Parallel universes Planets Stars and planetary systems General relativity Faster-than-light communication Wormholes Social Ancient astronauts Alien invasion Alien language Black Cyborgs Evil corporation Feminist First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Libertarian Message from space Political ideas Religious ideas Sci horror Transhumanism Uplifting World government Xenoarchaeology Related topics Alternate history Afrofuturism Fantasy Fictional technology Future Future history Horror Magic realism Rubber science Science and technology studies Science fantasy Speculative fiction Spy-Fi Supernatural Weird Techno-thriller Technology and society Utopian and dystopian fiction Category Portal v t e UFOs Ufology Index of ufology articles Claimed sightings General List of reported UFO sightings Sightings in outer space Pre-20th century Tulli Papyrus (possibly 15th century B.C.) Ezekiel's Wheel (circa 622–570 B.C.) 1561 celestial phenomenon over Nuremberg 1566 celestial phenomenon over Basel José Bonilla observation (1883) Aurora (1897) 20th century Los Angeles (1942) Kenneth Arnold (1947) Roswell (1947) Mantell (1948) Chiles-Whitted (1948) Gorman Dogfight (1948) Mariana (1950) McMinnville photographs (1950) Sperry (1950) Lubbock Lights (1951) Carson Sink (1952) Nash-Fortenberry (1952) Washington, D.C. (1952) Flatwoods monster (1952) Ellsworth (1953) Kelly–Hopkinsville (1955) Lakenheath-Bentwaters (1956) Antônio Villas Boas (1957) Levelland (1957) Trindade Island (1958) Barney and Betty Hill abduction (1961) Lonnie Zamora incident (1964) Solway Firth Spaceman (1964) Exeter (1965) Kecksburg (1965) Westall (1966) Shag Harbour (1967) Finnish Air Force (1969) Pascagoula Abduction (1973) Travis Walton incident (1975) Tehran (1976) Petrozavodsk phenomenon (1977) Operação Prato (1977) Zanfretta UFO Incident (1978) Valentich disappearance (1978) Kaikoura Lights (1978) Robert Taylor incident (1979) Val Johnson incident (1979) Cash-Landrum incident (1980) Rendlesham Forest (1980) Trans-en-Provence (1981) Japan Air Lines (1986) Voronezh UFO incident (1989) Belgian UFO wave (1990) Varginha (1996) Phoenix Lights (1997) 21st century USS Nimitz UFO incident (2004) Campeche, Mexico (2004) O'Hare Airport (2006) Alderney (2007) Norway (2009) USS Theodore Roosevelt UFO incidents (2014) Confirmed hoaxes Maury Island incident Aztec, New Mexico, UFO incident Morristown UFO hoax Sightings by country Argentina Australia Belarus Belgium Brazil Canada China France India Indonesia Iran Italy Mexico New Zealand Norway Philippines Russia South Africa Spain (Canary Islands) Sweden Thailand United Kingdom United States Types of UFOs Black triangle Flying saucer Foo fighter Ghost rockets Green fireballs Mystery airship Space jellyfish Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Studies The Flying Saucers Are Real (1947–1950) Project Sign (1948) Project Grudge (1949) Flying Saucer Working Party (1950) Project Magnet (1950–1962) Project Blue Book (1952–1970) Robertson Panel (1953) National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena (1956-1980) Condon Report (1966–1968) Institute 22 (1978–?) Project Condign (1997–2000) Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification Program (2007–2012) Identification studies of UFOs Unidentified Aerial Phenomenon Task Force (current) Hypotheses Ancient astronauts Cryptoterrestrial Extraterrestrial Interdimensional Psychosocial Nazi UFOs Trotskyist-Posadism Conspiracy theories Area 51 Storm Area 51 Bob Lazar Dulce Base Majestic 12 Men in black Project Serpo Involvement Abduction claims History Entities Claimants Narrative Perspectives Insurance Other Implants Cattle mutilation Close encounter Contactee Crop circles Government responses GEIPAN Organizations Ufologists Culture Conventions Fiction Religions list Skepticism List of scientific skeptics Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Category