UK music magazine This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. Please help improve it by removing promotional content and inappropriate external links, and by adding encyclopedic content written from a neutral point of view. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Fact Editor Al Horner Categories Music magazine Year founded 2003; 18 years ago (2003) Final issue 2008 (2008) (print) Company The Vinyl Factory Country United Kingdom Language English Website www.factmag.com Fact (stylised as FΛCT) is a music publication that launched in the UK in 2003. It covers a wide range of UK, US and international music and youth culture, with particular focus on electronic, pop, rap, and experimental artists. Fact was named “music website of the year” by The New Yorker in 2007, and has been described as “influential” by The Guardian. Having started as a bi-monthly print magazine, Fact went digital in 2007, focusing its efforts on its website and online TV channel Fact TV, which produces documentaries and videos including the popular series Against the Clock. Fact is also known for its weekly Fact Mixes, Singles Club review series and more recently, Make Music, a section aimed at inspiring producers and bedroom musicians. Fact operates out of a London office, with additional full-time staff in Los Angeles and New York City. Fact is part of The Vinyl Factory group. Contents 1 History 2 Dr Martens advertisement controversy 3 References 4 External links History[edit] Fact was founded in 2003 and during its run as a print magazine, it became notable for commissioning covers by artists including M.I.A., Bat for Lashes, Shepard Fairey, Barry McGee, Peter Saville, Trevor Jackson, Klaxons and Brazil's Os Gemeos. It reached a peak circulation of 28,000 (25,000 UK and 3,000 overseas) and readership of 100,000+ per issue, having been available free from independent record stores, selected clothing outlets and music/arts venues in the UK, France, Germany, Spain and Japan. After its final print edition in 2008, FACT continued as exclusively as an online magazine. Dr Martens advertisement controversy[edit] In 2007, some controversy was caused when Dr Martens placed an advertisement in FACT featuring manipulated photographs of a number of dead rock musicians so that they appeared to be wearing the company's boots in heaven. When some of these musicians' families saw the advert, they reacted angrily, leading Dr Martens to dismiss their advertising agency, Saatchi & Saatchi.[1][2] References[edit] ^ Williams, Eliza (30 May 2007). "Shoe storm". Creative Review. ^ "Ramones join Kurt Cobain advert row". NME. 29 May 2007. Retrieved 30 December 2020. External links[edit] FACT website