Faerûn /feɪˈruːn/ is a fictional continent, the primary setting of the Dungeons & Dragons world of Forgotten Realms. It is described in detail in several editions of the Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting (first published in 1987 by TSR, Inc.) with the most recent being the 5th edition from Wizards of the Coast,[1][2] and various locales and aspects are described in more depth in separate campaign setting books.[3] Around a hundred novels and several computer and video games use the Faerûn setting. Contents 1 Fictional culture and technology 2 Fictional geography 2.1 Northern regions 2.2 Middle lands 2.3 Southern nations 2.4 Underdark 3 Changes in geography 3.1 Third Edition 3.2 Fourth Edition 4 In other media 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Fictional culture and technology[edit] Economically and technologically, Faerûn is comparable to Western Europe during the late Middle Ages,[4] giving most new players using this campaign setting an intuitive grasp of the way the society functions. Gunpowder, known here as the magical substance smoke powder and different in its composition from historical gunpowder, is starting to make an appearance, but much of the armament is still dominated by pre-gunpowder weaponry such as swords, spears, and bows. Most of the population of Faerûn consists of farmers, who are organized somewhat loosely in a semi-feudal system. There are also a number of notable cities, and trade between nations is common, as in the Renaissance era. Likewise, there are regions where more barbaric tribes and customs persist.[1] A major difference between the setting and Earth is the presence of magic. The system of magic is subdivided into divine and arcane categories, with the former empowered by a Faerûnian deity, and the latter by rituals or innate abilities which manipulate a mystical field called the Weave, the source of magical energies on Toril. Faerûn has a pantheon of deities that are worshipped by the followers of this region. These are comparable to mythological deities of the ancient Greek pantheon, and cover a range of ethical beliefs and portfolios of interests. Faerûn is home to a number of non-human creatures of varying degrees of civilization or barbarism. Among these are several different races of dwarves, gnomes, halflings and elves, as well as goblins, orcs, lizardmen, ogres, various giants, and even dragons. There are a number of organized alliances in Faerûn, with each pursuing their own particular agenda. A few are dedicated to decent and honest causes, such as the Harpers, who protect the good-natured races and seek a balance between civilization and nature. The Harpers are opposed by evil organizations, including the Red Wizards of Thay and the nihilistic Cult of the Dragon. In the northern lands, the Zhentarim is an evil network seeking to dominate the region. Their efforts are being resisted by the Lords' Alliance, a council of knights that pursues the interests of the northern cities. Other organizations of Faerûn include the magical Seven Sisters, a band of assassins called the Fire Knives, a group of ruthless thieves operating out the city of Waterdeep named Xanathar's Guild, and the mysterious Shades—-the returning survivors of the long-fallen Netheril empire.[1] Fictional geography[edit] Faerûn partial map The sub-continent of Faerûn is set in the northern hemisphere of the planet Toril, or, more formally, "Abeir-Toril." The "landmass of approximately nine and a half million square miles".[5] Faerûn is the western part of an unnamed supercontinent that is quite similar to real-world Afro-Eurasia.[6]:6 "Sub-arctic extremes chill its northern reaches, where ice sheets like the Great Glacier dominate the landscape in blinding white. To the south are the equatorial jungles of Chult and the tropical coasts of Halruaa. It’s bordered on the west by the Trackless Sea and on the east by the Endless Wastes and the Hordelands that separate it from Kara-Tur".[5] Kara-Tur, which was the original setting of the D&D Oriental Adventures campaign setting,[7]:103 and Zakhara, home to the Arabian Nights setting Al-Qadim, are also on this continent. Maztica, home of a tribal, Aztec-like civilization is far to the west, across an Atlantic-like ocean called the Trackless Sea. The subterranean regions underneath Faerûn are called the Underdark.[1][8]:98,138 Faerûn includes terrain that is as varied as that of Europe, western Asia, and much of Africa is on our planet Earth. Role-playing campaigns in Faerûn can be set in a wide variety of locations, each with its own hazards and potential rewards for the participants. Likewise, the region that the players explore can determine what types of monsters they will face, which famous individuals they will encounter, and what types of missions they assume. Besides the exterior coastline to the west and south, the most dominant feature on the continent is the Sea of Fallen Stars. This is an irregular inland sea that keeps the neighboring lands fertile and serves as a major trade route for the bordering nations. Next in significance is the Shaar, a broad region of grasslands in the south that, together with a large body of water called the Lake of Steam, separates the area around the inland sea from the coastal nations at the southern edge of the continent. To the east, Faerûn is bordered by a vast region of steppe that separates it from Kara-Tur. In the north are massive glaciers, named Pelvuria and Reghed, and a region of tundra. South of the continent, separated by the Great Sea, is a sub-tropical land called Zakhara. The largest cities in Faerûn[1] City Region Population (thousands) Waterdeep Sword Coast 348 Skuld Mulhorand 205 Calimport Calimshan 193 Gheldaneth Mulhorand 172 Unthalass Unther 165 Suldolphor Calimshan 144 Bezantur Thay 137 Eltabbar Thay 123 Athkatla Amn 118 Zazesspur Tethyr 116 Cimbar Chessenta 111 Northern regions[edit] To the northwest, Faerûn is a region of wilderness, difficult winter weather, hordes of orcs, and barbarous human tribes. This region is generally referred to as "The North". It is a mostly-untamed region that lies between the large Anauroch desert in the east and the expansive Sea of Swords to the west. This area contains huge wooded regions such as the High Forest[9] and the Lurkwood,[10] the frozen Icewind Dale to the north,[9][11][12] and an untamed region called the Savage Frontier, which includes the Silver Marches (Luruar). The coastal region is called the Sword Coast. Here lies the city-state of Neverwinter and the large port city of Waterdeep.[13] Undermountain is a vast dungeon crawl under the area of Waterdeep. Deep inland are the ancient dwarven citadels of Mithral Hall, Citadel Felbarr and, the largest of the three, Citadel Adbar.[14][15] which was featured in the Legacy of the Drow series of novels. This area is one of the most popular regions for role-playing campaigns set in Faerûn, and has been the setting for a number of popular role-playing video games.[16] North of the Sea of Fallen Stars is a region that stretches from the wide Anauroch desert in the west[17] to the eastern edge of the inland Moonsea, in the northern region of the continent. It is a region of contrasts, with the forested Dalelands, the desert wastes of Anauroch,[9] the coastline of the Moonsea with the infamous Zhentil Keep,[9][18] and the bitterly cold steppes of The Ride. Along the east coast of the Dragon Reach (a northern branch of the Sea of Fallen Stars) is a temperate region called The Vast, consisting of farmlands, forests and the Earthsea mountains. This area includes the city of Ravens Bluff,[19] which for many years was home to the RPGA's Living City role-playing campaign and the site of the Living City series of game modules.[20] The Dragonspine Mountains, which house the infamous Citadel of the Raven on their western slopes, are a mountain range northwest of the Moonsea. Northeastern Faerûn is a remote area that begins in the cold, forbidding lands along the great ice sheets and continues south toward the northeastern shores of the Sea of Fallen Stars. It is bordered on the west by the mountain-hemmed land of Vaasa and stretches east to the vast steppes of the Hordelands. This region also contains the lightly populated kingdom of Damara, the druidic forests of the Great Dale, the coastal kingdom of Impiltur, the fallen and once evil empire of Narfell, and the trading nation of Thesk. Mystical Rashemen is a land ruled from behind the scenes by spiritual witches,[21] and it is the location of the Neverwinter Nights 2: Mask of the Betrayer computer game. The lands of Damara and Vaasa were described in a 1989 publication, FR9, The Bloodstone Lands.[3] This area formed the setting for the "H Series" of modules that used the Battlesystem rules to resolve battles. The most populous nations in Faerûn[1] Nation Population (millions) Calimshan 5.34 Mulhorand 5.34 Thay 4.92 Unther 4.26 Tethyr 3.77 Chessenta 3.39 Amn 2.96 Sembia 2.46 Chondath 1.98 Turmish 1.69 Halruaa 1.68 Cormyr 1.36 Damara 1.32 Great Rift 1.31 Aglarond 1.27 Impiltur 1.21 Middle lands[edit] The western part of Faerûn includes the nations south of Waterdeep and north of the Shining Sea, that border along the Sea of Swords. The west includes the city of Baldur's Gate, the library-fortress of Candlekeep,[22] the nations of Amn,[9] Tethyr, Calimshan, the region of Western Heartlands and the elven stronghold of Evereska. These regions were the setting for the Baldur's Gate series of computer games.[23] To the west in the vast ocean called the Trackless Sea is a multitude of islands, collectively named the Nelanther Isles. Other island kingdoms include the gnomish realm of Lantan, the country of Nimbral and, further west, the Moonshae Isles.[24] The Bloodstone Lands module from TSR. With the exception of the Shining Plains, the interior lands of Faerûn lie along the irregular coastline of the western Sea of Fallen Stars. In the north the Dragonmere arm of the sea extends far to the west, ending close to the Western Heartlands. To the south, the Vilhon Reach forms a second arm leading to the southwest. The notable areas within this region include Chondath, Cormyr,[25] the Dragon Coast,[26] Hlondeth, the Pirate Isles,[27] Sembia, Sespech, Turmish, and the Shining Plains. Along the eastern expanses of the Sea of Fallen Stars, the water forms a long arm that travels to the east before turning south to become the Alamber Sea. The northern nations of this mysterious area are termed the "Unapproachable East" and the southern nations the "Old Empires" in campaign setting publications. This region includes the nations of Aglarond, Altumbel, Mulhorand, Murghôm, Thay and Unther. Chondalwood is a long, forested region to the south of Chondath and Chessenta.[21] Southern nations[edit] To the southwest lies along the great Chultan peninsula that juts out toward the west.[28][29] The waters to the north are named the Shining Sea, a body bounded by Calimsham to the north and joined to the Lake of Steam through the Straits of Storm. To the south of the land is the Great Sea. Located in this area are Chult, Lapaliiya, Samarach, Tashalar, and Thindol. South of the Sea of Fallen Stars is a region somewhat isolated by the Lake of Steam in the west, and the vast length of the Shaar. It is bordered along the south by the Great Sea; to the west by the Chultan peninsula region, and in the east by Luiren. The south includes the Border Kingdoms, Dambrath, the Great Rift, Halruaa, the Lake of Steam, and The Shaar.[30] South and east of the grassy plains is an area known as the Shaar, along the shores of the Great Sea opposite the land of Zakhara. The region includes the lands of Durpar, Estagund and Var the Golden (collectively called the Shining Lands), Luiren, the land of Halflings, Ulgarth, the easternmost extent of Faerûn, and Veldorn, the land of monsters, as well as The Great Rift, a large, powerful nation of dwarves, within a titanic canyon Underdark[edit] Main article: Underdark The immense complex of caverns and passages that lie beneath many parts of the continent of Faerûn is known as the Underdark. It contains cities of the elf-related drow including the infamous Menzoberranzan and the ruins of Ched Nasad, as well as Maerdrimydra, Llurth Dreir and Sshamath; cities of duergar such as Gracklstugh and Dunnspeirrin; and almost unpronounceable cities of creatures called the kuo-toa, illithids, and beholders.[31] Changes in geography[edit] Third Edition[edit] When the third edition of the Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting was released in 2001, the designers took the opportunity to redesign the continent of Faerûn. Its size was reduced slightly to remove 'empty space' from the map and the Chultan Peninsula was moved several hundred miles north, reducing the size of the empty grassplain known as the Shaar. Additionally, the designers slightly adjusted the projection of the map to better reflect the curvature of the planet. There was no in-universe explanation given for these changes as it was classified as a retcon. Fourth Edition[edit] The fourth edition of the Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting, released in 2008, saw major changes to the geography of Faerûn and the world of Abeir-Toril. Due to a magical cataclysm known as the Spellplague, the southern parts of Faerûn were devastated.[32] Chult became an island detached from the mainland, the kingdom of Halruaa was utterly destroyed, and parts of the Sea of Fallen Stars drained into the Underdark. The northern Realms were less affected by the Spellplague, but during the 100-year gap between the third and fourth editions of the setting it was revealed that the Netherese wizards of the city of Shade had eliminated the desert of Anauroch, returning the land to its pre-Fall state. The borders of some of the kingdoms were changed to reflect this. In addition to these changes, floating islands of earth known as 'earthmotes' appeared in the skies above Faerûn and the continent of Maztica across the western ocean vanished along with the Faerûnian colonies on its east coast.[33] In other media[edit] In 2013, a mod for the video game Civilization V was set in Faerun and it featured 25 civilizations based on Faerun's creatures.[34][35] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f Greenwood, Ed; Heinsoo, Rob; Reynolds, Sean K.; Williams, Skip (June 1, 2001). Carter, Michele; Martin, Julia; Rateliff, John D. (eds.). Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting (3rd ed.). Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-1836-5. ^ Slavicsek, Bill; Baker, Richard; Mohan, Kim (2005). Dungeons & Dragons For Dummies. For Dummies. ISBN 0-7645-8459-6. ^ a b Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Buffalo, New York: Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ "Upcoming 'Dungeons & Dragons' Publications Will Explore More Areas Influenced by Non-European Cultures". Comicbook.com. January 7, 2019. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ a b "The Land of Faerûn | The Forgotten Realms | Dungeons & Dragons". dnd.wizards.com. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ Mackay, Daniel (2001). The Fantasy Role-Playing Game: A New Performing Art. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co. ISBN 0-7864-0815-4. OCLC 45575501. ^ Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ Canavan, Aidan-Paul (April 2011). Looting the Dungeon: The Quest for the Genre Fantasy Mega-Text (PDF) (Thesis). ^ a b c d e "Dungeons & Dragons: Forgotten Realms Locations That Deserve to be Revisited". Game Rant. 2020-01-09. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ "D&D: Faerun - Home Of The Iconic Forgotten Realms". Bell of Lost Souls. 2019-06-01. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons Icewind Dale: Everything You Need To Know". TheGamer. 2020-08-13. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons: The Story Behind Icewind Dale". TheGamer. 2020-08-24. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ Boyd, Eric L. (2005). City of Splendors: Waterdeep. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3693-2. ^ Slade (April 1996). The North: Guide to the Savage Frontier. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-0391-0. ^ Greenwood, Ed (March 1, 1988). Waterdeep and the North. TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-88038-490-5. ^ Hallford, Neal; Hallford, Jana (2001). Swords & Circuitry: A Designer's Guide to Computer Role-Playing Games. Thomson Course Technology. ISBN 0-7615-3299-4. ^ Vaughan, Greg A.; Reid, Thomas M.; Williams, Skip (2006). Anauroch: The Empire of Shade. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-4362-9. ^ Reid, Thomas; Reynolds, Sean (2006). Mysteries of the Moonsea. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3915-X. ^ Greenwood, Ed (1998). The City of Ravens Bluff. TSR Inc. ISBN 0-7869-1195-6. ^ Community (2003-05-29). "Development deal with Spellblade Studios for The Living City Of Ravens Bluff". Gaming Report. Archived from the original on 2004-11-01. Retrieved 2008-06-27. ^ a b Baker, Richard; Forbeck, Matt; Reynolds, Sean K. (2003). Unapproachable East. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-2881-6. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons: What to Know Before Candlekeep Mysteries". CBR. 2021-01-18. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ Muzyka, Ray; Hoenig, Michael; et al. (2001). Baldur's Gate, Original Saga with Tales of the Sword Coast Expansion Pack. Black Isle Studios. ASIN B00005S8J2. ^ Haring, Scott (1988). Empires of the Sands. TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-88038-539-1. ^ Baker, Rich; Cordell, Bruce R.; Noonan, David (2007). Cormyr: The Tearing of the Weave. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-4119-7. ^ Blando, Jared (2019). Fantasy Mapmaker: How to Draw RPG Cities for Gamers and Fans (First ed.). Cincinnati, Ohio: Penguin. ISBN 978-1-4403-5425-0. OCLC 1103519062. ^ Scott, Curtis (1999). Pirates of the Fallen Stars. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 1-56076-320-5. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons: Exploring Chult, the Dinosaur-Filled Jungle". CBR. 2020-03-09. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ D'Anastasio, Cecilia (October 18, 2017). "Dungeons & Dragons Stumbles With Its Revision Of The Game's Major Black Culture". Kotaku. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ Reid, Thomas M. (2004). Shining South. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3492-1. ^ Cordell, Bruce R.; Kestrel, Gwendolyn F. M.; Quick, Jeff (October 1, 2003). Underdark. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3053-5. ^ "Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide Chronicles the World's Epic Changes". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ Greenwood, Ed; Cordell, Bruce R.; Athans, Philip; Sims, Chris (August 19, 2008). Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide (4th ed.). Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-4924-4. ^ Campbell, Colin (2013-11-25). "Civ 5 mod creates D&D world of Faerun". Polygon. Retrieved 2021-01-29. ^ Livingston, Christopher (2013-11-24). "Mod of the Week: Faerun, for Civilization V". PC Gamer. Retrieved 2021-01-29. Further reading[edit] Greenwood, Ed; et al. (1993). The Forgotten Realms Atlas. TSR. ISBN 1-56076-695-6. Fonstad, Karen Wynn (1993). The Player's Guide to the Forgotten Realms Campaign. TSR. ISBN 0-88038-857-9. External links[edit] Timeline of Faerûn from pre-history to 768 (dates in Dalereckoning) v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond v t e Baldur's Gate Dungeons & Dragons Forgotten Realms Main series Baldur's Gate Tales of the Sword Coast Enhanced Edition Siege of Dragonspear Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn Throne of Bhaal Enhanced Edition Baldur's Gate III Dark Alliance series Dark Alliance Dark Alliance II Dungeons & Dragons: Dark Alliance Universe Drizzt Do'Urden Minsc Wulfgar Developers and publishers BioWare Black Isle Studios Interplay Entertainment Snowblind Studios Beamdog Larian Studios Related Baldur's Gate III: The Black Hound Descent into Avernus Dragon Age: Origins James Ohlen Book Category v t e Neverwinter Nights series Dungeons & Dragons Forgotten Realms Neverwinter Nights Expansions Shadows of Undrentide Hordes of the Underdark Kingmaker Darkness over Daggerford Neverwinter Nights 2 Expansions Mask of the Betrayer Storm of Zehir Mysteries of Westgate Universe Neverwinter Campaign Setting Developers and publishers BioWare Obsidian Entertainment Atari Related BloodSpell Neverwinter Neverwinter Nights (1991) NWScript Neverwinter Saga Book Category