Fairy tale parody (also known as a fractured fairy tale) is a genre of fiction which parodies traditional fairy tales. The genre was popularized on television by the Fractured Fairy Tales segments on The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show.[1] The 2001 computer-animated film Shrek brought great popularity to the genre. Parodies soon eclipsed traditional fairy tales. The genre garnered some praise for its more modern views but was also criticized for supplanting the traditional stories.[2] Children's books that have been classified as fairy tale parodies: The Giant's Big Toe by Brock Cole Sleeping Ugly by Jane Yolen Jack and the Meanstalk by Brian Wildsmith and Rebecca Wildsmith The Book That Jack Wrote, The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs!, The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales, and The Frog Prince, Continued by Jon Scieszka Revolting Rhymes by Roald Dahl Ruby, by Michael Emberley Jim Henson Presents Goldilocks, Miss Piggy's Dream by Louise Gikow The Three Bears by Cindy West Cinderella Cinder Edna by Ellen Jackson Cinder-Elly by Frances Minters Cinderella and the Glass Flipper by Janet Perlman Cinderella with Benjy and Bubbles by Ruth Perle The Adventures of Simple Simon by Chris Conover The Velveteen Killer Rabbit by Elia Anie Kawoni's Journey Across the Mountain: A Cherokee Little Red Riding Hood by Cordellya Smith The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig by Eugene Trivizas Politically Correct Fairy Tales and Politically Correct Bedtime Stories: Modern tales for our life and times by James Finn Garner have been called "Adult fractured fairy tales ... still humorous but the humor is for adults".[3] Fractured fairy tales in film[edit] Jack the Giant Killer, a live-action film mocking Jack and the Beanstalk (1962) Ladyhawke, a live-action film poking fun of fairy tale cliches (1985) The Princess Bride, a live-action film poking fun at fairy tale cliches (1987) Shrek, an animated film poking fun at fairy tale cliches (2001) Ella Enchanted, a live-action fairy tale spoof poking fun at Cinderella (2003) Teacher's Pet, an animated film poking fun at Pinocchio (2004) Shrek 2, the second instalment in the Shrek series (2004) Chicken Little, an animated high school, sci-fi take on the Henny Penny fable (2005) Hoodwinked!, an animated mystery-thriller take on The Little Red Riding Hood (2006) The Ugly Duckling and Me!, an animated fairy tale take on The Ugly Duckling (2006) Happily N'Ever After, an animated film poking fun at Cinderella and other fairy tales (2006) Enchanted, a live-action/animated Disney film poking fun at Disney fairy tale films (2007) Shrek the Third, the third installment in the Shrek series (2007) Shrek Forever After, the final installment in the Shrek series (2010) Hoodwinked! 2: Hood vs. Evil, a spy genred sequel to Hoodwinked! (2011) Puss in Boots, a spin-off from the Shrek series about the character Puss, poking fun at the "Puss in Boots" fairy tale (2011) Into the Woods, a live-action adaptation of the play under the same name (2014) Strange Magic, an animated film mocking Beauty and the Beast and A Midsummer Night's Dream (2015) References[edit] ^ Marilyn A. Kinsella. "Fractured Fairy Tales". marilynkinsella.org. Retrieved July 25, 2012. ^ Poniewozik, James (May 10, 2007). "Is Shrek Bad for Kids?". TIME. Retrieved April 2, 2012. ^ Marilyn A. Kinsella. "Fractured Thoughts Workshop: Fractured folk tales including fairy tales, fables, myths". marilynkinsella.org. Retrieved 2014-04-16. Children's literature portal v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category This article about a literary genre is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about children's literature is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e