For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Poster for Jules Massenet's Cendrillon (based on Perrault's Cinderella) showing the titular character's fairy godmother. In fairy tales, a fairy godmother (French: fée marraine) is a fairy with magical powers who acts as a mentor or parent to someone, in the role that an actual godparent was expected to play in many societies. In Perrault's Cinderella, he concludes the tale with the moral that no personal advantages will suffice without proper connections. The fairy godmother is a special case of the donor. Contents 1 In fairy tale and legend 2 Précieuses 3 In fiction 4 See also 5 References In fairy tale and legend[edit] Actual fairy godmothers are rare in fairy tales, but became familiar figures because of the popularity of the literary fairy tales of Madame d'Aulnoy and other précieuses, and Charles Perrault. Many other supernatural patrons feature in fairy tales; these include various kinds of animals and the spirit of a dead mother.[1] The fairy godmother has her roots in the figures of the Fates; this is especially clear in Sleeping Beauty, where they decree her fate, and are associated with spinning.[2] In the tales of précieuses and later successors, the fairy godmother acts in a manner atypical of fairies in actual folklore belief; they are preoccupied with the character and fortunes of their human protegees, whereas fairies in folklore had their own interests.[3] Typically, the fairy godmother's protégé is a prince or princess and the hero of the story, and the godparent uses her magic to help or otherwise support them. The most well-known example is probably the fairy godmother in Charles Perrault's Cinderella. Eight fairy godmothers appear in Sleeping Beauty, of Charles Perrault's and in the Grimm Brothers' version titled Little Briar Rose the thirteen so-called godmothers are called Wise Women. The popularity of these versions of these tales led to this being widely regarded as a common fairy-tale motif, although they are less common in other tales. Indeed, the fairy godmothers were added to The Sleeping Beauty by Perrault; no such figures appeared in his source, "Sole, Luna, e Talia" by Giambattista Basile.[4] A great variety of other figures may also take this place. She is portrayed as kind, gentle and loving. Précieuses[edit] In the works of the précieuses, French literary fairy tales, fairy godmothers act much as actual godmothers did among their social circles, exerting their benefits for their godchildren, but expecting respect in return. Madame d'Aulnoy created a fairy godmother for the evil stepsister in her fairy tale The Blue Bird; in this position, the fairy godmother's attempts to bring about the marriage of her goddaughter and the hero are evil attempts to impede his marriage with the heroine. Likewise, in her The White Doe, the fairy godmother helps the evil princess get revenge on the heroine. In Finette Cendron, the fairy godmother is the heroine's, but after helping her in the early portion of the tale, she is offended when Finette Cendron does not take her advice, and Finette must work through the second part with little assistance from her. In Henriette-Julie de Murat's Bearskin, the heroine has a fairy godmother, but she is offended that the heroine's marriage was arranged without consulting her, and refuses to assist. In fiction[edit] Illustration to Cinderella by Gustave Doré: the fairy godmother preparing an enchantment for her goddaughter. Fairy godmothers appear frequently in fairytale fantasy, especially comic versions and retellings of Cinderella and Sleeping Beauty. Mercedes Lackey presents a gently lampooned version of the concept in her Tales of the Five Hundred Kingdoms series, in which Fairy Godmothers are magically-gifted women who monitor magical forces across the kingdoms. Whenever events are right for a fairy tale to recur, the relevant Fairy Godmother steps in to make sure that the tale in question runs its course with as few fatalities as possible. In William Makepeace Thackeray's The Rose and the Ring, the fairy Blackstick concludes that her gifts have not done her godchildren good; in particular, she has given two of her goddaughters the title ring and the title rose, which have the power to make whoever owns them beautiful, which have ruined the character of those goddaughters; with the next prince and princess, she gives them "a little misfortune", which proves the best gift, as their difficulties form their characters.[5] In C. S. Lewis's The Magician's Nephew, when Uncle Andrew explains how he made the magical rings from dust left to him by his godmother, he points out that she may have had fairy blood, and so he might have been the last man to have a fairy godmother.[6] In the television animated Halloween special Witch's Night Out, the witch is mistaken for a "fairy godmother" by the two children, Small and Tender. Their sitter, Bazooey corrects them by addressing the fairy godmother as a "wicked witch". The Fairly OddParents is a humorous animated TV series where the fairies Cosmo and Wanda are (rather incompetent) godparents. In Shrek 2, the fairy godmother (voiced by Jennifer Saunders) who appears is an evil twin sister of Cinderella's fairy godmother. She is a conniving, crooked businesswoman (with a personality rather like that of the Stepmother in Cinderella), who is quite willing to resort to blackmail and/or murder to further her own interests. The pure reason for helping princesses gain a happily ever after with Prince Charming is the fact that Prince Charming is actually the Fairy Godmother's son, and through the marriage he will gain the throne. The Discworld novel Witches Abroad also features a plotting fairy godmother, Lady Lilith de Tempscire, who uses the power of stories to control the city of Genua. During the book Magrat Garlick also takes on the role, but throws away the magic wand at the end. In The Dresden Files novels (primarily Grave Peril and Summer Knight), the main character, a modern wizard named Harry Dresden is revealed to have a faerie godmother by the name of Leanansidhe who enjoys ensnaring Harry in one-sided deals. Once Upon a Midnight features the character of Angelica, the Blue Fairy, an overzealous fairy godmother. Fairy Godmother plays a leading role in web series Wish It Inc. She is portrayed by Portal voice actress Ellen McLain. The first King's Quest game features a fairy godmother of the main character Graham who can grant him invincibility. The otome game My Candy Love features a fairy godmother who will appear randomly and give the player gifts. She is a bit of an odd case in that she is implied to be an eccentric aunt who merely dresses as a fairy godmother. in Disney's The Princess and the Frog, Mama Odie (voiced by Jenifer Lewis) is the 197-year-old, blind Voodoo queen of the Bayou who appears. As Tiana's "Fairy Godmother of the Swamp," she uses her good voodoo conjuring to counter the voodoo witchdoctor Dr. Facilier's dark magic. Mama Odie is also the one who weds Princess Tiana and Prince Naveen at the end of the movie. In the TV series True Blood, Season 4, Episode 1, the character Sookie learns of her fairy heritage, including that she has a godmother who is actually a blood relative on her fairy side. In the film Maleficent, Princess Aurora, the Sleeping Beauty, mistakenly assumes Maleficent to be this, as the latter had been watching out for her since she was little, though the Princess Aurora doesn't know about her curse, or the person who cast it. In the fourth season of superhero series Legends of Tomorrow, the team hunts magical creatures across time that have escaped from Mallus' realm. One of the creatures is Tabitha (portrayed by Jane Carr), the fairy godmother of a girl in 1692 Salem, Massachusetts. She is later revealed to be a lover of Neron and later tricks Nora Darkh into becoming the new fairy godmother. Tabitha helps Neron in his plan to open a portal to hell and attacks the Legends with a dragon called Wickstable, which originally hatched in young Zari Tomaz's possession, at Heyworld. When young Zari regains control of Wickstable, the dragon eats Tabitha before regressing back to a baby dragon. See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Children's literature portal Black Annis Crone Fairy Godparent Hag Pixie Queen (Snow White) Sea witch Wicked fairy godmother Witchcraft The Witch (fairy tale) References[edit] ^ Katharine Briggs, An Encyclopedia of Fairies, Hobgoblins, Brownies, Boogies, and Other Supernatural Creatures, "Fairy godmother", p147. ISBN 0-394-73467-X ^ John Grant and John Clute, The Encyclopedia of Fantasy, "Fairy godmother" p 330 ISBN 0-312-19869-8 ^ K.M. Briggs The Fairies in English Tradition and Literature. p.177 Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 1967 ^ Jane Yolen, p 23, Touch Magic ISBN 0-87483-591-7 ^ Stephen Prickett, Victorian Fantasy p 69-70 ISBN 0-253-17461-9 ^ Janice Daurio, "Is It Good to be Bad?" p 123 Gregory Bassham ed. and Jerry L. Walls, ed. The Chronicles of Narnia and Philosophy ISBN 0-8126-9588-7 v t e "Cinderella" by Charles Perrault and the Brothers Grimm Universe Characters Buttons Cinderella Ugly sisters Fairy godmother Wicked stepmother Prince Charming National variation Bawang Merah Bawang Putih (Malay and Indonesian) Beauty and Pock Face (Chinese) Chūjō-hime (Japanese) Fair, Brown and Trembling (Irish) Finette Cendron (French) The Green Knight (Danish) Katie Woodencloak (Norwegian) Kongjwi and Patjwi (Korean) Ochikubo Monogatari (Japanese) "Rhodopis" (Greek) Rushen Coatie (Scottish) The Sharp Grey Sheep (Scottish) The Story of Tam and Cam (Vietnamese) Sumiyoshi Monogatari (Japanese) The True Bride (German) The Wonderful Birch (Russian) Ye Xian (Chinese) Related Jacinda Vidrio Catskin Into the Woods Into the Woods (2014 film) Politically Correct Bedtime Stories Disney's characters Stop! Look! and Laugh! Waltz Suite Black Cinderella Two Goes East Cinderella's Stepsister Cinderella (sports) Lying to Be Perfect Cinderella's Eyes (2011) Ralph Breaks the Internet (2018) Media Films Cinderella (1899) Cinderella or the Glass Slipper (1912) Cinderella (1914) A Lowland Cinderella (1921) A Kiss for Cinderella (1925 film) Ella Cinders (1926) The Magic Shoes (1935) First Love (1939) Cinderella (1947) The Glass Slipper (1955) Cinderella (1955) Cinderfella (1960) Stop! Look! and Laugh! (1960) More Than a Miracle (1967) Tři oříšky pro Popelku (1973) The Slipper and the Rose (1976) Cinderella (1979) Cinderella '80 (1984) Maid to Order (1987) If the Shoe Fits (1990) Ever After (1998) Ella Enchanted (2004) Cinderella (2006) Elle: A Modern Cinderella Tale (2010) Cinderella (2015) Cinderella the Cat (2017) Cinderella (2021) Sneakerella (2021) A Cinderella Story series A Cinderella Story (2004) Another Cinderella Story (2008) Once Upon a Song (2011) If the Shoe Fits (2016) Christmas Wish (2019) Animation Cinderella Blues (1931) Poor Cinderella (1934) Cinderella Meets Fella (1938) Swing Shift Cinderella (1945) Cinderella (1950) Ancient Fistory (1953) Señorella and the Glass Huarache (1964) Cinderella (1979) The Tender Tale of Cinderella Penguin (1981) The Magic Riddle (1991) Happily N'Ever After (2007) Year of the Fish (2008) Cinderella the Cat (2017) Charming (2018) Sequels Princess Cinderella (1941) Cinderella II: Dreams Come True (2002) Cinderella III: A Twist in Time (2007) Television Hey, Cinderella! (1968) Cindy (1978) Cinderella Monogatari (1996) Cinderella (1997) CinderElmo (1999) Cinderella (2000) La Cenicienta (2003) Bawang Merah Bawang Putih (2004) Floricienta (2004) Floribella (2005 Brazil) Floribella (2006 Portugal) Grazilda (2010) Rags (2012) Aik Nayee Cinderella (2012) Literary adaptations Celestina (1791) Cinderella, or the Little Glass Slipper (1954) Nine Coaches Waiting (1958) Carrie (1974) The Coachman Rat (1989) Witches Abroad (1991) Ella Enchanted (1997) I Was a Rat! or The Scarlet Slippers (1999) Just Ella (1999) Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister (1999) Chinese Cinderella (1999) The Fairy Godmother (2004) Phoenix and Ashes (2004) Bella at Midnight (2006) Ash (2009) Princess of Glass (2010) Cinder (2012) Opera Cendrillon (1810 Isouard) La Cenerentola (1817 Rossini) Cendrillon (1899 Massenet) Cendrillon (1904 Viardot) La Cenicienta (1966 Hen) Ballet Cinderella (1893 Fitinhof-Schell) Aschenbrödel (1900 Strauss-Bayer) Cinderella (1945 Prokofiev) Cinderella (1948 Ashton) Musicals Cinderella and the Prince, or The Castle of Heart's Desire (1904) Stubborn Cinderella (1909) Mr. Cinders (1929) Cinderella (1957) Cindy (1964) The Penny Friend (1966) The Slipper and the Rose (1984) Soho Cinders (2008) Cinderella (2013) Cinderella (2020) Other Plays A Kiss for Cinderella (1916) Comics Cinderella: From Fabletown with Love Cinderalla Games Cinders Songs "Spread a Little Happiness" (1929) "Bibbidi-Bobbidi-Boo" (1949) "A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes" (1950) "Cinderella" (1987) "Hey Cinderella" (1993) "It's Midnight Cinderella" (1996) "Cinderella" (2001) "Cinderella" (2002) "Cinderella" (2003) "Stealing Cinderella" (2007) "Cinderella" (2007) "C\C (Cinderella\Complex)" (2008) Albums A Cinderella Story (2004 soundtrack) Disney's Princess Favorites (2002) Sociology Cinderella complex Cinderella effect The Cinderella Movement Commercials A Coach for Cinderella A Ride for Cinderella Adult Cinder Ellen up too Late Cinderella (1977) Naughty Cinderella Category v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Stock characters By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Supersoldier Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Harlequin Zanni Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Social Darwinist Dark Lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer toy Skeleton Swamp monster Vampires Zombies Other Alazon Archenemy Igor Masked Mystery Villain Miser By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Magical Negro Young Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Himbo Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Moleman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent cliques Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Pop icon Redshirt Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Village idiot White savior v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Changeling Fairy godmother Fairy-locks Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale Familiar Household deity Hungry grass Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Notable royal fairies Aibell Clíodhna Fairy Queen Finvarra Gwyn ap Nudd Joan the Wad Morgan le Fay Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Oberon Queen of Elphame Sebile Titania Attested fairies A-E Adhene Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clurichaun Coblynau Cyhyraeth Dames blanches Drow Duende Duergar Dullahan Each-uisge Elf Enchanted Moura F-L Fachan Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Hulder Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Korrigan Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Ly Erg M-Z Mare Meg Mullach Melusine Mermaid Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Nain Rouge Nicnevin Nuckelavee Peg Powler Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Radande Redcap Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Tomte Tooth fairy Troll Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Little people Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Canotila Chaneque Curupira Encantado Ishigaq Jogah Menehune Nawao Nimerigar Nûñnë'hï Pukwudgie Saci Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Irshi Jinn Kijimuna Kodama Korpokkur Oni Orang bunian Peri Tengu Tennin Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Mimis Muldjewangk Patupaiarehe Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Celtic Tuatha Dé Danann Germanic Alberich Dwarf Elegast Erlking Hodekin Hinzelmann Imp King Goldemar Weiße Frauen Greek Dryad Hamadryad Kallikantzaros Lampad Naiad Nereid Nymph Oceanid Oread Potamides Romanic Căpcăun Doñas de fuera Iele Sânziană Spiriduș Squasc Vâlvă Vântoase Xana Zână Slavic Bagiennik & Bannik Berehynia Domovoi Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Likho Polevik Psotnik Rusalka Vila Vodyanoy Cross-cultural Goblin Early & late modern Gnome Gremlin See also Category List of beings referred to as fairies