5th century Chinese historian In this Chinese name, the family name is Fan. Fan Ye Traditional Chinese 范曄 Simplified Chinese 范晔 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Fàn Yè Wade–Giles Fan Yeh Fan Ye (398–445 or 446[note 1]), courtesy name Weizong (蔚宗), was a Chinese historian and politician of the Liu Song dynasty during the Southern and Northern dynasties period. He was the compiler of the historical text Book of the Later Han. The son of Fan Tai (范泰), Fan Ye was born in present-day Shaoxing, Zhejiang, but his ancestral home was in Nanyang, Henan. He was a noted atheist who heavily criticised Buddhism, Yin and Yang, and the concept of the Mandate of Heaven. To this end he cited Zhang Heng's scientific studies as evidence. Fan has a biography in the Book of Song. Contents 1 Notes 2 References 2.1 Citations 2.2 Sources 3 Further reading Notes[edit] ^ Hill gives his death date as 446. Fan said that in January 446, he was awaiting execution for plotting against Emperor Wen of Liu Song.[1] References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ Hill, John E. Through the Jade Gate, footnotes 28.1 and 29.1. Sources[edit] Tan, Jiajian, "Hou Hanshu" ("Book of Later Han"). Encyclopedia of China (Chinese Literature Edition), 1st ed. Further reading[edit] Yap, Joseph P. (2019). The Western Regions, Xiongnu and Han, from the Shiji, Hanshu and Hou Hanshu. ISBN 978-1792829154. v t e Notable Jin dynasty historians Gan Bao Chen Shou Fan Ye Guo Pu Sima Biao Sun Sheng Xi Zuochi Yuan Hong v t e Twenty-Four Histories Records of the Grand Historian (Sima Qian) Book of Han (Ban Gu) Book of the Later Han (Fan Ye) Records of the Three Kingdoms (Chen Shou) Book of Jin (Fang Xuanling et al.) Book of Song (Shen Yue) Book of Qi (Xiao Zixian) Book of Liang (Yao Silian) Book of Chen (Yao Silian) Book of Wei (Wei Shou) Book of Northern Qi (Li Baiyao) Book of Zhou (Linghu Defen et al.) Book of Sui (Wei Zheng et al.) History of the Southern Dynasties (Li Yanshou) History of the Northern Dynasties (Li Yanshou) Old Book of Tang (Liu Xu et al.) New Book of Tang (Ouyang Xiu, Song Qi et al.) Old History of the Five Dynasties (Xue Juzheng et al.) Historical Records of the Five Dynasties (Ouyang Xiu) History of Song (Toqto'a et al.) History of Liao (Toqto'a et al.) History of Jin (Toqto'a et al.) History of Yuan (Song Lian et al.) History of Ming (Zhang Tingyu et al.) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This biographical article about a Chinese historian is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e