For other uses, see Fan (disambiguation). Artwork featuring aspects of a work of fiction created by a fan This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A fan's depiction of Harry Potter Fan art or fanart is artwork created by fans of a work of fiction and derived from a series character or other aspect of that work. As fan labor, fan art refers to artworks that are neither created nor (normally) commissioned or endorsed by the creators of the work from which the fan art derives. A different, older meaning of the term is used in science fiction fandom, where fan art traditionally describes original (rather than derivative) artwork related to science fiction or fantasy, created by fan artists, and appearing in low- or non-paying publications such as semiprozines or fanzines, and in the art shows of science fiction conventions. The Hugo Award for Best Fan Artist has been given each year since 1967 for artists who create such works. Like the term fan fiction (although to a lesser extent), this traditional meaning is now sometimes confused with the more recent usage described above. Contents 1 Forms 2 Copyright 2.1 United States 3 References 4 External links Forms[edit] Fan art can take many forms. In addition to traditional paintings and drawings, fan artists may also create conceptual, sculpture, video art, livestreams, web banners, avatars, graphic designs or web-based animations, as well as photo collages, posters, artistic representations of quotes from a work or artistic representations of characters in new contexts or in contexts that are in keeping with the original series. The broad availability of digital image processing and the Internet has greatly increased the scope and potential reach of fan art. U.S. TV producer Bryan Konietzko wrote in 2013: "I remember back in the Avatar days [2005–2008]... the typical fanart we would get would be a charming, childish crayon drawing stuffed in an envelope. Nowadays on Korra [2012–2014], I take a skewed screenshot with my phone, post it, and shortly thereafter someone un-skews it, crops it, separates the character levels, clones the background, "Ken Burns" it with a multilevel slide, animates the characters blinking and talking, tints it, and makes a GIF out of it, that I then see on the same phone with which I took the original picture. Times they are a-changin'..."[1] Copyright[edit] See also: Legal issues with fan fiction The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (December 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) United States[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The legal status of derivative fan made art in America may be tricky due to the vagaries of the United States Copyright Act. Generally, the right to reproduce and display pieces of artwork is controlled by the original author or artist under 17 U.S.C. § 106. Fan art using settings and characters from a previously created work could be considered a derivative work, which would place control of the copyright with the owner of that original work. Display and distribution of fan art that would be considered a derivative work would be unlawful. However, American copyright law allows for the production, display and distribution of derivative works if they fall under a fair use exemption, 17 U.S.C. § 107. A court would look at all relevant facts and circumstances to determine whether a particular use qualifies as fair use; a multi-pronged rubric for this decision involves evaluating the amount and substantiality of the original appropriated, the transformative nature of the derivative work, whether the derivative work was done for educational or noncommercial use, and the economic effect that the derivative work imposes on the copyright holder's ability to make and exploit their own derivative works. None of these factors is alone dispositive. American courts also typically grant broad protection to parody, and some fan art may fall into this category. This has not explicitly been adjudicated with respect to fan art, however. Moreover, while parody is typically afforded protection under § 107, a court must engage in a fact-intensive, case-specific inquiry for each work. References[edit] ^ Konietzko, Bryan. "I remember back in the Avatar days…". Retrieved 30 March 2013. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fan art. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Riendeau, Danielle (18 February 2009). "Fan Art Empowers Queer Women". After Ellen. Retrieved 16 January 2017. FanArt.TV – FanArt website with may different types of fan art for TV shows and music artists Game-Art-Hq.Com – FanArt website specialized on video game related fan art Fan Art Documentary produced by Off Book (web series) DeviantArt: Fan Art Category DeviantArt calls itself "the world's largest online social community for artists and art enthusiasts" and hosts many fanartists and their art. [1] – Curso para quem gosta de Fanart Redbubble Fan Art Partner Program Redbubble, the largest marketplace for independent artists, allows fan artists to create officially licensed work. Aprenda a Desenhar FanArt – Como Aprender a Desenhar Aprenda a desenhar personagens de desenhos, video-games e muito mais – Como Aprender a Desenhar v t e Fandom By type Genre Fantasy fandom Furry fandom Science fiction fandom Yaoi fandom Medium-specific Anime and manga fandom Bibliophilia Cinephilia Sports fandom Production-specific A Song of Ice and Fire Beatlemania Doctor Who EarthBound Harry Potter Hog James Bond Juggalos MST3K My Little Pony Parrothead Shrek Sherlock Holmes Star Wars Stargate Steven Universe Tolkien Trekkie Twilight Demographics Anorak Anti-fan Cult following Fan Groupie Otaku Sasaeng Shipper Stan Tifosi Ultras Organizations and events Amateur press association Car club Boy racer Cruise Imports Hot rod Kustom Kulture Lowrider Supercar Cosplay Fan club Fan convention Fan nicknames Game club Historical reenactment Live action role-playing game Motorcycle club Organization for Transformative Works Railfan Stan Twitter Publications and activities Anime music video Autograph collecting Fan art Fan edit Fan fiction Fan film Fan labor Fan mail Fan translation Fanac Fangame Fansite Fanspeak Fanzine Filk music MAD Movie Real person fiction Vidding Zine Conventions Anime list Comic book list Furry Gaming list Horror Multigenre Professional wrestling Science fiction list by date of establishment Topics Autograph Fan loyalty Fan service Odagiri effect