This article is about Fantasy tropes. For other uses, see Trope (disambiguation). This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Illustration by Arthur Rackham to Richard Wagner's Die Walküre: the magic sword, such as Nothung, is a common fantasy trope. Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Contemporary fantasy Comedy Creatures Fantastic Fantastique Fantasy of manners History Historical fantasy Lovecraftian horror Magic Magic system Magician Races Religious themes Sources Tropes Worlds Subgenres Bangsian fantasy‎ Dark fantasy‎ Dieselpunk‎ Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairy tales‎ Gaslamp fantasy Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction‎ Grimdark Hard fantasy Heroic fantasy High fantasy‎ Historical fantasy‎ Isekai Kaiju‎ LitRPG Low fantasy Magic realism‎ Magical girl‎ Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Romantic fantasy‎ Science fantasy‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Steampunk‎ Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban fantasy‎ Weird fiction‎ Weird West‎ Wuxia‎ Fandom Harry Potter fandom Tolkien fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e Fantasy tropes are a specific type of literary tropes that occur in fantasy fiction. Worldbuilding, plot, and characterization have many common conventions, many of them ultimately originated with, myth and folklore. J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium (and in particular, The Lord of the Rings) for example, was inspired from a variety of different sources including Germanic, Finnish, Greek, Celtic and Slavic myths. Literary fantasy works operate using these tropes, while others use them in a revisionist manner, making the tropes over for various reasons such as for comic effect, and to create something fresh (a method that often generates new clichés).[1] Contents 1 Good vs. evil 1.1 Hero 1.2 Dark Lord 2 Quest 3 Magic 4 Medievalism 4.1 Ancient world 5 Races and species 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Good vs. evil[edit] The conflict of good against evil is a theme in the many popular forms of fantasy; normally, evil characters invade and disrupt the good characters' lands.[2] J. R. R. Tolkien delved into the nature of good and evil in The Lord of the Rings, but many of those who followed him use the conflict as a plot device, and often do not distinguish the sides by their behavior.[3] In some works, most notably in sword and sorcery, evil is not opposed by the unambiguously good but by the morally unreliable.[4] Hero[edit] Main article: Hero Heroic characters are a mainstay of fantasy, particularly high fantasy and sword and sorcery.[citation needed] Such characters are capable of more than ordinary behavior, physically, morally, or both.[5] Sometimes they might have to grow into the role ordained for them.[6] This may take the form of maturation,[7] which is often through Coming of Age. Many protagonists are, unknown to themselves, of royal blood.[citation needed] Even in so fanciful a tale as Through the Looking-Glass, Alice is made a queen in the end; this can serve as a symbolic recognition of the hero's inner worth. [8] Commonly, these tales revolve around the maltreated hero coming into his or her own. This can reflect a wish-fulfillment dream, or symbolically embody a profound transformation.[9] Dark Lord[edit] Main article: Dark Lord The forces of evil are often personified in a "Dark Lord". Besides possessing vast magical abilities, a Dark Lord often controls great armies and can be portrayed as possessing devil-like qualities.[10] A Dark Lord is usually depicted as the ultimate personification of evil,[citation needed] as with Sauron of The Lord of the Rings; Conan the Barbarian's archenemy, Thulsa Doom; the Dark One (Shai'tan) of The Wheel of Time; and the Sith Lords from Star Wars. Other notable Dark Lords include: Lord Voldemort of Harry Potter; the Skeksis from The Dark Crystal; Darkseid from DC Comics; Thanos from Marvel Comics; Mundus from the Devil May Cry video game series; Dracula of the Castlevania series; Skeletor from Masters of the Universe; Morgoth from The Silmarillion; Arawn Death-Lord from The Chronicles of Prydain; Torak from The Belgariad; Nightmare from Soulcalibur; Ganon from The Legend of Zelda; Exdeath from Final Fantasy V, and Galbatorix from The Inheritance Cycle. The villain of the Demon Sword video game is also literally called Dark Lord. In the Lone Wolf gamebooks, the Dark Lords are a race of powerful evil beings.[11] The protagonists of the Overlord video game franchise are classic Dark Lords in the vein of Sauron. The Dark Lord is usually seen as unmarried, though there has been the occasion when one has attempted to claim a bride. Quest[edit] Main article: Quest Quests, an immemorial trope in literature, are common in fantasy. They can be anything from a quest to locate the MacGuffins necessary to save the world, to an internal quest of self-realization.[12] Magic[edit] Main articles: Magic in fiction and Magician (fantasy) In fantasy, magic often has an overwhelming presence, although its precise nature is delineated in the book in which it appears. It can appear in a fantasy world (as in The Lord of the Rings or Shannara), or in a fantasy land that is part of reality but insulated from the mundane lands (as in Xanth), or as a hidden element in real life (as in The Dresden Files).[13] A common trope is that magical ability is innate and rare. As such, magic-wielding people are common figures in fantasy.[14] Another feature is the magic item, which can endow characters with magical abilities or enhance the abilities of the innately powerful. Among the most common are magic swords and magic rings. Self-fulfilling prophecies are amongst the most common forms of magic because they are an often used plot device. Often the effort undertaken to avert them brings them about, thus driving the story. It is very rare for a prophecy in a fantasy to be false, although usually, their significance is only clear with hindsight. Quibbles can undermine the clearest appearing prophecies.[15] In The Lord of the Rings, J. R. R. Tolkien minimized the use of the word 'magic'; beings who use such abilities tend to be confused when they are described this way by others. Science fantasy stories often make use of scientifically implausible powers similar to magic, such as psychics.[16] However, unlike true science fiction works, these powers are used in a pulp manner with no examination of their effects on society, only to create more spectacular effects than science fiction alone can provide.[16] An example of this is the use of the Force by the Jedi in the Star Wars franchise.[17] Medievalism[edit] Main article: Medievalism Many fantasy creatures are inspired by European folklore and the romances of medieval Europe. Dragons and unicorns are among the most popular creatures. Other monsters, such as griffins, giants, and goblins also appear. Races of intelligent beings such as elves, dwarves, and gnomes often draw their history from medieval or pre-Christian roots. Characteristics of the hero and heroine also frequently draw on these sources as well. This trope is also very important in the setting of many of these fantasies. Writers from the beginnings of the fantasy genre, such as William Morris in The Well at the World's End and Lord Dunsany in The King of Elfland's Daughter, set their tales in fantasy worlds clearly derived from medieval sources; though often filtered through later views. J. R. R. Tolkien set the type even more clearly for high fantasy, which is normally based in such a "pseudo-medieval" setting. Other fantasy writers have emulated him, and role-playing and computer games have also taken up this tradition. The full width of the medieval era is seldom drawn upon. Governments, for instance, tend to be feudalistic, corrupt empires despite the greater variety of the actual Middle Ages.[18] Settings also tend to be medieval in economy, with many fantasy worlds disproportionately pastoral.[19] These settings are typical of epic fantasy and, to a lesser extent, of sword and sorcery — which contains more urban settings — than of fantasy in general; the preponderance of epic fantasy in the genre has made them fantasy commonplaces. They are less typical of contemporary fantasy, especially urban fantasy. Ancient world[edit] A less common inspiration is the ancient world. A famous example is the Hyborian Age (the fictional world of Conan the Barbarian), which features analogues of Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and the Roman Empire, among others. Three notable recent series with such settings are: Bartimaeus by Jonathan Stroud, Percy Jackson & the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus by Rick Riordan. Races and species[edit] Many fantasy stories and worlds refer to their main sapient humanoid creatures as races, rather than species in order to distinguish them from non-sapient creatures.[20] J. R. R. Tolkien popularized the usage of the term in this context, in his legendarium (and particularly in The Lord of The Rings), and the use of races in the Dungeons & Dragons role-playing games further spread the label.[21] Many fantasy and science fiction settings now use the terms race and species interchangeably, such as the World of Warcraft computer game. In role-playing games, race typically refers to any sapient species usable as a player character. Older editions of Dungeons & Dragons called the primary non-human player races (dwarf, elf, gnome, halfling, and half-elf, Half-orc) "demi-humans." Later games such as Shadowrun use the term "metahuman," and define these humanoid races as subdivisions of "Homo sapiens." See also[edit] Archetype Cliché Damsel in distress Role reversal Stereotype Stock character List of science fiction themes References[edit] ^ Clute 1999, p. 810. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ "Top 10 Epic / High fantasy books". Fantasybookreview.co.uk. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 13 May 2014. ^ Clute 1999, p. 422. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 323. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 464. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 136. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 972. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Prickett 1979, pp. 145–156. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPrickett1979 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 466. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 250. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ "The Darklords of Helgedad". The World of Magnamund Webring. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009. Retrieved 13 July 2009. ^ Clute 1999, p. 796. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, pp. 615–616. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 616. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ Clute 1999, p. 789. sfn error: no target: CITEREFClute1999 (help) ^ a b Mann, George (2012). "The History and Origins of Science Fiction". The Mammoth Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. London: Constable & Robinson. ISBN 978-1780337043. OCLC 804664796. ^ Sinclair, Frances (2008). Riveting Reads plus Fantasy Fiction. School Library Association. Wanborough, Swindon, UK: School Library Association. p. 88. ISBN 978-1903446461. OCLC 272332168. ^ Hardinge, Frances. "Article: Quality in Epic Fantasy, by Alec Austin". Strangehorizons.com. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. ^ Yolen 1992, p. VIII. sfn error: no target: CITEREFYolen1992 (help) ^ Tresca 2010, p. 30. sfn error: no target: CITEREFTresca2010 (help) ^ Livingstone 1982, p. 74. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLivingstone1982 (help) Sources[edit] Anderson, Poul; Miesel, Sandra (1981). Fantasy (1st ed.). [S.l.]: Tom Doherty Associates. ISBN 0-523-48515-8. Clute, John (1999). The Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1st St. Martin's Griffin ed.). New York: St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 0-312-19869-8. Livingstone, Ian (1982). Dicing with Dragons. Routledge. ISBN 0-7100-9466-3. Prickett, Stephen (1979). Victorian Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-17461-9. Tresca, Michael J. (2010). The Evolution of Fantasy Role-Playing Games. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-6009-0. Yolen, Jane (1992). After the King: Stories in Honor of J.R.R. Tolkien (1st ed.). New York: T. Doherty Associates. ISBN 0-312-85175-8. External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Speculative fiction Science fiction Media Comics Films list Magazines list Television Creators list Authors Editors Studies Awards Definitions History Subgenres Alternate history Apocalyptic/post-apocalyptic Climate fiction Comic/comedy Cyberpunk (derivatives) Dying Earth Feminist Future history Military Space opera Space Western Tech-noir Themes Afrofuturism Aliens AI Frankenstein Parallel universes Planets Time travel Utopia/dystopia Space pirates Terraforming Terraforming in popular culture Subculture Community Gathering list Fantasy Media Anime Art Fantastic Comics Fantasy film Literature Magazines Television Creators Authors Studies High fantasy (Tolkienology) History Sources Subgenres Bangsian Comic Contemporary Dark Dying Earth Fairytale Folklore mythology (based) Gaslamp Hard Heroic High Historical Lost world Low Medieval Romantic Sword and sorcery Urban Tropes Fantasy races Fantasy worlds Legendary creatures Magic (fantasy) Magician (fantasy) Norse mythology Magic item Quest Occult detective Horror Media Comics Films list Magazines Television programs Video games Subgenres Body Goosebumps Lovecraftian Mass hysteria Psychological Splatterpunk Queer Urban legend Tropes Gargoyle Vampires list Werewolves General Authors of color Gender Japanese authors Sexuality Homosexuality Reproduction and pregnancy Women Related Science fantasy Fantastique Magic realism Slipstream Techno-thriller Portal Category