Feet of Clay First edition Author Terry Pratchett Cover artist Josh Kirby Language English Series Discworld 19th novel – 3rd City Watch novel (4th story) Subject Cop novels, slavery, robots and artificial intelligence Characters Ankh-Morpork City Watch, Havelock Vetinari Locations Ankh-Morpork Genre Fantasy Publisher Victor Gollancz Publication date 1996 ISBN 0-575-05900-1 Feet of Clay is a fantasy novel by British writer Terry Pratchett, the nineteenth book in the Discworld series, published in 1996. The story follows the members of the City Watch, as they attempt to solve murders apparently committed by a golem, as well as the unusual poisoning of the Patrician, Lord Vetinari. The title is a figure of speech from Hebrew scripture (see feet of clay) and the script used in the book to represent Morporkian being written by a golem resembles the Hebrew alphabet,[1] a reference to golems' origins in Jewish folklore. Contents 1 Plot 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Plot[edit] Twelve of the city golems, clay creatures forced to obey the written instructions placed inside their heads, decide to create a "king" golem. They fashion a golem from their own clay and place in his head instructions that would fulfill their hopes: "Bring peace to the world", "Treat everyone fairly" and so on. They enroll the help of a priest and dwarf bread baker to write the sacred instructions and bake the clay, respectively; Meshugah, the "king" golem, is initially sent to work in a candle factory. Around the same time, a cabal of Ankh-Morpork's guild leaders seeks to gradually depose the Patrician, replace him with Nobby Nobbs as the new king and rule the city through him. To implement this, the cabal orders the golems' newly made king, Meshugah, to make poisoned candles and have them delivered to the palace. Vetinari is successfully poisoned, making him severely ill. Meshugah, however, is "overloaded" by all the different instructions his creators gave him, and goes "mad": he starts overworking and, when he finishes raw materials, he rampages through the city, and goes on to murder the priest and baker who took part in his creation. The golems that made him are horrified as murder violates their most base instructions and Meshugah was baked from some of their parts and is therefore “clay of their clay.” At this point the City Watch steps in trying to solve the murders and the poisoning of Lord Vetinari. With the assistance of their new forensics expert dwarf Cheery Littlebottom, Commander Vimes and Captain Carrot slowly unravel the mystery. The golems send one of their number, Dorfl, to falsely confess to the murders and the remaining eleven commit suicide. Carrot and Dorfl, having been given a receipt for himself and thus owning himself and having no master, fight and defeat the golem king at the candlestick factory. Despite having his instructions removed, Dorfl is able to reveal that “words in the heart can not be taken” before dying, and is rebaked with a voice. Afterwards, Vimes confronts the city's chief heraldry expert, a vampire, who instigated the whole affair. Dorfl arrests him despite tenuous evidence and Vimes burns down all the heraldic record as retribution against the "elite" and "noble" plotters, who had happily and self-righteously sacrificed the lives of several "commoners" in the pursuit of their scheme. In the end, Vetinari has recovered completely, Dorfl is sworn in as a Watchman (much to the chagrin of Ankh-Morpork's theological establishment), Vimes gets a pay raise, and the Watch House gets a new dartboard. Vetinari reveals to his assistant, Drumknott, that he had known of the plot for some time already. Vimes' rash actions in the pursuit of truth had considerably scared the city elite, which is precisely why Vetinari had let him continue: so that the plotters would know just how much worse off they'd be if Vetinari died. Reception[edit] Publishers Weekly described the book as "fantasy served with a twist of Monty Python, parody that works by never taking itself too seriously", with "sly puns" and "lively, outrageous characters".[2] The A.V. Club, conversely, emphasized the book's "intelligent wit and wordplay with a notable lack of punnery", praised Pratchett for the "complexity" of the politics and the "three-dimensional" nature of the characters, and noted that the "sword and sorcery" plot "doesn't insult the reader's intelligence" despite involving "the bumbling City Watch" and "a murderous enchanted statue".[3] At the SF Site, Steven H Silver commended Pratchett for presenting "mysteries which can be solved with the clues provided", and stated that although the book does not have "quite as many laugh out loud moments as [previous Discworld novels]", it shows that Pratchett is "a novelist as well as a humorist".[4] Gideon Kibblewhite reviewed Feet of Clay for Arcane magazine, rating it a 9 out of 10 overall.[5] Kibblewhite comments that "It's another gem from a master of comic fantasy."[5] References[edit] ^ "The Annotated Pratchett File". lspace.org. Retrieved 15 October 2018. ^ "Fiction book review: Feet of Clay". Publishers Weekly. October 2, 1996. Retrieved December 28, 2017. ^ Krewson, John (March 29, 2002). "Terry Pratchett: Feet Of Clay". The A.V. Club. Retrieved December 28, 2017. ^ Silver, Stephen H. (January 14, 1997). "Terry Pratchett: Feet Of Clay". SF Site. Retrieved December 28, 2017. ^ a b Kibblewhite, Gideon (July 1996). "The Great Library". Arcane. Future Publishing (8): 82. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Feet of Clay Feet of Clay title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Annotations for Feet of Clay Quotes from Feet of Clay Synopsis of Feet of Clay Reading order guide Preceded by Maskerade 19th Discworld Novel Succeeded by Hogfather Preceded by Men at Arms 4th City Watch Story Published in 1996 Succeeded by Jingo v t e Terry Pratchett's Discworld Novels The Colour of Magic The Light Fantastic Equal Rites Mort Sourcery Wyrd Sisters Pyramids Guards! Guards! Eric Moving Pictures Reaper Man Witches Abroad Small Gods Lords and Ladies Men at Arms Soul Music Interesting Times Maskerade Feet of Clay Hogfather Jingo The Last Continent Carpe Jugulum The Fifth Elephant The Truth Thief of Time The Last Hero The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents Night Watch The Wee Free Men Monstrous Regiment A Hat Full of Sky Going Postal Thud! Wintersmith Making Money Unseen Academicals I Shall Wear Midnight Snuff Raising Steam The Shepherd's Crown Short stories "Troll Bridge" "Theatre of Cruelty" "The Sea and Little Fishes" "Death and What Comes Next" "A Collegiate Casting-Out of Devilish Devices" A Blink of the Screen (anthology) Other books The Discworld Companion The Science of Discworld The Science of Discworld II: The Globe The Science of Discworld III: Darwin's Watch The Science of Discworld IV: Judgement Day The Pratchett Portfolio The Art of Discworld The Unseen University Challenge The Wyrdest Link The Streets of Ankh-Morpork The Discworld Mapp A Tourist Guide to Lancre Death's Domain Nanny Ogg's Cookbook The Discworld Almanak Where's My Cow? The Unseen University Cut Out Book The Discworld Diaries Once More* with Footnotes The Wit and Wisdom of Discworld The Folklore of Discworld The World of Poo Games The Colour of Magic Discworld MUD Discworld Discworld II GURPS Discworld Discworld Noir Discworld: Ankh-Morpork Films and TV series Welcome to the Discworld Soul Music Wyrd Sisters Hogfather The Colour of Magic Going Postal The Watch The Amazing Maurice (upcoming film) Characters Tiffany Aching Death Hex Moist von Lipwig Nanny Ogg Rincewind Susan Sto Helit Lord Vetinari Sam Vimes Granny Weatherwax Races and creatures Dwarfs Elves Nac Mac Feegle Locations Discworld Ankh-Morpork Organisations City Watch Unseen University The Witches Other Games of the Discworld Lie-to-children v t e Works by Terry Pratchett Discworld Novels The Colour of Magic The Light Fantastic Equal Rites Mort Sourcery Wyrd Sisters Pyramids Guards! Guards! Eric Moving Pictures Reaper Man Witches Abroad Small Gods Lords and Ladies Men at Arms Soul Music Interesting Times Maskerade Feet of Clay Hogfather Jingo The Last Continent Carpe Jugulum The Fifth Elephant The Truth Thief of Time The Last Hero The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents Night Watch The Wee Free Men Monstrous Regiment A Hat Full of Sky Going Postal Thud! Wintersmith Making Money Unseen Academicals I Shall Wear Midnight Snuff Raising Steam The Shepherd's Crown Short stories "Troll Bridge" "Theatre of Cruelty" "The Sea and Little Fishes" "Death and What Comes Next" "A Collegiate Casting-Out of Devilish Devices" Mapps The Streets of Ankh-Morpork The Discworld Mapp A Tourist Guide to Lancre Death's Domain Science The Science of Discworld Lie-to-children The Science of Discworld II: The Globe The Science of Discworld III: Darwin's Watch The Science of Discworld IV: Judgement Day Art The Pratchett Portfolio The Art of Discworld The Unseen University Cut Out Book Other books The Discworld Companion Nanny Ogg's Cookbook The Discworld Almanak Where's My Cow? Discworld Diary Wit and Wisdom of Discworld The Folklore of Discworld The World of Poo Johnny Maxwell Only You Can Save Mankind Johnny and the Dead Johnny and the Bomb The Long Earth (with Stephen Baxter) The Long Earth The Long War The Long Mars The Long Utopia The Long Cosmos Other novels The Carpet People The Dark Side of the Sun Strata The Unadulterated Cat The Nome Trilogy Good Omens (with Neil Gaiman) Nation Dodger Collected shorts and nonfiction Once More* with Footnotes A Blink of the Screen A Slip of the Keyboard Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125