This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (January 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2011) This article includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A U.S. Army Combat Support Hospital, a type of field hospital, in 2000 Red Cross field hospital set up after earthquake in the Philippines A field hospital is a temporary hospital or mobile medical unit that takes care of casualties on-site before they can be safely transported to more permanent facilities.[1] This term was initially used in military medicine (such as the Mobile Army Surgical Hospital or MASH), but it is inherited to be used in civil situations such as disasters and major incidents.[2] A field hospital is a medical staff with a mobile medical kit and, often, a wide tent-like shelter (at times an inflatable structure in modern usage) so that it can be readily set up near the source of casualties. In an urban environment, the field hospital is often established in an easily accessible and highly visible building (such as a manor house, restaurant, school, and so on). In the case of an airborne structure, the mobile medical kit is often placed in a normalized container; the container itself is then used as shelter. A field hospital is generally larger than a temporary aid station but smaller than a permanent military hospital. International humanitarian law, such as the Geneva Conventions, include prohibitions on attacking doctors, ambulances, hospital ships, or field hospitals buildings displaying a Red Cross, a Red Crescent or other emblem related to the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement. Contents 1 By country 1.1 France 1.2 Namibia 1.3 United States 1.4 Switzerland 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links By country[edit] France[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Field hospitals in France are managed by the SAMU (French emergency medical service). Two types of mobile medical kits (poste sanitaire mobile or PSM) are used: The level one mobile medical kit (PSM1): it can handle 25 heavy casualties on any type of ground; it is made of about 400 kg of equipment and drugs placed in 10 tanks, with also logistic equipment (trailer, inflatable tent, lighting, generating unit); there are 42 PSM1 in France; The level two mobile medical kit (PSM2): it can handle resuscitation care for 500 patients; it is made of 8 tons of equipment and drugs (200 references) in 150 tanks, it can be divided ( is possible to set up several sub-fracedPSM2); in addition to the usual logistic equipment of the PSM1, the PSM2 has a tactical radio network and a management computer system. There are 21 PSM2 in France. The PSM are stored in the hospitals where there are samus and smurs. The PMA is organized in four zones: a reception and triage zone, under the responsibility of a sort physician; the casualties are sorted and dispatched according to the seriousness of their state; two zones for medical care: Absolute emergencies zone (UA: urgences absolues): prehospital resuscitation unit for very serious cases: extreme emergencies (EU: extrème urgence) and grave injuries (U1); Relative emergencies zone (UR: urgences relatives): for the serious (U2) and light injured (U3) Mortuary zone (dépot mortuaire) for the deceased casualties. This zone is under the responsibility of the judicial police. In case of really massive disaster, it is possible to have several PMA; the evacuation goes then not directly to a hospital, but to another big field hospital called "medical evacuation centre" (centre médical d'évacuation, CME), to avoid the saturation of the hospitals. In case of a red plan, the PMA is under the responsibility of a physician chosen by the director of medical rescue (DSM), and he is assisted by a firefighter officer chosen by the commander of rescue operation (COS). The firefighter officer has in charge the identification of the living casualties and of the secretaryship. The aim of the PMA is to sort and stabilize the casualties before their evacuation to a hospital. A similar system can be set up as a preventive measure for some very big events (sport championship, cultural events, concert...), but managed by first aid associations. It is then called an "associative medical post" (poste associatif médicalisé, PAM). (For smaller events, is simple first aid post, with only volunteer certified first responders and no medical staff, is set up.) The civil defence military units (Unité d'instruction et d'intervention de la sécurité civile, UIISC) have airborne field hospitals. The general system is called DICA (détachement d'intervention de catastrophe aéroporté, i.e. airborne disaster unit), and is specialized in search-and-rescue and in emergency medicine; it can be enhanced by the Fast civil defence medical unit, called ESCRIM (élément de sécurité civile rapide d'intervention médicale). The ESCRIM is a surgical unit (detachement d'appui chirurgical) assisted by a medical assistance unit (DAMHo, détachement d'appui médical et d'hospitalisation); the later is specialized in pre- and post-operation care, and allows 48h of hospitalization. The UIISC also has a PMA (i.e. sort, stabilization and evacuation structure) when the hospital infrastructure of the country is sufficient. Namibia[edit] The Namibian Defence Force operates a mobile field hospital through its Defence Health Services Directorate. It was donated by the German government to Namibia in March 2013. Initially it was a UN level two hospital but has now been upgraded to level one. The field hospital is containerized in tents, it has capacity to treat forty outpatients per day and can admission capacity of twenty patients. It has two intensive care units, laboratories, an X-ray unit and a mobile oxygen concentrator.[3] The dental department can treat 20 and four operations can be carried out daily. It has its own mobile logistics support wing consisting of kitchens, water purifiers, water tanks, toilet and shower containers, generators and sewage and refuse disposal facilities. During the COVID-19 pandemic the hospital was deployed to Hosea Kutako International Airport to aid the country's response.[4] United States[edit] Field hospital after the Battle of Savage's Station (1862) Italian Army field hospital on the Italian Front during World War I Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, convention centers were deemed to be ideal sites for field hospitals due to their existing infrastructure (electrical, water, sewage).[5] Hotels and dormitories were also considered appropriate because they can use negative pressure technology.[5] In the United States Army Medical Department, the term "field hospital" is used as a generic term for a deployable medical facility. However, from 1906 to the present, with small interruptions, the department has had specific organized units called "Field Hospitals." These numbered units, for example the 10th Field Hospital have specific tables of organization and equipment, capabilities, and doctrine for their employment, all of which have varied over time. Readers should take care not to confuse the generic American field hospital with a specific numbered XXth Field Hospital, as the two cannot be used interchangeably. An Evacuation Hospital, a MASH, a CSH, a Field Hospital and a numbered General Hospital are all field hospitals—but a MASH, CSH, a General Hospital and Field Hospital are not interchangeable.[6] Switzerland[edit] Transport truck of the Swiss Army with field hospital in cargo module. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Swiss Armed Forces were mobilised to support civil hospitals in Switzerland. Similar measures were taken in other countries. See also[edit] Aid station Argentine Air Force Mobile Field Hospital Battalion Aid Station Casualty Clearing Station Combat support hospital Expeditionary Medical Support System Forward surgical teams Hospital ship Military medicine Mobile Army Surgical Hospital Mobile hospital Norman Bethune Portable Surgical Hospital Regimental Aid Post Shipping container clinic List of former United States Army medical units References[edit] ^ Joy, Robert J. T. (4 December 2003). "A Grateful Heart: The History of a World War I Field Hospital (review)". Bulletin of the History of Medicine. 77 (4): 961–962. doi:10.1353/bhm.2003.0176. ISSN 1086-3176. S2CID 71238828. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Field hospitals were mobile, were sent to support the battle line—as was the 103d—and served in every capacity, from disease hospital to resuscitation center to acute care (with surgical reinforcement) to reserve and rest status. Their job was triage, stabilization, and evacuation to the base hospitals. ^ "In pictures: Field hospitals set up around world". BBC News. 30 March 2020. ^ "Namibia Defence Force gets German-made mobile field hospital". Mar 7, 2013. Retrieved Jun 7, 2020. ^ Namibian, The. "Mobile field hospital set up at airport". The Namibian. Retrieved Jun 7, 2020. ^ a b Serbu, Jared (27 March 2020). "Army Corps sees convention centers as good option to build temporary hospitals". Federal News Network. Archived from the original on 14 April 2020. ^ FM 8-55, Planning for Health Service Support, February 1985  This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Army document: John T. Greenwood. "Portable Surgical Hospitals". Further reading[edit] Clouston, Ann (2018). Centenary History of 201 Field Hospital. The Memoir Club. External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons The Nurses of the 51st Evac Hospital In WWII Supplier of field hospitals to the US Army Utilis SAS, Designer and Supplier of field hospitals SMU's Frank J. Davis World War II Photographs v t e Articles about Hospitals History of hospitals, Hospital network, Category:Hospitals Common hospital components Accreditation Bed Coronary care unit Emergency department Emergency codes Hospital administrators Hospital information system Hospital medicine Hospital museum Hospital separation Hospitalist Intensive care unit Nocturnist On-call room Operating theater Orderly Patients Pharmacy Wards Archaic forms Almshouse Asclepeion (Greece) Bimaristan (Islamic) Cottage hospital (England) Hôtel-Dieu (France) Valetudinaria (Roman) Vaishya lying in houses (India) Xenodochium (Middle Ages) Geographic service area Base hospital (Australia) Community hospital General hospital Regional hospital or District hospital Municipal hospital Complexity of services Day hospital Secondary hospital Tertiary referral hospital Teaching hospital Specialty hospital Unique physical traits Hospital ship Hospital train Mobile hospital Underground hospital Virtual Hospital Limited class of patients Military hospital Combat support hospital Field hospital Prison hospital Veterans medical facilities Women's hospital Funding Charitable hospital For-profit hospital Non-profit hospital State hospital Private hospital Public hospital Voluntary hospital Defunct Condition treated Cancer Children's hospital Eye hospital Fever hospital Leper colony Lock hospital Maternity hospital Psychiatric hospital Rehabilitation hospital Trauma center Verterinary hospital Century established 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Lists of hospitals in: Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, Oceania, South America Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125