Summary[edit] Non-free media information and use rationale – non-free audio or music sample true for The Thing (1982 film) Description This is the sample from a recording of the Ogg The Thing Main Theme by the artist Copyright in the recording is believed to belong to Universal Pictures. Copyright in the recording is believed to belong to Universal Pictures. Additional information:This is the sample from a recording of the main theme of The Thing by Ennio Morricone from the score of the 1982 science fiction horror film The Thing (30 seconds from total recording of 7 minutes). Source A version can or could be obtained from Universal Pictures. Article The Thing (1982 film) Portion used A short section sufficient to identify the work concerned, or to aid in critical commentary of the work Low resolution? The sample is of reduced quality (and/or timespan) compared to the original, yet of sufficient resolution for commentary and identification. Copies made from it will be of inferior quality, unsuitable for 'unauthorised distribution' or other uses that would compete with the commercial purpose of the original recording. Purpose of use Additional:To illustrate the music of The Thing as this single score is used almost singularly throughout the entire film. The musical effect is used to accompany scenes in the film and cannot be described effectively entirely in prose.. Replaceable? As a sample from a copyright musical recording, the sample is not replaceable by free content; any other sample from the same recording would also be copyrighted, and any version that is not true to the original would be inadequate for identification or commentary. Other information Use of the sample in the article is understood to be compatible with Wikipedia non-free content policy and fair use under United States copyright law as described above. Use of this sample outside of Wikipedia may be subject to other terms. Fair useFair use of copyrighted material in the context of The Thing (1982 film)//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API Licensing[edit] This is a sound sample from a song, movie, sound effect, or other audio recording that is currently copyrighted. The copyright for it may be owned by the company who made it or the author. For a song, it may also be owned by the person(s) who performed it. It is believed that the use of this work qualifies as fair use under United States copyright law when used on the English-language Wikipedia, hosted on servers in the U.S. by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation, where: the sample is being used for commentary on the recording in question; the sample contributes significantly to the encyclopedia articles in which it is used (listed under the heading "File usage" below) in a way that cannot be duplicated by other forms of media; the sample is short in relation to the duration of the recorded track, and is of inferior quality to the original recording; no other samples from the same track are currently used in Wikipedia; there is no adequate free alternative available. A more detailed fair use rationale should be provided by the user who uploaded this sample. Any other uses of this sample, on Wikipedia or elsewhere, may be copyright infringement. If you are the copyright holder of this sample and you feel that its use here does not fall under "fair use", please see Wikipedia:Copyright problems for information on how to proceed. To the uploader: If this is a free, non-copyrighted audio recording, please post it to Wikimedia Commons instead. Fair use //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API true To the uploader: Please add a detailed non-free use rationale for each article the image is used in, which must also declare compliance with the other parts of the non-free content criteria, as well as the source of the work and copyright information. For example fair use rationales, see Wikipedia:Use rationale examples. To patrollers and administrators: If this image has an appropriate rationale please append |image has rationale=yes as a parameter to the license template.