Classification of films based on similarities in narrative elements See also: List of genres and List of genres § Film and television formats and genres This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Western films are those "set in the American West that embod[y] the spirit, the struggle and the demise of the new frontier."[1] Pictured: Clint Eastwood in the Italian Western film A Fistful of Dollars (1964). A film genre is a stylistic or thematic category for motion pictures based on similarities either in the narrative elements, aesthetic approach, or the emotional response to the film.[2] Drawing heavily from the theories of literary-genre criticism, film genres are usually delineated by "conventions, iconography, settings, narratives, characters and actors."[3] One can also classify films by the tone, theme/topic, mood, format, target audience, or budget.[4] These characteristics are most evident in genre films, which are "commercial feature films [that], through repetition and variation, tell familiar stories with familiar characters and familiar situations" in a given genre.[5] A film's genre will influence the use of filmmaking styles and techniques, such as the use of flashbacks and low-key lighting in film noir; tight framing in horror films; or fonts that look like rough-hewn logs for the titles of Western films.[6] In addition, genres have associated film-scoring conventions, such as lush string orchestras for romantic melodramas or electronic music for science-fiction films.[6] Genre also affects how films are broadcast on television, advertised, and organized in video-rental stores.[5] Alan Williams distinguishes three main genre categories: narrative, avant-garde, and documentary.[7] With the proliferation of particular genres, film subgenres can also emerge: the legal drama, for example, is a sub-genre of drama that includes courtroom- and trial-focused films. Subgenres are often a mixture of two separate genres; genres can also merge with seemingly unrelated ones to form hybrid genres, where popular combinations include the romantic comedy and the action comedy film. Broader examples include the docufiction and docudrama, which merge the basic categories of fiction and non-fiction (documentary).[8] Genres are not fixed; they change and evolve over time, and some genres may largely disappear (for example, the melodrama).[4] Not only does genre refer to a type of film or its category, a key role is also played by the expectations of an audience about a film, as well as institutional discourses that create generic structures.[4] Contents 1 Overview 1.1 Characteristics 2 Examples of genres and subgenres 3 History 4 Pure and hybrid genres 5 Audience expectations 6 Grouping vs. genre 7 Categorization 8 Film in the context of history 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Overview[edit] With the proliferation of particular genres, film subgenres can also emerge: the legal drama, for example, is a sub-genre of drama that includes courtroom- and legal trial-focused films. Genres can also merge with seemingly unrelated ones to form hybrid genres/subgenres, where popular combinations include the romantic comedy and the action comedy film; a more specific example would be the Evil Dead films, which meld horror and comedy. Broader examples include the docufiction and docudrama, which merge the basic categories of fiction and non-fiction (documentary).[8] Characteristics[edit] A film's genre will influence the use of filmmaking styles and techniques, such as the use of flashbacks and low-key lighting in film noir; tight framing in horror films; fonts that look like rough-hewn logs for the titles of Western films; or the "scrawled" title-font and credits of Se7en (1995), a film about a serial killer.[6] As well, genres have associated film-scoring conventions, such as lush string orchestras for romantic melodramas or electronic music for science-fiction films.[6] Genre also affects how films are broadcast on television, advertised, and organized in video-rental stores.[5] Characteristics of particular genres are most evident in genre films, which are "commercial feature films [that], through repetition and variation, tell familiar stories with familiar characters and familiar situations" in a given genre.[5] Drawing heavily from the theories of literary-genre criticism, film genres are usually delineated by conventions, iconography, narratives, formats, characters, and actors, all of which can vary according to the genre.[3] In terms of standard or "stock" characters, those in film noir, for example, include the femme fatale[9] and the "hardboiled" detective; while those in Westerns, stock characters include the schoolmarm and the gunslinger. Regarding actors, some may acquire a reputation linked to a single genre, such as John Wayne (the Western) or Fred Astaire (the musical).[10] Some genres have been characterized or known to use particular formats, which refers to the way in which films are shot (e.g., 35 mm, 16 mm or 8 mm) or the manner of presentation (e.g., anamorphic widescreen).[4] Genres can also be classified by more inherent characteristics (usually implied in their names), such as settings, theme/topic, mood, target audience, or budget/type of production.[4] The setting is the environment—including both time and geographic location—in which the story and action take place (e.g., present day or historical period; Earth or outer-space; urban or rural, etc.). Genres that are particularly concerned with this element include the historical drama, war film, Western, and space-opera, the names of which all denote particular settings.[4] The theme or topic refers to the issues or concepts that the film revolves around; for example, the science-fiction film, sports film, and crime film. The mood is the emotional tone of the film, as implied in the names of the comedy film, horror film, or 'tearjerker'. Genres informed by particular target audience(s) include children's film, teen film, women's film, and "chick flick" Genres characterized by the type of production include the blockbuster, independent film, and low-budget film, such as the B movie (commercial) or amateur film (noncommercial). Screenwriters, in particular, often organize their stories by genre, focusing their attention on three specific aspects: atmosphere, character, and story.[11] A film’s atmosphere includes costumes, props, locations, and the visceral experiences created for the audience.[12] Aspects of character include archetypes, stock characters, and the goals and motivations of the central characters.[13] Some story considerations for screenwriters, as they relate to genre, include theme, tent-pole scenes, and how the rhythm of characters’ perspective shift from scene to scene.[14] Examples of genres and subgenres[edit] Genres and subgenres[2] Genre Description Subgenre(s) Examples Action film Associated with particular types of spectacle (e.g., explosions, chases, combat)[15] Disaster film Heroic bloodshed: defined by stylized action sequences and themes such as duty, brotherhood, honour, redemption. Martial arts film: focusing on the excitement and values of martial arts Spy film: centered on the excitement and entertainment of espionage rather than political or psychological aspects. Superhero film The Killer (1989) Hard Boiled (1992) James Bond films Mission: Impossible films Adventure film Implies a narrative that is defined by a journey (often including some form of pursuit) and is usually located within a fantasy or exoticized setting. Typically, though not always, such stories include the quest narrative. The predominant emphasis on violence and fighting in action films is the typical difference between the two genres.[15][16] Pirate film Swashbuckler film Lawrence of Arabia (1962) Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) Animated film A film medium in which the film’s images are primarily created by computer or hand and the characters are voiced by actors.[17] Animation can otherwise incorporate any genre and subgenre[2] and is often confused as a genre itself. CGI animation Cutout animation Live-action animated film Stop motion film Claymation Traditional animation The Princess and the Frog (2009) Chicken Run (2000) South Park: Bigger, Longer, & Uncut (1999) Shrek (2001) Space Jam (1996) Comedy film Defined by events that are primarily intended to make the audience laugh Action-comedy film Buddy comedy Dark/Black comedy film Mockumentary Parody film (including spoof film) Romantic comedy Slapstick film Rush Hour films Superbad (2007) Spaceballs (1987) This Is Spinal Tap (1984) Drama Focused on emotions and defined by conflict, often looking to reality rather than sensationalism. Legal drama Medical drama Melodrama Political drama Docudrama Teen drama Fantasy film Films defined by situations that transcend natural laws and/or by settings inside a fictional universe, with narratives that are often inspired by or involve human myths. The genre typically incorporates non-scientific concepts such as magic, mythical creatures, and supernatural elements.[2][17] Contemporary fantasy Dark fantasy High/epic fantasy Urban fantasy Harry Potter films Pan’s Labyrinth (2006) Jason and the Argonauts (1963) Historical film Films that either provide more-or-less accurate representations of historical accounts or depict fictional narratives placed inside an accurate depiction of a historical setting.[2] Alternate history Biopic Historical epic Historical event Historical fiction Period piece Lincoln (2012) Catch Me If You Can (2002) Spartacus (1960) Titanic (1997) Inglourious Basterds (2009) Horror film Found footage Ghost films Monster movie Vampire films Werewolf films Slasher film Splatter film Zombie film Science fiction film Films are defined by a combination of imaginative speculation and a scientific or technological premise, making use of the changes and trajectory of technology and science. This genre often incorporates space, biology, energy, time, and any other observable science.[2][17] Dystopian film Post-apocalyptic film Military science fiction Steampunk film Tech noir Utopian film Space opera 12 Monkeys (1995) Tomorrowland (2015) Children of Men (2006) Blade Runner (1982) Howl's Moving Castle (2004) Thriller film Psychological thriller Mystery film Techno-thriller Western A genre in which films are set in the American West during the 19th century and embodies the "spirit, the struggle and the demise of the new frontier." These films will often feature horse riding, violent and non-violent interaction with Native-American tribes, gunfights, and technology created during the industrial revolution.[2][17] Epic Western Revisionist Western Spaghetti Western History[edit] From the earliest days of cinema in the 19th century the term "genre" (already in use in English with reference to works of art or literary production from at least 1770[18]) was used[by whom?] to organize films according to type.[19] By the 1950s André Bazin was discussing the concept of "genre" by using the Western film as an example; during this era, there was a debate over auteur theory versus genre.[4] In the late 1960s the concept of genre became a significant part of film theory.[4] Film genres draw on genres from other forms; Western novels existed before the Western film, and musical theatre pre-dated film musicals.[20] The perceived genre of a film can change over time; for example, in the 21st century The Great Train Robbery (1903) classes as a key early Western film, but when released, marketing promoted it "for its relation to the then-popular genres of the chase film, the railroad film and the crime film".[21] A key reason that the early Hollywood industrial system from the 1920s to the 1950s favoured genre films is that in "Hollywood's industrial mode of production, genre movies are dependable products" to market to audiences - they were easy to produce and it was easy for audiences to understand a genre film.[22] In the 1920s to 1950s, genre films had clear conventions and iconography, such as the heavy coats worn by gangsters in films like Little Caesar (1931).[23] The conventions in genre films enable filmmakers to generate them in an industrial, assembly-line fashion, an approach which can be seen in the James Bond spy-films, which all use a formula of "lots of action, fancy gadgets, beautiful woman and colourful villains", even though the actors, directors and screenwriters change.[23] Pure and hybrid genres[edit] Films are rarely purely from one genre, which is in keeping with the cinema's diverse and derivative origins, it being a blend of "vaudeville, music-hall, theatre, photography" and novels.[4] American film historian Janet Staiger states that the genre of a film can be defined in four ways. The "idealist method" judges films by predetermined standards. The "empirical method" identifies the genre of a film by comparing it to a list of films already deemed to fall within a certain genre. The apriori method uses common generic elements which are identified in advance. The "social conventions" method of identifying the genre of a film is based on the accepted cultural consensus within society.[24] Martin Loop contends that Hollywood films are not pure genres because most Hollywood movies blend the love-oriented plot of the romance genre with other genres.[24] Jim Colins claims that since the 1980s, Hollywood films have been influenced by the trend towards "ironic hybridization", in which directors combine elements from different genres, as with the Western/science fiction mix in Back to the Future Part III.[24] Many films cross into multiple genres. Susan Hayward states that spy films often cross genre boundaries with thriller films.[4] Some genre films take genre elements from one genre and place them into the conventions of a second genre, such as with The Band Wagon (1953), which adds film noir and detective film elements into "The Girl Hunt" ballet.[23] In the 1970s New Hollywood era, there was so much parodying of genres that it can be hard to assign genres to some films from this era, such as Mel Brooks' comedy-Western Blazing Saddles (1974) or the private eye parody The Long Goodbye (1973).[4] Other films from this era bend genres so much that it is challenging to put them in a genre category, such as Roman Polanski's Chinatown (1974) and William Friedkin's The French Connection (1971).[4] Film theorist Robert Stam challenged whether genres really exist, or whether they are merely made up by critics. Stam has questioned whether "genres [are] really 'out there' in the world or are they really the construction of analysts?". As well, he has asked whether there is a "... finite taxonomy of genres or are they in principle infinite?" and whether genres are "...timeless essences ephemeral, time-bound entities? Are genres culture-bound or trans-cultural?" Stam has also asked whether genre analysis should aim at being descriptive or prescriptive. While some genres are based on story content (the war film), other are borrowed from literature (comedy, melodrama) or from other media (the musical). Some are performer-based (Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers films) or budget-based (blockbusters, low budget film), while others are based on artistic status (the art film), racial identity (Race films), location (the Western), or sexual orientation (Queer cinema).[25] Audience expectations[edit] Many genres have built-in audiences and corresponding publications that support them, such as magazines and websites. For example, horror films have a well-established fanbase that reads horror magazines such as Fangoria. Films that are difficult to categorize into a genre are often less successful. As such, film genres are also useful in the areas of marketing, film criticism and the analysis of consumption. Hollywood story consultant John Truby states that "...you have to know how to transcend the forms [genres] so you can give the audience a sense of originality and surprise."[26] Some screenwriters use genre as a means of determining what kind of plot or content to put into a screenplay. They may study films of specific genres to find examples. This is a way that some screenwriters are able to copy elements of successful movies and pass them off in a new screenplay. It is likely that such screenplays fall short in originality. As Truby says, "Writers know enough to write a genre script but they haven’t twisted the story beats of that genre in such a way that it gives an original face to it".[27] Cinema technologies are associated with genres. Huge widescreens helped Western films to create an expansive setting of the open plains and desert. Science fiction and fantasy films are associated with special effects, notably computer generated imagery (e.g., the Harry Potter films).[4] In 2017, screenwriter Eric R. Williams published a system for screenwriters to conceptualize narrative film genres based on audience expectations.[28]  The system was based upon the structure biologists use to analyze living beings.  Williams wrote a companion book detailing his taxonomy, which claims to be able to identify all feature length narrative films with seven categorizations: film type, super genre, macro-genre, micro-genre, voice, and pathway.[29] Grouping vs. genre[edit] There are other methods of dividing films into groups besides genre. For example, auteur critics group films according to their auteur-directors. Production attributes, such as the low-budget film, can also be considered a grouping. Some groupings may be casually described as genres although the definition is questionable.[citation needed] For example, while independent films are sometimes discussed as if they are a genre in-and-of themselves, independent productions can belong to any genre. Similarly, while art films are referred to as a genre by film scholar David Bordwell, who states that "art cinema itself is a [film] genre, with its own distinct conventions",[24] an art film can be in a number of genres (e.g., drama, experimental film, black comedy, etc.). Categorization[edit] War film or anti-war movie: Lewis Milestone's All Quiet on the Western Front, 1930 Because genres are easier to recognize than to define, academics agree they cannot be identified in a rigid way.[30] Furthermore, different countries and cultures define genres in different ways. A typical example are war movies. In US, they are mostly related to ones with large U.S involvement such as World wars and Vietnam, whereas in other countries, movies related to wars in other historical periods are considered war movies. Film genres may appear to be readily categorizable from the setting of the film. Nevertheless, films with the same settings can be very different, due to the use of different themes or moods. For example, while both The Battle of Midway and All Quiet on the Western Front are set in a wartime context and might be classified as belonging to the war film genre, the first examines the themes of honor, sacrifice, and valour, and the second is an anti-war film which emphasizes the pain and horror of war. While there is an argument that film noir movies could be deemed to be set in an urban setting, in cheap hotels and underworld bars, many classic noirs take place mainly in small towns, suburbia, rural areas, or on the open road.[31] The editors of filmsite.org argue that animation, pornographic film, documentary film, silent film and so on are non-genre-based film categories.[32] Linda Williams argues that horror, melodrama, and pornography all fall into the category of "body genres" since they are each designed to elicit physical reactions on the part of viewers. Horror is designed to elicit spine-chilling, white-knuckled, eye-bulging terror; melodramas are designed to make viewers cry after seeing the misfortunes of the onscreen characters; and pornography is designed to elicit sexual arousal.[33] This approach can be extended: comedies make people laugh, tear-jerkers make people cry, feel-good films lift people's spirits and inspiration films provide hope for viewers. Eric R. Williams (no relation to Linda Williams) argues that all narrative feature length films can be categorized as one of eleven “super genres” (Action, Crime, Fantasy, Horror, Romance, Science Fiction, Slice of Life, Sports, Thriller, War and Western).[11]  Williams contends that labels such as comedy or drama are more broad than the category of super genre, and therefore fall into a category he calls “film type”.[28] Similarly, Williams explains that labels such as animation and musical are more specific to storytelling technique and therefore fall into his category of “voice”.[34]  For example, according to Williams, a film like Blazing Saddles could be categorized as a Comedy (type) Western (super-genre) Musical (voice) while Anomolisa is a Drama (type) Slice of Life (super-genre) Animation (voice).  Williams has created a seven-tiered categorization for narrative feature films called the Screenwriters Taxonomy.[29] A genre movie is a film that follows some or all of the conventions of a particular genre, whether or not it was intentional when the movie was produced.[35] Film in the context of history[edit] In order to understand the creation and context of each film genre, we must look at its popularity in the context of its place in history. For example, the 1970s Blaxploitation films have been called an attempt to "undermine the rise of Afro-American's Black consciousness movement" of that era.[4] In William Park's analysis of film noir, he states that we must view and interpret film for its message with the context of history within our minds; he states that this is how film can truly be understood by its audience.[36] Film genres such as film noir and Western film reflect values of the time period. While film noir combines German expressionist filming strategies with post World War II ideals; Western films focused on the ideal of the early 20th century. Films such as the musical were created as a form of entertainment during the Great Depression allowing its viewers an escape during tough times. So when watching and analyzing film genres we must remember to remember its true intentions aside from its entertainment value. Over time, a genre can change through stages: the classic genre era; the parody of the classics; the period where filmmakers deny that their films are part of a certain genre; and finally a critique of the entire genre.[4] This pattern can be seen with the Western film. In the earliest, classic Westerns, there was a clear hero who protected society from lawless villains who lived in the wilderness and came into civilization to commit crimes.[4] However, in revisionist Westerns of the 1970s, the protagonist becomes an anti-hero who lives in the wilderness to get away from a civilization that is depicted as corrupt, with the villains now integrated into society. Another example of a genre changing over time is the popularity of the neo-noir films in the early 2000s (Mulholland Drive (2001), The Man Who Wasn't There (2001) and Far From Heaven (2002); are these film noir parodies, a repetition of noir genre tropes, or a re-examination of the noir genre?[4] This is also important to remember when looking at films in the future. As viewers watch a film they are conscious of societal influence with the film itself. In order to understand it's true intentions, we must identify its intended audience and what narrative of our current society, as well as it comments to the past in relation with today's society. This enables viewers to understand the evolution of film genres as time and history morphs or views and ideals of the entertainment industry. See also[edit] Film portal Film Glossary of motion picture terms References[edit] ^ "America's 10 Greatest Films in 10 Classic Genres". American Film Institute. Retrieved 2010-06-06. AFI defines 'western' as a genre of films set in the American West that embodies the spirit, the struggle and the demise of the new frontier. ^ a b c d e f g "90+ Film Genre Examples for Film & TV". StudioBinder. 2020-12-13. Retrieved 2021-02-25. ^ a b Grant, Barry Keith (2007). Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Short cuts. 33 (reprint ed.). London: Wallflower Press. p. 2. ISBN 9781904764793. Retrieved 2018-10-13. [...] the various elements of genre films, including conventions, iconography, settings, narratives, characters and actors. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Hayward, Susan. "Genre/Sub-genre" in Cinema Studies: The Key Concepts (Third Edition). Routledge, 2006. p. 185-192 ^ a b c d Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 1 ^ a b c d Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 11 ^ Alan Williams, "Is a Radical Genre Criticism Possible?" Quarterly Review of Film Studies 9, no. 2 (Spring 1984): 121-2 ^ a b Judith Butler and genre theory. ^ Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 17 ^ Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 18 ^ a b Williams, Eric R. "Episode 3: Movie Genre: It's Not What You Think". How to View and Appreciate Great Movies. Retrieved 2020-06-07. ^ Williams, Eric R. "Episode 4: Genre Layers and Audience Expectations". How to View and Appreciate Great Movies. Retrieved 2020-06-07. ^ Williams, Eric R. "How to View and Appreciate Great Movies (episode 18: Knowing Characters from the Outside In)". English. Retrieved 2020-06-07. ^ Williams, Eric R. "Episode 5: Story Shape and Tension". How to View and Appreciate Great Movies. Retrieved 2020-06-07. ^ a b "Action and Adventure Films | Encyclopedia.com". www.encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 2021-02-25. ^ "Adventure Films". www.filmsite.org. Retrieved 2021-02-25. ^ a b c d "AFI's 10 TOP 10". American Film Institute. Retrieved 2021-02-25. ^ "genre". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Hayward, Susan (2006) [1996]. "Genre/Sub-genre". Cinema Studies: The Key Concepts. Routledge Key Guides (3 ed.). London: Routledge. p. 185. ISBN 9781134208920. Retrieved 29 May 2020. As a term genre goes back to earliest cinema and was seen as a way of organizing films according to type. But it was not until the late 1960s that genre was introduced as a key concept into Anglo-Saxon film theory [...]. ^ Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 4 ^ Grant, Barry Keith (2007). "approaching film genre". Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Short cuts. 33. London: Wallflower Press. p. 6. ISBN 9781904764793. Retrieved 29 May 2020. [...] Neale notes that most histories of the western film begin with The Great Train Robbery (1903), but when released it was promoted not as a western but marketed for its relation to the then-popular genres of the chase film, the railroad film and the crime film; at that time, there was no recognised genre known as the western into which to categorise it. ^ Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 7-8 ^ a b c Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press, 2007. p. 8. ^ a b c d Grant, Barry Keith (2007). Film Genre: From Iconography to Ideology. Wallflower Press. ISBN 9781904764793. ^ Stam, Robert (2000-02-21). Film Theory: An Anthology. Wiley. ISBN 9780631206545. ^ Truby, John. "What's My Genre?". Writers Store. Retrieved 2007-07-31. ^ Ward, Lewis. "Interview: John Truby on Screenwriting and Breaking In". Script Magazine. Archived from the original on 2007-07-02. Retrieved 2007-07-31. ^ a b Williams, Eric R. (2017). Screen Adaptation: Beyond the Basics. New York: Focal Press. ISBN 978-1-315-66941-0. OCLC 986993829. ^ a b Williams, Eric R. (2017). The Screenwriters Taxonomy : a roadmap to collaborative storytelling. New York, NY: Routledge Studies in Media Theory and Practice. ISBN 978-1-315-10864-3. OCLC 993983488. ^ Thompson, Kristin; Bordwell, David (2012-07-06). Film Art: An Introduction. McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 9780073535104. ^ Lamster, Mark (2000). Architecture and Film. Princeton Architectural Press. p. 217. ISBN 9781568982076. ^ "Other Major Film Categories". filmsite.org. Retrieved 2015-03-14. ^ Williams, Linda (Summer 1991). "Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, and Excess". Film Quarterly. 44 (4): 2–13. doi:10.2307/1212758. ^ Williams, Eric R. "How to View and Appreciate Great Movies (episode 24: Filmmaker's Voice and Audience Choice)". English. Retrieved 2020-06-07. ^ McNair, Brian (2010). Journalists in Film: Heroes and Villains. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 9780748634477. ^ Park W. What Is Film Noir? [e-book]. Lanham, Md: Bucknell University Press; 2011. Available from: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost), Ipswich, MA. Accessed November 19, 2017. Further reading[edit] Friedman, Lester et al. An Introduction to Film Genres. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2014 ISBN 978-0-393-93019-1 609p. Grant, Barry Keith. Film Genre Reader I, II & III. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986, 1995, 2003 López, Daniel. Films by Genre: 775 categories, styles, trends, and movements defined, with a filmography for each. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 1993 ISBN 0-89950-780-8 495p. Summers, Howard. The Guide To Movie Lists 2: Genres, Subjects and Themes. Borehamwood: Howcom Services, 2018 ISBN 978-1-982904-72-2 418p. External links[edit] Genres of film at the Internet Movie Database Genres and Themes, BFI screenonline Finding Books on Film Genres, Styles and Categories, Yale University Library "A Semantic/Syntactic Approach to Film Genre", by Rick Altman] SCRIBD academia.edu (PDF)JSTOR 1225093 "Review: Film/Genre by Rick Altman", by Leger Grindon. JSTOR 1213754. v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie v t e Lists of films by genre and themes Action Martial arts Mixed martial arts List of ninja films Vigilante Adventure Pirate Swashbuckler Animation Avant-garde Biographical Blaxploitation Children's Christian Comedy Parody Slapstick Crime Heist Disaster Documentary Drama Economics Historical Slavery Erotic Fantasy Sword and Sorcery Horror Cannibal Clowns Comedy horror Disaster Eco Ghosts Holiday Mummy Natural Satanic Toys Vampire Zombie LGBT Mockumentary Monster Kaiju Giant-monster Musical Mystery Noir Neo-noir Religious Romance Romantic comedy Satire Science fiction apocalyptic Body Swap Dystopia Extraterrestrials Sci-fi action Sci-fi comedy Sci-fi horror Superhero Time travel Spy Sports Teen Thriller Legal Erotic War anti-war Submarine Western Spaghetti Northern Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125