The film-poem (also called the poetic avant-garde film, verse-film or verse-documentary or film poem without the hyphen)[1] is a label first applied to American avant-garde films released after World War II.[2] During this time, the relationship between film and poetry was debated. James Peterson in Dreams of Chaos, Visions of Order said, "In practice, the film poem label was primarily an emblem of the avant-garde's difference from the commercial narrative film." Peterson reported that in the 1950s, overviews of avant-garde films "generally identified two genres: the film poem and the graphic cinema".[3] By the 1990s, the avant-garde cinema encompassed the term "film-poem" in addition to different strains of filmmaking.[4] Film-poems are considered "personal films" and are seen "as autonomous, standing apart from traditions and genres". They are "an open, unpredictable experience" due to eschewing extrinsic expectations based on commercial films. Peterson said, "The viewer's cycles of anticipation and satisfaction derive primarily from the film's intrinsic structure."[5] The film-poems are personal as well as private: "Many film poems document intimate moments of the filmmaker's life."[6] Contents 1 History 2 Examples 3 Other notable film-poems 4 Notes 5 References History[edit] David E. James and Sarah Neely are two academics who have sought to explore the relationship between poetry and film. James writes of the idea of the poet ‘In the modern world, poet designates a preferred medium; but the word also implies a mode of social (un)insertion. It bespeaks a cultural practice that, in being economically insignificant, remains economically unincorporated, and so retains the possibility of cultural resistance.’ Of Stan Brakhage, David E. James writes ‘The installation of the filmmaker as a poet had, then, both theoretical and practical components. It involved the conceptualization of the film artist as an individual author, a Romantic creator-a conceptualization made possible by manufacturing a tradition of such out of previous film history; and it necessitated a working organization, a mode of production and distribution, alternative to the technology, labour practices, and institutional insertion of Hollywood.’[7] In his essay Poetry-Films and Film Poems in Film Poems, William C. Wees differentiates between poetry-film using a film to ‘illustrate’ a poem, and film poems in which ‘a synthesis of poetry and film that generates associations, connotations and metaphors neither the verbal nor the visual text could produce on its own.’[8] Examples[edit] Examples of a film that fits in to the first is Manhatta (1921) by Charles Sheeler and Paul Strand using the poem by Walt Whitman, while in the second is Meshes of the Afternoon (1943) by Maya Deren and Alexander Hammmid.  Film Poems was a touring programme of films exploring the relationship between films and poetry curated by film maker Peter Todd and screened at the National Film Theatre London in February 1998 and which screened the following year as a touring programme at various venues supported by The Arts Council of England and the BFI Touring Unit (and would be followed by a further three Film Poems programmes). [9] [10] This programme included two films by film maker and poet Margaret Tait which displayed the range and texture of her work with one film Hugh MacDiarmid A Portrait (1964) featuring the poet MacDiarmid reading his own work, while the other Aerial (1974) is without words and which author Ali Smith described as ‘a tiny poem’. [11] Sarah Neely also writes of this film ‘For this film, Tait moved away from the inclusion of spoken word on the soundtrack: instead the film’s poetry comes wholly from image and sound’ emphasising ‘Aerial seems a perfect distillation of Tait’s idea of a film poem. [12] Sophie Mayer in How British Poetry Fell In Love With Film said Margaret Tait created her largely self-made films where she lived and would be described as ‘the only British artist truly making film poems’. [13] Other notable film-poems[edit] The Indian film Stark Electric Jesus (2014) [14][15][16][17] The Blasphemers' Banquet (1989) The Gaze of the Gorgon (1992) Prometheus (1998) Notes[edit] ^ Peter Atkinson. "Poetic licence: Issues of signification and authorship in British television versedocumentary, 1986-96". ^ Peterson 1994, p. 10 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPeterson1994 (help) ^ Peterson 1994, p. 29 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPeterson1994 (help) ^ Peterson 1994, p. 30 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPeterson1994 (help) ^ Peterson 1994, p. 31 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPeterson1994 (help) ^ Peterson 1994, p. 32 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPeterson1994 (help) ^ James, David E (1989). Allegories of Cinema: American Film in the Sixties. Princeton University Press. p. 32. ISBN 0691006040. ^ "Film Poems". Margaret Tait 100. Retrieved 2020-05-07. ^ Todd, Peter (June 2019). The Film Poems Series 1-4 (1999-2003) – and a few thoughts. Jugend ohne Film, No. 1, Poetry: Poetry.CS1 maint: location (link) ^ "Poetry Archive". Jugend ohne Film (in German). Retrieved 2020-05-07. ^ Todd and Cook (2004). Subjects and sequences : a Margaret Tait reader. Tait, Margaret, 1918-1999., Todd, Peter,, Cook, Benjamin. London: LUX. p. 18. ISBN 0-9548569-0-2. OCLC 62119997. ^ Neely, Sarah (2017). Between categories: the films of Margaret Tait: portraits, poetry, sound and place. Peter Lang Ltd, International Academic Publishers. p. 149. ^ The Oxford handbook of contemporary British and Irish poetry. Robinson, Peter, 1953- (First ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2013. ISBN 978-0-19-959680-5. OCLC 809977205.CS1 maint: others (link) ^ "'প্রচণ্ড বৈদ্যুতিক ছুতার' ও একটি চিন্তা". charbak. charbak. 6 September 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015. ^ "কম বাজেটের প্রতিবাদ". ebela. ABP Group. 23 September 2014. Archived from the original on 18 January 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2014. ^ "মলয় বিদ্যুৎ". Anandabazar Patrika. ABP Group. 29 October 2014. Retrieved 29 October 2014. ^ "কয়েক জন কলেজ পড়ুয়া". ei samay. Times Group. 6 October 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. References[edit] Peterson, James (1994). Dreams of Chaos, Visions of Order: Understanding the American Avant-Garde Cinema. Contemporary Film and Television. Wayne State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8143-2457-8. v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie