A film à clef (or cinéma à clef, movie à clef,[1] film à clé (French pronunciation: ​[film a kle]), French for "film with a key"), is a film describing real life, behind a façade of fiction.[2] "Key" in this context means a table one can use to swap out the names. Film à clef is the film equivalent of the literary roman à clef, and the two share the same techniques.[1] Many films à clef are biopics of Hollywood personalities.[1] Contents 1 Selected notable films à clef 2 See also 3 References 3.1 Works cited 4 Further reading Selected notable films à clef[edit] 8½ (1963) is based on Federico Fellini's experience suffering from "director's block."[3] 21 (2008) Adaptation (2002); while parts of the film are adapted from Susan Orlean's non-fiction book The Orchid Thief, most of the film is a heavily fictionalized account of Charlie Kaufman's difficulty in adapting the book into a screenplay. All About Eve (1950) All Good Things (2010) is inspired by the life of Robert Durst. All the King's Men (1949), is based on the life of Huey Long.[4] All That Jazz (1979) musical film by Bob Fosse loosely based on his struggle with life and health during post production of his 1974 film Lenny and his 1975 Broadway musical Chicago.[5] Almost Famous (2000), is based on writer, director Cameron Crowe's experience as a teenaged writer for Rolling Stone magazine. Alpha Dog (2006), based on the story of Jesse James Hollywood and the murder of Nicholas Markowitz. Annie Hall (1977), believed to be a version of Woody Allen's own relationship with Diane Keaton (whose birth name is Diane Hall). Allen has denied this in interviews, however. The Birth of a Nation (1915), Austin Stoneman is based on Thaddeus Stevens. The Carpetbaggers (1964),[1] based on the book by Harold Robbins, whose main character, Jonas Cord, is influenced by Howard Hughes Casino (1995) is based on Frank Rosenthal and the Stardust casino.[6] Citizen Kane (1941), is partially based on the life of William Randolph Hearst.[1] A Cock and Bull Story (2005)[7] The Devil Wears Prada (2006) is based on Vogue magazine editor Anna Wintour. Diva (1981) is based on the early European career of soprano Jessye Norman. Dreamgirls (2006), the musical film based on the career of The Supremes. The Celebration (1998) was based on an alleged real-life story that director Thomas Vinterberg heard on Danish radio. The Five Heartbeats (1991) inspired loosely by the lives of The Temptations, The Dells, The Four Tops, Wilson Pickett, James Brown, Sam Cooke, Frankie Lymon and others.[8] The Goddess[1] (1958) said to be based on Marilyn Monroe. The Greek Tycoon (1978),[1] influenced by Aristotle Onassis. The Great Dictator (1940), Adenoid Hynkel is based on Adolf Hitler. The Mechanism (TV series): about Brazilian political corruption. Guru (2007), based on the rise and business practices of Dhirubhai Ambani. I'm Not There (2007), a series of stories loosely inspired by the life of Bob Dylan. While some segments are more literal interpretations of parts of Dylan's life (such as the segment featuring Cate Blanchett), others are heavily fictionalized accounts inspired by Dylan's music (such as the segment featuring Richard Gere). Imitation of Life (1934)[1] Last Days (2005), a barely concealed dramatization of Kurt Cobain's final days.[9] The Last Samurai (2003), inspired by the 1876 Satsuma Rebellion and also on the story of Jules Brunet, a French army captain who fought in the Boshin War. The Last Tycoon (1976)[1][10] The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou (2004), which features a protagonist based loosely on Jacques-Yves Cousteau.[11] Lost in Translation (2003); Charlotte and John are believed to be based loosely on writer-director Sofia Coppola and her ex-husband, Spike Jonze. Magnolia (1999), is loosely inspired by Paul Thomas Anderson's experience in dealing with his father's death from cancer. Mr. Arkadin (1955) Monsieur Verdoux (1947), Henri Verdoux is based on Henri Désiré Landru. Network (1976)[1] The Power and the Glory (1933) is loosely based on the life of C.W. Post. Primary Colors (1998) is a thinly veiled depiction of Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential campaign.[12] The killers in Psycho (1960), The Texas Chain Saw Massacre (1974), and The Silence of the Lambs (1991) are all modeled closely after Ed Gein, who murdered two women, robbed many graves, and made clothing and furniture out of human skin and bones. Saving Private Ryan (1998), based loosely on the Niland brothers. Scarface (1932), is largely based on the life of Al Capone. The Sea Hawk (1940), Geoffrey Thorpe is based on Sir Francis Drake. The Shootist (1976) Stagecoach (1939), Doc Boone is based on Doc Holliday. A Star Is Born (1937)[13][14] Sunset Boulevard (1950)[1] Sweet Smell of Success (1957), is based on the life of Walter Winchell.[15] Talk Radio (1988)[16] Velvet Goldmine (1998) is largely based on the career of David Bowie. White Hunter Black Heart (1990)[17] based on film director John Huston Withnail & I (1987) is based on the experiences of writer/director Bruce Robinson, represented in the film by "I" (Paul McGann), and his friend Vivian MacKerrell, represented in the film by Withnail (Richard E. Grant), as struggling actors living in Camden Town in the late 1960s. The character of Uncle Monty (Richard Griffiths) is based on Italian film director Franco Zeffirelli, who Robinson claims made amorous advances during the filming of Romeo and Juliet. See also[edit] Film portal Metafilm Roman à clef Postmodernist film References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Films à clef - LC Linked Data Service: Authorities and Vocabularies". id.loc.gov. Library of Congress. Retrieved 16 August 2017. ^ Truffaut, François (1994). The films in my life. Da Capo Press. p. 131. ISBN 978-0-306-80599-8. Retrieved 2012-05-01. ^ 8 ½: When “He” Became “I”|The Criterion Collection ^ Subgenre – Film a Clef|AllMovie ^ All That Jazz (1979)|The Criterion Collection ^ Subgenre – Film a Clef|AllMovie ^ Smith, Damon (2010). Michael Winterbottom: Interviews. Univ. Press of Mississippi. p. 98. ISBN 978-1-60473-841-4. ^ The Five Heartbeats (1991) – AllMovie ^ Subgenre – Film a Clef|AllMovie ^ Subgenre – Film a Clef|AllMovie ^ Wes Anderson in Oklahoma|The Criterion Collection ^ The Best Film A Clef Movies of All Time – Flickchart ^ Stam & Raengo 2008, p. 235. sfn error: no target: CITEREFStamRaengo2008 (help) ^ Is ‘A Star Is Born’ Based on a True Story? Well, Sort Of – Decider ^ Subgenre – Film a Clef|AllMovie ^ Talk Radio (1988) - AllMovie ^ Sara Anson Vaux (2014). Clint Eastwood: A Biography: A Biography. ABC-CLIO. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-4408-2998-7. Works cited[edit] Stam, Robert; Raengo, Alessandra (2008). A Companion to Literature and Film. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-99911-0. Further reading[edit] "What is… Film à Clef?". Terry Malloy's Pigeon Coop. October 10, 2013. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved August 16, 2017. v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie