Flag of China 1862–1912 Great Qing Name Yellow Dragon Flag (黃龍旗) Use State and war flag, state and naval ensign Proportion 2:3[1] Adopted 1862 Design Blue dragon on plain yellow, with a red pearl at the upper left corner. Variant flag of national flag Great Qing Name Later version of Yellow Dragon Flag Use National flag and ensign Proportion 5:8 Adopted 1889 The flag of the Qing dynasty was an emblem adopted in the late 19th century featuring the Azure Dragon on a plain yellow field with the red flaming pearl of the three-legged crow in the upper left corner. It became the first national flag of China and is usually referred to as the "Yellow Dragon Flag" (traditional Chinese: 黃龍旗; simplified Chinese: 黄龙旗; pinyin: huánglóngqí). Ruling China from 1644 until the overthrow of the monarchy during the Xinhai Revolution, the Qing dynasty was the last imperial dynasty in China's history. Between 1862 and 1912, the dynasty represented itself with the dragon flag. Contents 1 Design 2 Triangular version (1862–1889) 3 Rectangular version (1889–1912) 4 Influence 5 Naval flags of Qing dynasty 6 Flags based on the Qing dynasty flag 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Design[edit] Throughout the history of China's imperial dynasties, yellow was considered the royal color of successive Chinese emperors. The legendary first emperor of China was known as the Yellow Emperor (traditional Chinese: 黃帝; simplified Chinese: 黄帝; pinyin: huángdì). Members of the imperial family of China at that time were the only ones allowed to display the color yellow in buildings and on garments. The Emperor of China usually used a Chinese dragon as a symbol of the imperial power and strength. Generally, a five-clawed dragon was used by emperors only. In Chinese culture, a flaming pearl is shown on top of the dragon's head. The pearl is associated with wealth, good luck, and prosperity. The design of the flag was largely based on the Plain Yellow Banner, the one of three "upper" banner armies among the Eight Banners under the direct command of the emperor himself, and one of the four "right wing" banners.[2][3] The Eight Banners The Eight Banners were administrative/military divisions under the Qing dynasty into which all Manchu households were placed. In war, the Eight Banners functioned as armies, but the banner system was also the basic organizational framework of all of Manchu society. Plain Yellow Banner Bordered Yellow Banner Plain White Banner Bordered White Banner Plain Red Banner Bordered Red Banner Plain Blue Banner Bordered Blue Banner Triangular version (1862–1889)[edit] Triangular version The Arrow Incident of 1856 occurred as a result of Chinese civilian vessels flying foreign flags as the Qing dynasty had no official flag at the time.[4] In 1862, sailors from the Chinese and British navies clashed at Wuhan on the Yangtze River. In response to protests from the British government that their ships were unable to properly distinguish between Chinese navy ships and civilian vessels, Yixin (Prince Gong) urged Zeng Guofan to create a governmental flag for the Qing, and suggested use of a yellow dragon flag, which was also used as one of the Eight Banners of the Manchu as well as in the Chinese army. After due consideration, Zeng Guofan concluded that a square flag bore too close a resemblance to the Plain Yellow Banner of the Eight Banners with the potential to be viewed as an endorsement of the Eight Banners hierarchy, he instead removed one corner to create a triangular flag.[3] The triangular version of the yellow dragon flag was restricted to naval and governmental use only, no civilian ships were permitted to fly the yellow pennant, and it never formally became the national flag.[5] However, on some diplomatic occasions and at international exhibitions, this flag was used to represent China. Rectangular version (1889–1912)[edit] Rectangular version In September 1881, when the two cruisers Chaoyong and Yangwei ordered from Birkenhead, England were sent to China, Li Hongzhang realized a triangular ensign was unique among naval flags of other countries. As a result, he petitioned the imperial court for permission and subsequently altered the triangular naval flag into a rectangular one.[6] Seeing Western countries flying national flags on official occasions, Li Hongzhang also asked Empress Dowager Cixi to select a national flag for the Qing dynasty. Among the proposals for use of the Ba gua flag, the Yellow dragon flag and the Qilin flag, Cixi selected the Yellow dragon design. In 1888, the imperial court promulgated the naval flag as the Qing national flag.[7] Influence[edit] The Palace of the Dalai Lama in Lhasa (Tibet). This is a collector card from serie 71, "Scenes From Around the World - midday in Berlin", #5/12 card. Yellow Dragon Flag, within the upper right part. The notion of yellow as representative of Manchu ethnicity was used in the flags of the Five Races Under One Union flag of the Republic of China, and on the flag of the Empire of China, respectively, although in 1912 the former was challenged by Sun Yat-sen, who thought it inappropriate to use the traditional imperial color to represent Manchu ethnicity.[8] Also, mustard yellow was used in the flag of Manchukuo in deference to the Qing dynasty, on whose flag it was based. The blue dragon was featured in the Twelve Symbols national emblem, which was the state emblem of China from 1913 to 1928. Naval flags of Qing dynasty[edit] Horatio Nelson Lay's Proposal (1862) When the Qing dynasty purchased warships from the United Kingdom in 1862, Horatio Nelson Lay designed several naval flags based on the custom flag he designed.[9] These proposals were not recognized by the Qing dynasty government.[10] Proposed Chinese naval ensign, designed by Horatio Nelson Lay. Beiyang Fleet (1874–1890) The Beiyang Fleet was created in 1874, and several rank flags were introduced based on the traditional five color officials' flags of the old Chinese navy. Admiral's Flag Deputy Commanders's Flag High-ranking Official's Flag, for officials other than navy Beiyang Navy (1890–1909) The Beiyang Fleet became the national navy by Regulations of the Beiyang Fleet in 1888. However, rank flags were not updated until 1890, when William Metcalfe Lang and Liu Buchan disputed about their rank flags in an incident. Therefore, the British Royal Navy advisers proposed five new rank flags to replace the simple two rank flags system.[11] Proposed Admiral's Flag Proposed Vice Admiral's Flag Proposed Rear Admiral's Flag Proposed Commodore 1st Class's Flag Proposed Commodore 2nd Class's Flag However these proposals were not adopted by the Qing dynasty.[12] New rank flags were introduced later in 1890.[13] Admiral's Flag High-ranking Official's Flag Commander of Torpedo Boat's Flag Commodore's Flag Imperial Navy (1909–1911) After the total defeat of the Beiyang Navy in First Sino-Japanese War in 1894, the new imperial navy was reorganized following the establishment of the department of the navy in 1909. Imperial Chinese Navy adopted the national flag in the canton of naval flags in 1909.[14] Secretary's Flag Admiral's Flag Vice Admiral's Flag Rear Admiral's Flag Senior Officer's Flag Fleet Leader's Flag Flags based on the Qing dynasty flag[edit] Chinese Eastern Railway Flag of Chinese Eastern Railway adopted a combination of Qing dynasty and Russian flags. The flag was not updated until 1915.[15] Flag of the Chinese Eastern Railway (1897−1915) See also[edit] China portal Flag of Bhutan Flags of China References[edit] ^ Dimension of first yellow dragon flag from Wuhan Custom Archive ^ Elliott 2001, p. 79. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott2001 (help) ^ a b 施爱东 (Shi Aidong) (2011). Qing dragon flag flourished through 50 years of sorrow (哀旗不幸 怒旗不争 大清龙旗50年). 民族艺术. p. 6. (in Chinese) ^ 肖吟新 (Xiao Yinxin) (2002). The story of the Qing dynasty national flag (清代国旗的故事). 世纪. p. 63. (in Chinese) ^ "係為雇船捕盜而用，並未奏明定為萬年國旗", "[the flag] is used for ferry and policing, but is not explicitly designated as the permanent national flag", from 《北洋水師章程》(Regulations of the Beiyang Fleet) (in Chinese) ^ "今中國兵商各船日益加增，時與各國交接，自應重定旗式，以祟體制。應將兵船國旗改為長方式，照舊黃色，中畫青色飛龍。", "Nowadays the number of both Chinese military and commercial ships is growing. When our ships meet those of other nations they should display a flag based on a conformed system. [The government] should change the military flag to a pennant with an azure dragon in the middle",《北洋水師章程》(Regulations of the Beiyang Fleet) (in Chinese) ^ 《清朝国旗考》(Study on the Flag of Qing), 育民 (in Chinese) ^ "Story of the National Flag, official website of the Kuomintang". Retrieved 11 February 2014. (in Chinese) ^ The London Gazette, 13 February 1863 ^ Lay-Osborne Flotilla (China) ^ Drawings of the flags in use at the present time by various nations, Royal Navy Admiral ^ Images of Chinese Naval Ships(1855-1911) / 中国军舰图志(1855-1911)" by Chen Rui 陈悦, ISBN 9787545811544 ^ 清国北洋海軍実況一班 ^ Source: 北京故宮《海軍旗式及章服圖說》 Archived 2014-01-09 at the Wayback Machine ("Illustration of Naval flags and Uniforms", Palace Museum, Beijing, China) ^ Chinese Eastern Railway Company (China) External links[edit] Media related to Flags of the Qing Dynasty Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Qing dynasty topics History Early (1616–1683) Jurchen unification Later Jin Seven Grievances Later Jin invasion of Joseon Qing invasion of Joseon Transition from Ming to Qing Battle of Shanhai Pass Great Clearance Revolt of the Three Feudatories High Qing (1683–1839) Sino-Russian border conflicts Dzungar–Qing Wars Chinese expedition to Tibet (1720) Chinese Rites controversy Ten Great Campaigns Miao Rebellion (1735–36) Lhasa riot of 1750 Revolt of the Altishahr Khojas Āfāqī Khoja Holy War Sino-Burmese War (1765–1769) Lin Shuangwen rebellion Battle of Ngọc Hồi-Đống Đa Sino-Nepalese War Miao Rebellion (1795–1806) White Lotus Rebellion Late (1840–1912) First Opium War Dogra–Tibetan War (Sino-Sikh War) Taiping Rebellion Nian Rebellion Red Turban Rebellion (1854–1856) Da Cheng Rebellion Small Swords Society Miao Rebellion (1854–1873) Nepalese–Tibetan War Panthay Rebellion Second Opium War Punti–Hakka Clan Wars Amur Acquisition Self-Strengthening Movement Tongzhi Restoration Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Mudan incident Tianjin Massacre Margary Affair Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874) Northern Chinese Famine Qing reconquest of Xinjiang Sino-French War Sikkim expedition Jindandao incident First Sino-Japanese War Gongche Shangshu movement Dungan revolt (1895–96) Hundred Days' Reform Third plague pandemic Boxer Rebellion Red Lanterns Eight-Nation Alliance Declaration of war Late Qing reforms British expedition to Tibet 1905 Tibetan Rebellion 1909 Provincial Assembly elections Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910) Manchurian plague Railway Protection Movement 1911 Revolution Wuchang Uprising Xinhai Lhasa turmoil Mongolian Revolution of 1911 Xinhai Revolution in Xinjiang Manchu Restoration Government Emperor List Family tree Amban Cup of Solid Gold Deliberative Council Flag of the Qing dynasty Grand Council Great Qing Legal Code Imperial Clan Court Imperial Commissioner Imperial Household Department Lifan Yuan Ministry of Posts and Communications Nine Gates Infantry Commander Provincial governor Provincial military commander Principles of the Constitution (1908) Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty Ta-Ching Government Bank Viceroys Zhili Shaan-Gan Liangjiang Huguang Sichuan Min-Zhe Liangguang Yun-Gui Three Northeast Provinces Zongli Yamen Military Military of the Qing dynasty Beiyang Army Chu Army Eight Banners Ever Victorious Army Green Standard Army Huai Army Hushenying Imperial Guards New Army Peking Field Force Shuishiying Wuwei Corps Xiang Army Special regions Qing dynasty in Inner Asia Manchuria under Qing rule Mongolia under Qing rule Administrative divisions Tibet under Qing rule Golden Urn List of imperial residents Xinjiang under Qing rule General of Ili Taiwan under Qing rule Provincial Administration Hall Palaces & mausoleums Chengde Mountain Resort Forbidden City Mukden Palace Old Summer Palace Summer Palace Eastern Qing tombs Fuling Mausoleum Zhao Mausoleum (Qing dynasty) Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties Western Qing tombs Society & culture Booi Aha Changzhou School of Thought Dibao Four Wangs Gujin Tushu Jicheng History of Ming Islam during the Qing dynasty Kangxi Dictionary Kaozheng Literary inquisition Manchu Han Imperial Feast Peiwen Yunfu Pentaglot Dictionary Qing official headwear Qing poetry Quan Tangshi Queue Researches on Manchu Origins Sacred Edict of the Kangxi Emperor Shamanism in the Qing dynasty Siku Quanshu Zongmu Tiyao Treaties Treaty of Kyakhta (1727) Treaty of Nerchinsk Unequal treaty Boxer Protocol Burlingame Treaty Chefoo Convention Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory Convention of Peking Convention of Tientsin Li–Lobanov Treaty Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking Treaty of Aigun Treaty of the Bogue Treaty of Canton Treaty of Kulja Treaty of Nanking Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881) Treaty of Shimonoseki Treaty of Tarbagatai Treaty of Tientsin Treaty of Wanghia Treaty of Whampoa Currency Coinage Zhiqian Kangxi Tongbao Qianlong Tongbao Hongqian Da-Qing Tongbi Da-Qing Jinbi Paper money Da-Qing Baochao Hubu Guanpiao Banknotes of the Ta-Ching Government Bank Other topics Aisin Gioro Anti-Qing sentiment Canton System Chuang Guandong Draft History of Qing Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty Manchu people Names of the Qing dynasty New Qing History Qing conquest theory Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions Treaty ports Willow Palisade Imperial Edict of the Abdication of the Qing Emperor