Legendary ghost ship For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Flying Dutchman The Flying Dutchman by Albert Pinkham Ryder c. 1887 (Smithsonian American Art Museum) Captain Willem van der Decken The Flying Dutchman (Dutch: De Vliegende Hollander) is a legendary ghost ship which was said to never be able to make port, doomed to sail the oceans forever. The myth is likely to have originated from the 17th-century Golden Age of the Dutch East India Company (VOC)[1][2][3][4] and Dutch maritime power.[5][6][7] The oldest extant version of the legend has been dated to the late 18th century. According to the legend, if hailed by another ship, the crew of the Flying Dutchman was said to try to send messages to land, or to people long dead. Purported sightings in the 19th and 20th centuries claimed that the ship glowed with a ghostly light. In ocean lore, the sight of this phantom ship is a portent of doom. Contents 1 Origins 2 Reported sightings 3 Explanations as an optical illusion 4 Adaptations 4.1 In artworks and design 4.2 In television series and comics 4.3 In film 4.4 In literature 4.5 In opera and theatre 4.6 In music 4.7 In radio drama 4.8 In video games 4.9 In leisure 4.10 In aviation 4.11 In education 4.12 In Sailing 4.13 In sports 4.13.1 Baseball 4.13.2 Auto racing 4.13.3 Football 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Origins[edit] View of Table Bay (overlooked by Kaapstad, Dutch Cape Colony) with ships of the Dutch East India Company, c. 1683. In the 17th century, the size of the Dutch merchant fleet probably exceeded the combined fleets of England, France, Spain, Portugal, and Germany.[8][9][10] An 18th-century painting of a VOC ship with Table Mountain in the background, used by navigators as the landmark to sail around southern tip of Africa. Replica of an East Indiaman of the Dutch East India Company/United East Indies Company (VOC). The legend of the Flying Dutchman is likely to have originated from the 17th-century golden age of the VOC. The first print reference to the ship appears in Travels in various part of Europe, Asia and Africa during a series of thirty years and upward (1790) by John MacDonald: The weather was so stormy that the sailors said they saw the Flying Dutchman. The common story is that this Dutchman came to the Cape in distress of weather and wanted to get into harbour but could not get a pilot to conduct her and was lost and that ever since in very bad weather her vision appears.[11] The next literary reference appears in Chapter VI of A Voyage to Botany Bay (1795) (also known as A Voyage to New South Wales), attributed to George Barrington (1755–1804):[nb 1] I had often heard of the superstition of sailors respecting apparitions and doom, but had never given much credit to the report; it seems that some years since a Dutch man-of-war was lost off the Cape of Good Hope, and every soul on board perished; her consort weathered the gale, and arrived soon after at the Cape. Having refitted, and returning to Europe, they were assailed by a violent tempest nearly in the same latitude. In the night watch some of the people saw, or imagined they saw, a vessel standing for them under a press of sail, as though she would run them down: one in particular affirmed it was the ship that had foundered in the former gale, and that it must certainly be her, or the apparition of her; but on its clearing up, the object, a dark thick cloud, disappeared. Nothing could do away the idea of this phenomenon on the minds of the sailors; and, on their relating the circumstances when they arrived in port, the story spread like wild-fire, and the supposed phantom was called the Flying Dutchman. From the Dutch the English seamen got the infatuation, and there are very few Indiamen, but what has some one on board, who pretends to have seen the apparition.[12] The next literary reference introduces the motif of punishment for a crime, in Scenes of Infancy (Edinburgh, 1803) by John Leyden (1775–1811): It is a common superstition of mariners, that, in the high southern latitudes on the coast of Africa, hurricanes are frequently ushered in by the appearance of a spectre-ship, denominated the Flying Dutchman ... The crew of this vessel are supposed to have been guilty of some dreadful crime, in the infancy of navigation; and to have been stricken with pestilence ... and are ordained still to traverse the ocean on which they perished, till the period of their penance expire.[nb 2] Thomas Moore (1779–1852) places the vessel in the north Atlantic in his poem Written on passing Dead-man's Island in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Late in the evening, September, 1804:[13] "Fast gliding along, a gloomy bark / Her sails are full, though the wind is still, / And there blows not a breath her sails to fill." A footnote adds: "The above lines were suggested by a superstition very common among sailors, who call this ghost-ship, I think, 'the flying Dutch-man'." Sir Walter Scott (1771–1832), a friend of John Leyden's, was the first to refer to the vessel as a pirate ship, writing in the notes to Rokeby; a poem (first published December 1812) that the ship was "originally a vessel loaded with great wealth, on board of which some horrid act of murder and piracy had been committed" and that the apparition of the ship "is considered by the mariners as the worst of all possible omens". According to some sources, 17th-century Dutch captain Bernard Fokke is the model for the captain of the ghost ship.[14] Fokke was renowned for the speed of his trips from the Netherlands to Java and was suspected of being in league with the Devil. The first version of the legend as a story was printed in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine for May 1821,[15] which puts the scene as the Cape of Good Hope. This story introduces the name Captain Hendrick Van der Decken for the captain and the motifs (elaborated by later writers) of letters addressed to people long dead being offered to other ships for delivery, but if accepted will bring misfortune; and the captain having sworn to round the Cape of Good Hope though it should take until the day of judgment. She was an Amsterdam vessel and sailed from port seventy years ago. Her master's name was Van der Decken. He was a staunch seaman, and would have his own way in spite of the devil. For all that, never a sailor under him had reason to complain; though how it is on board with them nobody knows. The story is this: that in doubling the Cape they were a long day trying to weather the Table Bay. However, the wind headed them, and went against them more and more, and Van der Decken walked the deck, swearing at the wind. Just after sunset a vessel spoke him, asking him if he did not mean to go into the bay that night. Van der Decken replied: "May I be eternally damned if I do, though I should beat about here till the day of judgment." And to be sure, he never did go into that bay, for it is believed that he continues to beat about in these seas still, and will do so long enough. This vessel is never seen but with foul weather along with her.[16] Reported sightings[edit] There have been many reported or alleged sightings in the 19th and 20th centuries. A well-known sighting was by Prince George of Wales, the future King George V. He was on a three-year voyage during his late adolescence in 1880 with his elder brother Prince Albert Victor of Wales and their tutor John Neill Dalton. They temporarily shipped into HMS Inconstant after the damaged rudder was repaired in their original ship, the 4,000-tonne corvette Bacchante. The princes' log (indeterminate as to which prince, due to later editing before publication) records the following for the pre-dawn hours of 11 July 1881, off the coast of Australia in the Bass Strait between Melbourne and Sydney: July 11th. At 4 a.m. the Flying Dutchman crossed our bows. A strange red light as of a phantom ship all aglow, in the midst of which light the masts, spars and sails of a brig 200 yards distant stood out in strong relief as she came up on the port bow, where also the officer of the watch from the bridge clearly saw her, as did the quarterdeck midshipman, who was sent forward at once to the forecastle; but on arriving there was no vestige nor any sign whatever of any material ship was to be seen either near or right away to the horizon, the night being clear and the sea calm. Thirteen persons altogether saw her ... At 10.45 a.m. the ordinary seaman who had this morning reported the Flying Dutchman fell from the foretopmast crosstrees on to the topgallant forecastle and was smashed to atoms.[17] Nicholas Monsarrat, the novelist who wrote The Cruel Sea, described the phenomenon in the Pacific Ocean in his unfinished final book "Master Mariner", which was partly inspired by this tale (he lived and worked in South Africa after the war) and the story of the Wandering Jew. Explanations as an optical illusion[edit] Main articles: Mirage, Fata Morgana (mirage), and Looming and similar refraction phenomena Probably the most credible explanation is a superior mirage or Fata Morgana seen at sea. Book illustration showing superior mirages of two boats The news soon spread through the vessel that a phantom-ship with a ghostly crew was sailing in the air over a phantom-ocean, and that it was a bad omen, and meant that not one of them should ever see land again. The captain was told the wonderful tale, and coming on deck, he explained to the sailors that this strange appearance was caused by the reflection of some ship that was sailing on the water below this image, but at such a distance they could not see it. There were certain conditions of the atmosphere, he said, when the sun's rays could form a perfect picture in the air of objects on the earth, like the images one sees in glass or water, but they were not generally upright, as in the case of this ship, but reversed—turned bottom upwards. This appearance in the air is called a mirage. He told a sailor to go up to the foretop and look beyond the phantom-ship. The man obeyed, and reported that he could see on the water, below the ship in the air, one precisely like it. Just then another ship was seen in the air, only this one was a steamship, and was bottom-upwards, as the captain had said these mirages generally appeared. Soon after, the steamship itself came in sight. The sailors were now convinced, and never afterwards believed in phantom-ships.[18] Another optical effect known as looming occurs when rays of light are bent across different refractive indices. This could make a ship just off the horizon appear hoisted in the air.[19] Adaptations[edit] This article appears to contain trivial, minor, or unrelated references to popular culture. Please reorganize this content to explain the subject's impact on popular culture, providing citations to reliable, secondary sources, rather than simply listing appearances. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2020) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There is a 20-foot one-design high-performance two-person monohull racing dinghy named the Flying Dutchman (FD). It made its Olympic debut at the 1960 Summer Games competitions in the Gulf of Naples and is still one of the fastest racing dinghies in the world.[20] In artworks and design[edit] The Flying Dutchman has been captured in paintings by Albert Ryder, now in the Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington, D.C., and by Howard Pyle, whose painting of the Flying Dutchman is on exhibit at the Delaware Art Museum. In television series and comics[edit] Efteling Productions made a short movie to introduce the backstory of the Flying Dutchman and Captain 'Willem van der Decken'. Efteling Productions made in 2010 a documentary about the construction of the attraction 'The Flying Dutchman'. Scooby-Doo featured a Flying Dutchman ghost modeled after the illustrator Howard Pyle's 1900 depiction of the character "The Flying Dutchman" is both the name of a pirate ghost (a flying Dutchman) and his haunted pirate ship (The Flying Dutchman) in the Nickelodeon animated comedy series SpongeBob SquarePants. The former is voiced by Brian Doyle-Murray, and the latter is based on Queen Anne's Revenge. Carl Barks wrote and drew a 1959 comic book story where Uncle Scrooge, Donald Duck and Huey, Dewey, and Louie meet the Flying Dutchman.[21] Barks ultimately explains the "flying" ship as an optical illusion. In Eiichiro Oda's manga One Piece as well as the anime television series, Fishman Vander Decken IX (バンダー・デッケン九世, Bandā Dekken Kyūsei), a descendant of the original Captain Van der Decken, is the Flying Dutchman's current captain who appears as a major villain in the "Fishman Island" arc. He is an inversion of the normal legend, being a fish-man who has been cursed to never again be able to swim, as opposed to a human who can never set foot on land.[22] In Soul Eater, the Flying Dutchman is the soul of the ghost ship. In the 1967 Spider-Man cartoon episode "Return of the Flying Dutchman" the legend of the Flying Dutchman is used by Spider-Man's enemy Mysterio to frighten villagers and plunder their wealth. In 1967, the Flying Dutchman was featured in the Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea episode "Cave of the Dead". In a 1959 episode of Rod Serlings Judgment Night (The Twilight Zone) a cruel and merciless U-Captain that sank a Allied passenger ship in World War II finds himself doomed to forever relieve the experience as a "Flying Dutchman" passenger of the torpedoed ship An episode called "The Arrival" (1961, written by Rod Serling) of the television series The Twilight Zone depicts an airplane that arrives at a busy airport. The airplane is discovered to have no crew, passengers, or luggage. At the tail end of the prior episode ("Two"), Rod Serling advertises "The Arrival" as a retelling of the Flying Dutchman tale. It also gets a mention in the closing narration of the episode "Death Ship". An episode called "Lone Survivor" (1971, written by Rod Serling) of the television series Night Gallery has the story of a Flying Dutchman survivor of the RMS Titanic who because of his cowardice is forever doomed to be picked up by ships that will sink...first the RMS Lusitania in 1915 and then by the Andria Doria in 1956. In a 1976 episode of Land of the Lost, the Marshalls discover the captain of a mysterious ship that appears in "the mist". Later in the episode, it is discovered that the ship is the Flying Dutchman. In the 1982 Fantasy Island episode "A Very Strange Affair; The Sailor", Peter Graves plays a portrayal of the Flying Dutchman in the hopes of breaking his curse by meeting someone who is willing to die for him. In 2001, Andromeda aired a first-season episode "The Mathematics of Tears", in which the Flying Dutchman figured explicitly in the plot. In an episode of Supernatural a ghost ship heralds the death of the victims of a first mate's ghost. The ship is compared to the Flying Dutchman by Sam Winchester. In the upcoming Halloween special of Santiago of the Seas, a Ghost Captain can scare Santiago and his crew, voiced by Mark Hamill. In film[edit] The story was dramatised in the 1951 film Pandora and the Flying Dutchman, starring James Mason (who plays the Dutch Captain Hendrick Van der Decken) and Ava Gardner (who plays Pandora). In this version, the Flying Dutchman is a man, not a ship. The two-hour long film, scripted by its director Albert Lewin, sets the main action on the Mediterranean coast of Spain during the summer of 1930. Centuries earlier the Dutchman had killed his wife, wrongly believing her to be unfaithful. At his trial he is unrepentant and curses God. Providence condemned him to roam the seas until he found the true meaning of love. In the only plot device taken from earlier versions of the story, once every seven years the Dutchman is allowed ashore for six months to search for a woman who will love him enough to die for him, releasing him from his curse, and he finds her in Pandora. Disney's Flying Dutchman prop used in Pirates of the Caribbean moored at Castaway Cay cruise ship terminal In the Pirates of the Caribbean films, the ship made its first appearance in Dead Man's Chest (2006) under the command of the fictional captain, Davy Jones. The story and attributes of the ship were inspired by the actual Flying Dutchman of nautical lore. In literature[edit] The 1797–98 poem by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, contains a similar account of a ghost ship, which may have been influenced by the tale of the Flying Dutchman.[23][24] One of the first Flying Dutchman short stories was titled "Vanderdecken's Message Home; or, the Tenacity of Natural Affection" and was published in Blackwood's during 1821.[25] Dutch poet J. Slauerhoff published a number of related poems, particularly in his 1928 volume Eldorado.[26][27] This story was adapted in the English melodrama The Flying Dutchman; or the Phantom Ship: a Nautical Drama, in three acts (1826)[nb 3] by Edward Fitzball (1792–1873), music by George Rodwell,[28] and the novel The Phantom Ship (1839)[nb 4] by Frederick Marryat. This in turn was later adapted as Het Vliegend Schip (The Flying Ship) by the Dutch clergyman, A. H. C. Römer. In Marryat's version, Terneuzen, in the Netherlands, is described as the home of the captain, who is called "Van der Decken" ("of the decks"). Another adaptation was The Flying Dutchman on Tappan Sea by Washington Irving (1855), in which the captain is named Ramhout van Dam. Irving had already used the story (based on Moore's poem) in his Bracebridge Hall (1822). Hedvig Ekdal describes visions of the Flying Dutchman from the books she reads in the attic in Henrik Ibsen's The Wild Duck (1884). John Boyle O'Reilly's The Flying Dutchman was first published in The Wild Goose, a handwritten newspaper produced by Fenian convicts being transported to Western Australia in 1867.[29] The Death Ship, by W. Clark Russell, was published in 1888. It is narrated by Geoffrey Fenton, descendant of Edward Fenton, second mate of the English ship Saracen on a voyage to the East Indies in 1796. Fenton's ship encounters the Flying Dutchman, and an accident leaves him stranded aboard the cursed ship with her ghostly crew. The captain, Cornelius Vanderdecken, tells Fenton that his ship, the Braave, sailed from Batavia in 1653. I looked at him as closely as I durst. His eyes were extraordinarily piercing and passionate, with the cruel brilliance in them such as may be noticed in the insane; the lower part of his face was hidden in hair, but the skin of as much of it as was visible, for his cap was dragged low down upon his brows, was pale, of a haggard sallowness, expressed best in paintings of the dead where time has produced the original whiteness of the pigment. It was impossible that I should have observed this in him in the mani-coloured lamplight of the preceding night. Yet did not his graveyard complexion detract from the majesty and imperiousness of his mien and port. I could readily conceive that the defiance of his heart would be hell-like in obstinacy, and that here was a man whose pride and passions would qualify him for a foremost place among the most daring of those fallen spirits of whom our glorious poet has written. British author Brian Jacques wrote a trilogy of fantasy/young adult novels concerning two reluctant members of the Dutchman's crew, a young boy and his dog, who were swept off the ship by a wave on the night the ship was cursed; however, the same angel who pronounced the curse on the ship and crew appeared to them and blessed them, charging them to help those in need . The first novel was titled Castaways of the Flying Dutchman and was first published by Puffin Books in 2001. The second was titled The Angel's Command and was released by Puffin in 2003. The third and final book of the trilogy (due to Jacques' death in 2011) was titled Voyage of Slaves and was released by Puffin in 2006. In the novel The Flying Dutchman (2013) by the Russian novelist Anatoly Kudryavitsky, the ghost ship rebuilds itself from an old barge abandoned on the bank of a big Russian river, and offers itself as a refuge to a persecuted musicologist. The comic fantasy Flying Dutch by Tom Holt is a version of the Flying Dutchman story. In this version, the Dutchman is not a ghost ship but crewed by immortals who can only visit land once every seven years when the unbearable smell that is a side-effect of the elixir of life wears off. The Roger Zelazny short story "And Only I Am Escaped to Tell Thee" tells of a sailor who escapes from the Flying Dutchman and is rescued by sailors who welcome him to the Mary Celeste. Ward Moore in his 1951 story "Flying Dutchman"[30] used the myth as a metaphor for an automated bomber plane which continues to fly over an Earth where humanity long since totally destroyed itself and all life in a nuclear war. In Craig Alanson's novel series Expeditionary Force, the Flying Dutchman is a large alien starship that has been commandeered by the human protagonist Joe Bishop, an ancient AI and a multi-national military and civilian crew - who named the ship. In the sci-fi novel series The Expanse by James S.A. Corey, a mysterious alien presence causes entire ships to disappear when passing through transdimensional gateways. Until humanity came to understand the exact nature of the phenomenon, ships lost in this way were described as "going Dutchman". In opera and theatre[edit] Depiction of Richard Wagner's Opera Der fliegende Holländer Richard Wagner's opera The Flying Dutchman (1843) is adapted from an episode in Heinrich Heine's satirical novel The Memoirs of Mister von Schnabelewopski (Aus den Memoiren des Herrn von Schnabelewopski) (1833), in which a character attends a theatrical performance of The Flying Dutchman in Amsterdam. Heine had first briefly used the legend in his Reisebilder: Die Nordsee (Pictures of Travel: the North Sea) (1826), which simply repeats from Blackwood's Magazine the features of the vessel being seen in a storm and sending letters addressed to persons long since dead. In his 1833 elaboration, it was once thought that it may have been based on Fitzball's play, which was playing at the Adelphi Theatre in London, but the run had ended on 7 April 1827 and Heine did not arrive in London until the 14th.[nb 5] Heine was the first author to introduce the chance of salvation through a woman's devotion and the opportunity to set foot on land every seven years to seek a faithful wife. This imaginary play, unlike Fitzball's play, which has the Cape of Good Hope location, in Heine's account is transferred to the North Sea off Scotland. Wagner's opera was similarly planned to take place off the coast of Scotland, although during the final rehearsals he transferred the action to another part of the North Sea, off Norway. Pierre-Louis Dietsch composed an opera Le vaisseau fantôme, ou Le maudit des mers ("The Phantom Ship, or The Accursed of the Sea"), which was first performed on 9 November 1842 at the Paris Opera. The libretto by Paul Foucher and H. Révoil was based on Walter Scott's The Pirate as well as Captain Marryat's The Phantom Ship and other sources, although Wagner thought it was based on the scenario of his own opera, which he had just sold to the Opera. The similarity of Dietsch's opera to Wagner's is slight, although Wagner's assertion is often repeated. Berlioz thought Le vaisseau fantôme too solemn, but other reviewers were more favourable.[31][32] Dutchman (play), a short play by Amiri Baraka, was first performed in 1964. In music[edit] In 1949 RCA Victor, inventors of the single 45 RPM format, released as one of their first 45s a recording of the legend in song in bandleader Hugo Winterhalter's "The Flying Dutchman", sung as a sea shanty. Tori Amos (artist) “Flying Dutchman” “Little Earthquakes 2015 remaster” Captain Video (Early TV serial) introduction has the overture to Wagner's "The Flying Dutchman" as background music. The musical group “The Band “, on their album entitled “The Band”, from 1969, refer to The Flying Dutchman in the lyrics of their song “Rockin’ Chair”. Jethro Tull refer to the Flying Dutchman with a song of the same name from their 1979 album Stormwatch. Tori Amos refers to the Flying Dutchman in her 1992 single B side "Flying Dutchman", the A side being "China". It was re-released in 2012 on her album Gold Dust and performed on The Gold Dust Orchestral Tour. Jimmy Buffett refers to the Flying Dutchman in his 1995 song "Remittance Man" on the album Barometer Soup. Rufus Wainwright refers to the Flying Dutchman in his song "Flying Dutchman" on the album Poses. Social Waste, a Greek rap band, refers to the Flying Dutchman (Ιπτάμενος Ολλανδός) in their song "Του κόσμου τα λιμάνια" (World's Harbors). The song was released on their album "Στη γιορτή της Ουτοπίας" (Feast of Utopia). Dutch symphonic black metal band Carach Angren wrote a concept album about the Flying Dutchman entitled Death Came Through a Phantom Ship. God Dethroned, a Dutch death metal band, featured the song "Soul Capture 1562" about the Flying Dutchman on their album Bloody Blasphemy. In radio drama[edit] The tale was the subject of the radio drama The Witch's Tale broadcast on 1 February 1932. The story was adapted by Judith French into a play, The Dutch Mariner, broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on 13 April 2003.[33] In video games[edit] In the 1993 multiplatform game Alone in the Dark 2, fictional detective Edward Carnby investigates a missing girl who he discovers has been kidnapped by the undead One-Eyed Jack who, in the game, is captain of the undead crew of The Flying Dutchman. The Flying Dutchman is depicted in Terraria as a flying wooden ship with four destructible, broadside cannons. It appears within the Pirate Invasion as a boss enemy. In 2017, the online FPS game Paladins added a Flying Dutchman skin for its Makoa character.[34] In 2020, the online FPS game Overwatch added a Flying Dutchman skin for its Dutch character, Sigma. In leisure[edit] Flying Dutchman rollercoaster at Efteling amusement park The Efteling amusement park in the Netherlands has a roller coaster called The Flying Dutchman which features the captain named Willem van der Decken (nl). Worlds of Fun amusement park in Kansas City, Missouri has a swinging boat ride called The Flying Dutchman. Six Flags over Georgia, an amusement park located in Austell, Georgia also had a swinging boat ride called The Flying Dutchman which was added in 1980. In aviation[edit] KLM using the slogan The Dutch aviation pioneer and an aircraft manufacturer Anthony Fokker was nicknamed The Flying Dutchman.[35] KLM Royal Dutch Airlines references the endless traveling aspect of the story by having The Flying Dutchman painted on the rear sides of all its aircraft with regular livery. In education[edit] The nickname of Lebanon Valley College is "The Flying Dutchmen", and its mascot "The Flying Dutchman". The nickname references the college's location in the Pennsylvania Dutch Country. Hofstra University on Long Island, New York was unofficially named "The Flying Dutchman" and has many references to Dutch culture around the university including residence halls. Hope College in Holland, Michigan is also the home of "The Flying Dutchman" because it was founded by settlers from the Netherlands in 1866. In Sailing[edit] Flying Dutchman Dinghy In sports[edit] Baseball[edit] Honus Wagner was nicknamed "The Flying Dutchman" due to his superb speed and German heritage. Auto racing[edit] Dutch driver Arie Luyendyk, two-time champion of the Indianapolis 500 and still record-holder for the quickest time ever run to qualify for the race in 1996, was nicknamed the Flying Dutchman by fans and media. Football[edit] Dutch football player Dennis Bergkamp was nicknamed "the Non-Flying Dutchman", because of his fear of flying. See also[edit] 90377 Sedna – nicknamed the Flying Dutchman Caleuche Chasse-galerie Peter Rugg Wandering Jew Wild Hunt List of ghosts Notes[edit] ^ George Barrington (originally Waldron) was tried at the Old Bailey in London in September 1790 for picking pockets and sentenced to transportation for seven years. He embarked on the convict transport Active which sailed from Portsmouth on 27 March 1791 and arrived at Port Jackson (Sydney), just to the north of Botany Bay, on 26 September, having anchored briefly at Table Bay in very late June. The various accounts of his voyage and activities in New South Wales appear to be literary forgeries by publishers capitalizing both on his notoriety and in public interest for the new colony, combining turns of phrase from his trial speeches with plagiarized genuine accounts of other writers concerning Botany Bay. See George Barrington's Voyage to Botany Bay edited by Suzanne Rickard (Leicester University Press, 2001). A Voyage to Botany Bay and A Voyage to New South Wales, both issued in 1795, were revamped versions of An Impartial and Circumstantial Narrative of the Present State of Botany Bay, which had appeared in 1793–94, but which did not include the Flying Dutchman reference. ^ Leyden says that Chaucer, echoing Dante's account of the Second Circle of Hell in his Inferno, alludes to a punishment of a similar kind in his poem The Parlement of Foules: "And breakers of the laws, sooth to sain, / And lecherous folk, after that they been dead, / Shall whirl about the world alway in pain, / Till many a world be passed out of dread." ^ The 48-page text published c. 1829 acknowledges Blackwood's 1821 story as the source, although the two have little in common. ^ Originally published in instalments in the New Monthly Magazine (London) March–October 1837, January–February 1838 & February–August 1839 before appearing in book form in 1839. Marryat's gripping story added no new elements to the legend. ^ The play was not published until its revival in 1829. On all these points see Musical Times (London), March 1986, p. 133. References[edit] ^ Brook, Timothy: Vermeer's Hat: The Seventeenth Century and the Dawn of the Global World. (Bloomsbury Press, 2008, pp. 288, ISBN 978-1596915992) ^ Sayle, Murray (5 April 2001). "Japan goes Dutch". London Review of Books. Vol. 23 no. 7. The Netherlands United East Indies Company (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, or VOC), founded in 1602, was the world's first multinational, joint-stock, limited liability corporation – as well as its first government-backed trading cartel. Our own East India Company, founded in 1600, remained a coffee-house clique until 1657, when it, too, began selling shares, not in individual voyages, but in the Company itself, by which time its Dutch rival was by far the biggest commercial enterprise the world had known. ^ Hagel, John; Brown, John Seely (12 March 2013). "Institutional Innovation: Creating Smarter Organizations". Deloitte Insights. [...] In 1602, the Dutch East India Company was formed. It was a new type of institution: the first multinational company, and the first to issue public stock. These innovations allowed a single company to mobilize financial resources from a large number of investors and create ventures at a scale that had previously only been possible for monarchs. ^ Taylor, Bryan (6 Nov 2013). "The Rise and Fall of the Largest Corporation in History". BusinessInsider.com. Retrieved 8 August 2017. ^ Glete, Jan (2001), 'The Dutch Navy, Dutch State Formation and the Rise of Dutch Maritime Supremacy'. (Paper for the Anglo-American Conference for Historians: The Sea, 4–6 July 2001, University of London, Institute of Historical Research). In Swedish historian Jan Glete's words, "From the late sixteenth to the early eighteenth century... Dutch maritime activities are normally described as superior to those of other nations and proofs of the Dutch society's ability to combine technology, entrepreneurship and low transaction costs. The Dutch was in this period the naval enemy or ally of Spain, Portugal, England, France, Denmark-Norway and Sweden. In the naval histories of these countries, the Dutch navy is treated with respect, admiration or envy. In 1639, it won one of the most decisive victories ever achieved in a major fleet contest against Spain-Portugal in the Channel, and in 1658–59 it saved Denmark from possible extinction as an independent state by Sweden. In 1667, it attacked the English fleet in its bases, in 1672–73 it waged a very successful defensive campaign against the combined fleets of France and England [the two battles of Schooneveld and Texel], and in 1688 it achieved an invasion of England in an excellently administrated surprise mobilisation of a major fleet. In a European perspective, the Dutch navy is a strong candidate for the position as the most successful naval organisation of the seventeenth century." ^ Chua, Amy: Day of Empire: How Hyperpowers Rise to Global Dominance – and Why They Fall. (New York: Anchor Books, 2009) ^ Schultz, Isaac (24 October 2019). "The World's Most Famous Ghost Ship Is an Enduring Symbol of Empire". Atlas Obscura. Retrieved 16 June 2020. ^ Wallerstein, Immanuel (2011). The Modern World-System II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of the European World-Economy, 1600–1750. (New York: Academic Press, 1980), p. 43–44. As Immanuel Wallerstein (1980) remarked, the Dutch shipbuilding industry was "of modern dimensions, inclining strongly toward standardised, repetitive methods. It was highly mechanized and used many labor-saving devices – wind-powered sawmills, powered feeders for saw, block and tackles, great cranes to move heavy timbers – all of which increased productivity." ^ Lunsford, Virginia W.: Piracy and Privateering in the Golden Age Netherlands. (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005), p. 69. "By seventeenth century standards," as Richard Unger affirms, Dutch shipbuilding "was a massive industry and larger than any shipbuilding industry which had preceded it." ^ Moore, Jason W. (2010). "'Amsterdam is Standing on Norway' Part II: The Global North Atlantic in the Ecological Revolution of the Long Seventeenth Century," Journal of Agrarian Change, 10, 2, p. 188–227 ^ MacDonald, John (1790). Forbes, London (ed.). Travels in various part of Europe, Asia and Africa during a series of thirty years and upward. p. 276. ^ Barrington 2004, p. 30 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBarrington2004 (help) ^ Published in Epistles, Odes, and other poems (London, 1806) ^ Eyers, Jonathan (2011). Don't Shoot the Albatross!: Nautical Myths and Superstitions. A&C Black, London, UK. ISBN 978-1-4081-3131-2. ^ The author has been identified as John Howison (fl. 1821–1859) of the East India Company. See Alan Lang Strout, A Bibliography of Articles in Blackwood's Magazine 1817–1825 (1959, p. 78). ^ "Source of the Legend of The Flying Dutchman". Music with Ease. 2008. Retrieved 2008-02-23. ^ Rose, Kenneth (1988) King George V ^ Round-about Rambles in Lands of Fact and Fancy by Frank R. Stockton ^ Meyer-Arendt 1995, p. 431 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFMeyer-Arendt1995 (help) ^ Portsmouth tables Archived 2012-02-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ Carl Barks (March 1959). "Uncle Scrooge – The Flying Dutchman". Retrieved 2014-12-23. ^ http://www.ryu-anime.com/anime/watch/subbed/one-piece-episode-526 ^ Fulmer, O. Bryan (October 1969). "The Ancient Mariner and the Wandering Jew". Studies in Philology. 66 (5): 797–815. JSTOR 4173656. ^ John Clute; John Grant, eds. (1999). The encyclopedia of fantasy. Macmillan. p. 210. ISBN 978-0-312-19869-5. Excerpt available at Google Books. ^ Barger, Andrew (2011). The Best Ghost Stories 1800-1849. USA: Bottletree Books LLC. p. 71. ISBN 978-1-933747-33-0. Excerpt available at Google Books. ^ Miedema, H.T.J. (1951–1952). "De vliegende Hollander als antilegende" [The flying Dutchman as anti-legend]. Roeping. 28. Retrieved 25 February 2018. ^ Uri, S. P. "De Vliegende Hollander in de nieuwere Nederlandse poezie" [The Flying Dutchman in the newer Dutch poetry]. De Nieuwe Taalgids (in Dutch). 48: 241–51. Retrieved 25 February 2018. ^ Lee, Sidney, ed. (1897). "Rodwell, George Herbert Buonaparte" . Dictionary of National Biography. 49. London: Smith, Elder & Co. ^ O'Reilly, John Boyle (1867). The Flying Dutchman (O'Reilly) . p. 10 (Christmas Number)  – via Wikisource. [ scan ] ^ David Seed (31 October 2013). American Science Fiction and the Cold War: Literature and Film. Routledge. p. 126. ISBN 978-1-135-95382-9. ^ Cooper & Millington 1992. ^ Cooper & Millington 2001. ^ The Dutch Mariner, radiolistings.co.uk. Retrieved 2015-09-19. ^ https://paladins.gamepedia.com/Dutchman_Makoa_voice_lines ^ Fokker, Anthony and Bruce Gould. Flying Dutchman: The Life of Anthony Fokker. London: George Routledge, 1931. Bibliography[edit] Barrington, George (2004) [1795], Voyage to Botany Bay, Sydney University Press, ISBN 1-920897-20-8 Meyer-Arendt, Jurgen (1995) [1972], Introduction to Modern and Classical Optics, Prentice-Hall, Inc., ISBN 0-13-124356-X External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flying Dutchman (ship). Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Flying Dutchman" . Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, May 1821 On the history and sightings of the Flying Dutchman Mainly about Wagner's possible sources Melodramatic Possessions: The Flying Dutchman, South Africa and the Imperial Stage ca. 1830 The Phantom Ship by Marryat at Project Gutenberg The Death Ship by W. Clark Russell at Project Gutenberg USA premiere of 1841 critical edition of Wagner's The Flying Dutchman at Boston Lyric Opera, April & May 2013 "The Flying Dutchman, Harbinger of Watery Doom" article on Atlas Obscura [1] v t e Flying Dutchman Stage The Flying Dutchman (opera) discography Music Overture of 'The Flying Dutchman' as played at sight by a bad spa orchestra at the well at 7 in the morning (1925 composition) Death Came Through a Phantom Ship (2010 album) Film Pandora and the Flying Dutchman (1951) Literature The Phantom Ship (1839) Flying Dutch (1991) Castaways of the Flying Dutchman (2001) The Angel's Command (2003) Voyage of Slaves (2006) Related Flying Dutchman (Pirates of the Caribbean) v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category v t e Superstition Main topics Amulet Evil eye Luck Omen Talismans Myth and ritual Lists List of superstitions List of lucky symbols List of bad luck signs Sailors' superstitions Theatrical superstitions Africa Buda Gris-gris Sampy Sleeping child Americas Ascalapha odorata Carranca Cooties Curupira Djucu Fortune cookie Groundhog Day I'noGo tied Oscar love curse Susto White lighter myth Witch window Asia Superstition in India Superstition in Pakistan Japanese superstitions Bhoot (ghost) Chhaupadi Churel Ghosts in Bengali culture Jackal's horn Kuai Kuai culture Muhurta Navaratna Nazar battu Pichal Peri Puppy pregnancy syndrome Akabeko Kanai Anzen Maneki-neko Okiagari-koboshi Omamori Fan death Agimat Arbularyo Barang Kulam Lihi Pagtatawas Pasma Usog Kuman Thong Palad khik Takrut Nang Kwak White elephant Curse of 39 Jin Chan Numbers in Chinese culture Superstitions of Malaysian Chinese Europe August curse Barbary macaques in Gibraltar Bayern-luck Blarney Stone Cimaruta Cornicello The Goodman's Croft Himmelsbrief Icelandic magical staves In bocca al lupo Kitchen witch Klabautermann Mooncalf Nazar Need-fire Painted pebbles Powder of sympathy Rabbit rabbit rabbit Ravens of the Tower of London Russian traditions and superstitions Spilling water for luck The Scottish Play Troll cross Tycho Brahe days Witch post Wolfssegen General 11:11 4 (Four-leaf clover, Tetraphobia) 7 (Seventh son of a seventh son) 8 9 13 (Friday the 13th, The Thirteen Club, Thirteenth floor, Triskaidekaphobia) 108 111 666 (Number of the Beast) Ace of spades Auspicious wedding dates Baseball superstition Beginner's luck Black cat Bread and butter Break a leg Chain letter Cramp-ring Curse Davy Jones' Locker Dead man's hand End-of-the-day betting effect Fear of frogs Fear of ghosts First-foot Flying Dutchman Four Eleven Forty Four Gambler's conceit Good luck charm Human sacrifice Jinx Knocking on wood Law of contagion Literomancy Lock of hair Maternal impression Miasma theory Nelson Numismatic charm Penny Rabbit's foot Rainmaking Ship sponsor Shoes on a table Sign of the horns Something old Spilling salt Statue rubbing Three on a match Threshold Toi toi toi 27 Club Wishing well Witch ball Witching hour Related Apotropaic magic Astrology and science Coincidence Debunker Divination Folk religion Fortune-telling Magic and religion Magical thinking Numerology Perceptions of religious imagery in natural phenomena Post hoc ergo propter hoc Traditional medicine Urban legend Jew Muslim v t e Piracy Periods Ancient Mediterranean Golden Age Republic of Pirates Libertatia 21st century Types of pirate Albanian piracy Baltic Slavic pirates Barbary pirates (corsairs) Brethren of the Coast Buccaneers Cilician pirates Cossack pirates Fillibusters Jewish pirates Moro pirates Narentines Privateers (confederate privateer) River pirate Sea Beggars Sea Dogs Sindhi corsairs Timber pirate Ushkuyniks Uskoks Vikings Wokou Areas Anglo-Turkish piracy Barataria Bay Barbary Coast British Virgin Islands Caribbean Falcon Lake Gulf of Guinea Indonesia Lagos Lake Nicaragua Lundy Persian Gulf Port Royal Saint-Malo Salé Somali Coast South China Coast Spanish Main Strait of Malacca Sulu Sea Tortuga Major figures Pirates Mansel Alcantra Louis-Michel Aury Joseph Baker Hayreddin Barbarossa Joseph Barss Samuel Bellamy Charlotte de Berry Black Caesar Blackbeard Eli Boggs Stede Bonnet Anne Bonny Hippolyte Bouchard Abshir Boyah Roche Braziliano Henri Caesar Cai Qian Cheung Po Tsai Ching Shih Chui A-poo Roberto Cofresí William Dampier Diabolito Peter Easton Edward England Henry Every Alexandre Exquemelin Fūma Kotarō Vincenzo Gambi Gan Ning Charles Gibbs Pedro Gilbert Nathaniel Gordon Laurens de Graaf Michel de Grammont Calico Jack Rahmah ibn Jabir Al Jalhami Jørgen Jørgensen Shirahama Kenki William Kidd Jean Lafitte Lai Choi San François le Clerc Liang Daoming Limahong Samuel Hall Lord John Hawkins Bully Hayes Piet Pieterszoon Hein Moses Cohen Henriques Albert W. Hicks Nicholas van Hoorn Benjamin Hornigold Pierre Lafitte Olivier Levasseur Edward Low Hendrick Lucifer John Newland Maffitt Samuel Mason Henry Morgan Shap-ng-tsai François l'Olonnais Samuel Pallache Lawrence Prince Redbeard Bartholomew Roberts Dan Seavey Benito de Soto Klaus Störtebeker Henry Strangways Wang Zhi Dominique You Zheng Jing Zheng Qi Zheng Yi Zheng Zhilong Pirate hunters Pedro Menéndez de Avilés Luis Fajardo Angelo Emo Richard Avery Hornsby Jose Campuzano-Polanco Robert Maynard Chaloner Ogle Pompey Woodes Rogers David Porter James Brooke Miguel Enríquez Pirate ships Adventure Galley Fancy Flying Dutchman Ganj-i-Sawai Queen Anne's Revenge Quedagh Merchant Saladin Whydah Gally Marquis of Havana Ambrose Light York Pirate battles and incidents Jiajing wokou raids Turkish Abductions Chepo Expedition Battle of Mandab Strait Battle of Pianosa Blockade of Charleston Battle of Cape Fear River Battle of Ocracoke Inlet Capture of the sloop William Sack of Campeche Attack on Veracruz Raid on Cartagena Battle of Cape Lopez Capture of the schooner Fancy Persian Gulf Campaign Battle of New Orleans Anti-piracy in the Aegean Anti-piracy in the West Indies Capture of the schooner Bravo Action of 9 November 1822 Capture of the sloop Anne Battle of Doro Passage Falklands Expedition Great Lakes Patrol Pirate attacks in Borneo Balanguingui Expedition Battle of Tysami Battle of Tonkin River Battle of Nam Quan Battle of Ty-ho Bay Battle of the Leotung Antelope incident North Star affair Battle off Mukah Salvador Pirates Battle of Boca Teacapan Capture of the Ambrose Light Irene incident 1985 Lahad Datu ambush Operation Enduring Freedom – HOA Action of 18 March 2006 Action of 3 June 2007 Action of 28 October 2007 Dai Hong Dan incident Operation Atalanta Carré d'As IV incident Action of 11 November 2008 Action of 9 April 2009 Maersk Alabama hijacking Operation Ocean Shield Action of 23 March 2010 Action of 30 March 2010 Action of 1 April 2010 Action of 5 April 2010 MV Moscow University hijacking Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden Operation Dawn 8: Gulf of Aden Beluga Nomination incident Battle off Minicoy Island Quest incident MT Zafirah hijacking MT Orkim Harmony hijacking Slave trade African slave trade Atlantic slave trade Barbary slave trade Blockade of Africa East African slave trade Trans-Saharan slave trade African Slave Trade Patrol Capture of the Providentia Capture of the Presidente Capture of the El Almirante Capture of the Marinerito Capture of the Veloz Passagera Capture of the brig Brillante Amistad Incident Capture of the Emanuela Fictional pirates Tom Ayrton Barbe Rouge Hector Barbossa Captain Blood Captain Crook Captain Flint José Gaspar Captain Hook Don Karnage Monkey D. Luffy Captain Nemo Captain Pugwash Red Rackham Captain Sabertooth Sandokan Long John Silver Jack Sparrow Captain Stingaree Roronoa Zoro Edward Kenway Nami Miscellaneous Truce of Ratisbon Piracy Act 1698 Piracy Act 1717 Piracy Act 1837 Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law Child pirate Golden Age of Piracy Jolly Roger skull and crossbones Walking the plank Treasure map Buried treasure Pirate booty No purchase, no pay Marooning Pirate code Pirate utopia Victual Brothers Pirate Round Libertatia Sack of Baltimore A General History of the Pyrates Mutiny Pegleg Eyepatch Letter of marque Davy Jones' Locker Air pirate Space pirate Meta Lists Pirates Privateers Timeline of piracy Pirate films Women in piracy Fictional pirates In popular culture List of ships attacked by Somali pirates Categories Piracy Pirates By nationality Barbary pirates Female pirates Piracy by year Fictional pirates Literature Treasure Island Facing the Flag On Stranger Tides Jim Hawkins and the Curse of Treasure Island Castaways of the Flying Dutchman The Angel's Command Voyage of Slaves Long John Silver Pirate Latitudes Silver: Return to Treasure Island Category Portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125