This article is about the concept in the Christian Bible. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Figures in the New Testament believed to start the apocalypse Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, an 1887 painting by Viktor Vasnetsov. From left to right are Death, Famine, War, and Conquest; the Lamb is at the top. Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism (Interpretations of Revelation) Futurism Preterism Idealism Dispensationalism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath Rapture Posttribulation Rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Heaven and New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (often referred to as the Four Horsemen) are figures in Christian scriptures, appearing in the New Testament's final book, Revelation, an apocalypse written by John of Patmos, as well as in the Old Testament's prophetic Book of Zechariah, and in the Book of Ezekiel, where they are named as punishments from God. Revelation 6 tells of a book/scroll in God's right hand that is sealed with seven seals. The Lamb of God/Lion of Judah opens the first four of the six seals, which summons four beings that ride out on white, red, black, and pale horses. To Zechariah, they are described as "the ones whom the Lord has sent to patrol the earth" causing it to rest quietly. Ezekiel lists them as "sword, famine, wild beasts, and plague." In John's revelation, the first horseman is on a white horse, carrying a bow, and given a crown, riding forward as a figure of Conquest,[1] perhaps invoking Pestilence, Christ, or the Antichrist. The second carries a sword and rides a red horse and is the creator of War.[2] The third is a food merchant riding upon a black horse, symbolizing Famine.[3] The fourth and final horse is pale green, and upon it rides Death accompanied by Hades.[4] "They were given authority over a quarter of the earth, to kill with sword, famine, and plague, and by means of the beasts of the earth."[5] The Christian apocalyptic vision is that the Four Horsemen are to set a divine end time upon the world as harbingers of the Last Judgment.[1][6] Contents 1 White Horse 1.1 As Christ, the Gospel, or the Holy Spirit 1.2 As the Antichrist 1.3 As Roman Empire prosperity 1.4 As war 1.5 As infectious disease 2 Red Horse 2.1 As empire division 3 Black Horse 3.1 As imperial oppression 4 Pale Horse 4.1 Destroying an empire 5 Interpretations 5.1 Christological interpretation 5.2 Prophetic interpretation 5.3 Historicist interpretation 5.4 Preterist interpretation 5.5 LDS interpretation 5.6 Other interpretations 6 Other Biblical references 6.1 Zechariah 6.2 Ezekiel 7 See also 8 References 9 External links White Horse[edit] See also: White horse (mythology) For other uses of the term "White Rider", see White rider. The first Horseman, Conquest on the White Horse as depicted in the Bamberg Apocalypse (1000–1020). The first "living creature" (with halo) is seen in the upper right. Then I saw when the Lamb broke one of the six seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying as with a voice of thunder, "Come." I looked, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it had a bow; and a crown was given to him, and he went out conquering and to conquer. — Revelation 6:1–2 New American Standard Bible [7] Based on the above passage, a common translation into English is the rider of the White Horse (sometimes referred to as the White Rider). He is thought to carry a bow (Greek τόξο, toxo) and wear a victor's crown (Greek stephanos). As Christ, the Gospel, or the Holy Spirit[edit] Albrecht Dürer, Knight, Death and the Devil, 1513 Irenaeus, an influential Christian theologian of the 2nd century, was among the first to interpret this Horseman as Christ himself, his white horse representing the successful spread of the gospel.[3] Various scholars have since supported this notion,[8] citing the later appearance, in Revelation 19, of Christ mounted on a white horse, appearing as The Word of God. Furthermore, earlier in the New Testament, the Book of Mark indicates that the advance of the gospel may indeed precede and foretell the apocalypse.[3][9] The color white also tends to represent righteousness in the Bible, and Christ is in other instances portrayed as a conqueror.[3][9] Besides Christ, the Horseman could represent the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit was understood to have come upon the Apostles at Pentecost after Jesus' departure from Earth. The appearance of the Lion in Revelation 5 shows the triumphant arrival of Jesus in Heaven, and the first Horseman could represent the sending of the Holy Spirit by Jesus and the advance of the gospel of Jesus Christ.[10] As the Antichrist[edit] While for nearly nineteen centuries Christians had thought that the first horseman was a positive figure representing either Christ or the Gospel, a completely different interpretation of this character emerged in 1866[11] when C.F. Wimpel defended the first hypothesis that he was the Antichrist (and more precisely according to him Napoleon Bonaparte).[12] It was taken over from the next generation in the United States by R. F. Franklin in 1898[13] and W. C. Stevens in 1928[14] and was then very successful in evangelical circles until today, for example with Pastor Billy Graham, for whom it was the Antichrist or false prophets in general.[15] As Roman Empire prosperity[edit] Four horsemen, by Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld, 1860 According to Edward Bishop Elliott's interpretation, that the Four Horsemen represent a prophecy of the subsequent history of the Roman Empire, the white color of this horse signifies triumph, prosperity and health in the political Roman body. For the next 80 or 90 years succeeding the banishment of the apostle John to Patmos covering the successive reigns of the emperors Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian and the two Antonines (Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius), a golden age of prosperity, union, civil liberty and good government unstained with civil blood unfolded. The agents of this prosperity personified by the rider of the white horse are these five emperors wearing crowns that reigned with absolute authority and power under the guidance of virtue and wisdom, the armies being restrained by their firm and gentle hands.[16] This interpretation points out that the bow was preeminently a weapon of the inhabitants of the island of Crete and not of the Roman Empire in general. The Cretans were renowned for their archery skills. The significance of the rider of the white horse holding a bow indicates the place of origin of the line of emperors ruling during this time. This group of emperors can be classed together under one and the same head and family whose origins were from Crete.[17] According to this interpretation, this period in Roman history, remarkable, both at its commencement and at its close, illustrated the glory of the empire where its limits were extended, though not without occasional wars, which were always uniformly triumphant and successful on the frontiers. The triumphs of the Emperor Trajan, a Roman Alexander, added to the empire Dacia, Armenia, Mesopotamia and other provinces during the course of the first 20 years of the period, which deepened the impression on the minds of the barbarians of the invincibility of the Roman Empire. Roman war progressed triumphantly into the invader's own territory, and the Parthian war was successfully ended by the total overthrow of those people. Roman conquest is demonstrated even in the most mighty of these wars, the Marcomannic succession of victories under the second Antonine unleashed on the German barbarians, driven into their forests and reduced to Roman submission.[18] As war[edit] In some commentaries to Bibles, the white Horseman is said to symbolize (ordinary) War, which may possibly be exercised on righteous grounds in decent manner, hence the white color, but still is devastating. The red Horseman (see below) then rather more specifically symbolizes civil war.[19] As infectious disease[edit] Under another interpretation, the first Horseman is called Pestilence, and is associated with infectious disease and plague. It appears at least as early as 1906, when it is mentioned in the Jewish Encyclopedia.[20] This particular interpretation is common in popular culture references to the Four Horsemen.[21] The origin of this interpretation is unclear. Some translations of the Bible mention "plague" (e.g. the New International Version[citation needed]) or "pestilence" (e.g. the Revised Standard Version[citation needed]) in connection with the riders in the passage following the introduction of the fourth rider; cf. "They were given power over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword, famine, plague, and by the wild beasts of the earth." in the NASB[22]. However, it is a matter of debate as to whether this passage refers to the fourth rider only, or to the four riders as a whole.[1] Vicente Blasco Ibáñez, in his 1916 novel The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (filmed in 1921 and in 1962), provides an early example of this interpretation, writing "The horseman on the white horse was clad in a showy and barbarous attire. ... While his horse continued galloping, he was bending his bow in order to spread pestilence abroad. At his back swung the brass quiver filled with poisoned arrows, containing the germs of all diseases."[23] Red Horse[edit] The second Horseman, War on the Red Horse as depicted in a thirteenth-century Apocalypse manuscript. When He broke the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, "Come." And another, a red horse, went out; and to him who sat on it, it was granted to take peace from Earth, and that men would slay one another; and a great sword was given to him. — Revelation 6:3–4NASB[24] The rider of the second horse is often taken to represent War[2] (he is often pictured holding a sword upwards as though ready for battle[25]) or mass slaughter.[1][6][26] His horse's color is red (πυρρός, pyrrhos from πῦρ, fire); and in some translations, the color is specifically a "fiery" red. The color red, as well as the rider's possession of a great sword (μάχαιρα, machaira), suggests blood that is to be spilled.[3] The sword held upward by the second Horseman may represent war or a declaration of war, as seen in heraldry. In military symbolism, swords held upward, especially crossed swords held upward, signify war and entering into battle.[27] (See for example the historical and modern images, as well as the coat of arms, of Joan of Arc.) The second Horseman may represent civil war as opposed to the war of conquest that the first Horseman is sometimes said to bring.[3][28] Other commentators have suggested that it might also represent the persecution of Christians.[9][29][full citation needed] As empire division[edit] Death on the Pale Horse, Benjamin West, 1817 According to Edward Bishop Elliott's interpretation of the Four Horsemen as symbolic prophecy of the history of the Roman Empire, the second seal is opened and the Roman nation that experienced joy, prosperity and triumph is made subject to the red horse which depicts war and bloodshed—civil war. Peace left the Roman Earth resulting in the killing of one another as insurrection crept into and permeated the Empire beginning shortly into the reign of the Emperor Commodus.[30] Elliott points out that Commodus, who had nothing to wish and everything to enjoy, that beloved son of Marcus Aurelius who ascended the throne with neither competitor to remove nor enemies to punish, became the slave of his attendants who gradually corrupted his mind. His cruelty degenerated into habit and became the ruling passion of his soul.[31] Elliott further recites that, after the death of Commodus, a most turbulent period lasting 92 years unfolded during which time 32 emperors and 27 pretenders to the Empire hurled each other from the throne by incessant civil warfare. The sword was a natural, universal badge among the Romans, of the military profession. The apocalyptic figure indicated by the great sword indicated an undue authority and unnatural use of it. Military men in power, whose vocation was war and weapon the sword, rose by it and also fell. The unrestrained military, no longer subject to the Senate, transformed the Empire into a system of pure military despotism.[32] Black Horse[edit] The third Horseman, Famine on the Black Horse as depicted in the Angers Apocalypse Tapestry (1372–82) When He broke the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, "Come." I looked, and behold, a black horse; and he who sat on it had a pair of scales in his hand. And I heard something like a voice in the center of the four living creatures saying, "A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius; but do not damage the oil and the wine." — Revelation 6:5–6 NASB[33] The third Horseman rides a black horse and is popularly understood to be Famine as the Horseman carries a pair of balances or weighing scales (Greek ζυγὸν, zygon), indicating the way that bread would have been weighed during a famine.[3][28] Other authors interpret the third Horseman as the "Lord as a Law-Giver" holding Scales of Justice.[34] In the passage, it is read that the indicated price of grain is about ten times normal (thus the famine interpretation popularity), with an entire day's wages (a denarius) buying enough wheat for only one person (one choenix, about 1.1 litres), or enough of the less nutritious barley for three, so that workers would struggle to feed their families.[3] Of the Four Horsemen, the black horse and its rider are the only ones whose appearance is accompanied by a vocalization. John hears a voice, unidentified but coming from among the four living creatures, that speaks of the prices of wheat and barley, also saying "and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine". This suggests that the black horse's famine is to drive up the price of grain but leave oil and wine supplies unaffected (though out of reach of the ordinary worker). One explanation for this is that grain crops would have been more naturally susceptible to famine years or locust plagues than olive trees and grapevines, which root more deeply.[3][28] The statement might also suggest a continuing abundance of luxuries for the wealthy while staples, such as bread, are scarce, though not totally depleted;[28] such selective scarcity may result from injustice and the deliberate production of luxury crops for the wealthy over grain, as would have happened during the time Revelation was written.[2][8] Alternatively, the preservation of oil and wine could symbolize the preservation of the Christian faithful, who use oil and wine in their sacraments.[35] As imperial oppression[edit] This section's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) According to Edward Bishop Elliott's interpretation, through this third seal, the black horse is unleashed—aggravated distress and mourning. The balance in the rider's hand is not associated with a man's weighing out bits of bread in scanty measure for his family's eating but in association with the buying and selling of corn and other grains. The balance during the time of the apostle John's exile in Patmos was commonly a symbol of justice since it was used to weigh out the grains for a set price. The balance of justice held in the hand of the rider of the black horse signified the aggravation of the other previous evil, the bloodstained red of the Roman aspect into the darker blackness of distress.[36]The black horse rider is instructed not to harm the oil and the wine which signifies that this scarcity should not fall upon the superfluities, such as oil and wine, which men can live without, but upon the necessities of life—bread.[37] In history, the Roman Empire suffered as a result of excessive taxation of its citizens. During the reign of Emperor Caracalla, whose sentiments were very different from the Antonines being inattentive, or rather averse, to the welfare of the people, he found himself under the necessity of gratifying the greed and excessive lifestyle which he had excited in the Army. During his reign, he crushed every part of the empire under the weight of his iron scepter. Old as well as new taxes were at the same time levied in the provinces. In the course of this history, the land tax, the taxes for services and the heavy contributions of corn, wine, oil and meat were exacted from the provinces for the use of the court, army and capital. "This noxious weed not totally eradicated again sprang up with the most luxurious growth and going forward darkened the Roman world with its deadly shade".[38] In reality, the rise to power of the Emperor Maximin, whose cruelty was derived from a different source being raised as a barbarian from the district of Thrace, expanded the distress on the empire beyond the confines of the illustrious senators or bold adventurers who in the court or army exposed themselves to the whims of fortune. This tyrant, "stimulated by the insatiable desires of the soldiers, attacked the public property at length". Every city of the empire was destined to purchase corn for the multitudes as well as supply expenses for the games. By the Emperor's authority, the whole mass of wealth was confiscated for use by the Imperial treasury—temples "stripped of their most valuable offerings of gold, silver [and statues] which were melted down and coined into money."{ {sfn|Gibbon|1776|p=142–143}} Pale Horse[edit] The fourth Horseman, Death on the Pale Horse. Engraving by Gustave Doré (1865). When the Lamb broke the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature saying, "Come." I looked, and behold, an ashen horse; and he who sat on it had the name Death; and Hades was following with him. Authority was given to them over a fourth of the earth, to kill with sword and with famine and with pestilence and by the wild beasts of the earth. — Revelation 6:7–8 (New American Standard Bible)[39] The fourth and final Horseman is named Death. Known as Θάνατος (Thanatos)[40], of all the riders, he is the only one to whom the text itself explicitly gives a name. Unlike the other three, he is not described carrying a weapon or other object, instead he is followed by Hades (the resting place of the dead). However, illustrations commonly depict him carrying a scythe (like the Grim Reaper), sword,[41] or other implement. The color of Death's horse is written as khlōros (χλωρός) in the original Koine Greek,[42] which can mean either green/greenish-yellow or pale/pallid.[43] The color is often translated as "pale", though "ashen", "pale green", and "yellowish green"[28] are other possible interpretations (the Greek word is the root of "chlorophyll" and "chlorine"). Based on uses of the word in ancient Greek medical literature, several scholars suggest that the color reflects the sickly pallor of a corpse.[3][44] In some modern artistic depictions, the horse is distinctly green.[45][46][47] The Greek word for plague is θανάτῳ, which is a variation of Θάνατος, indicating a connection between the Fourth Horseman and plague.[48] The verse beginning "they were given power over a fourth of the earth" is generally taken as referring to Death and Hades,[28][49] although some commentators see it as applying to all four horsemen.[1] Destroying an empire[edit] See also: Crisis of the Third Century Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (by Arnaldo dell'Ira, neo-roman project of mosaic, 1939–1940. This fourth, pale horse, was the personification of Death with Hades following him jaws open receiving the victims slain by Death. Its commission was to kill upon the Roman Earth with all of the four judgements of God—with sword, famine, pestilence and wild beasts. The deadly pale and livid appearance displays a hue symptomatic of approaching empire dissolution. According to Edward Bishop Elliott, an era in Roman history commencing within about 15 years after the death of Severus Alexander (in 235 AD[50]) strongly marks every point of this terrible emblem.[51] Edward Gibbon speaks of a period from the celebration of the great secular games by the Emperor Philip to the death of Gallienus (in 268 AD[52]) as the 20 years of shame and misfortune, of confusion and calamity, as a time when the ruined empire approached the last and fatal moment of its dissolution. Every instant of time in every province of the Roman world was afflicted by military tyrants and barbarous invaders—the sword from within and without.[53][54] According to Elliott, famine, the inevitable consequence of carnage and oppression, which demolished the produce of the present as well as the hope of future harvests, produced the environment for an epidemic of diseases, the effects of scanty and unwholesome food. That furious plague (the Plague of Cyprian), which raged from the year 250 to the year 265, continued without interruption in every province, city and almost every family in the empire. During a portion of this time, 5000 people died daily in Rome; and many towns that escaped the attacks of barbarians were entirely depopulated.[55] For a time in the late 260s, the strength of Aurelian crushed the enemies of Rome, yet after his assassination certain of them revived.[56] While the Goths had been destroyed for almost a century and the Empire reunited, the Sassanid Persians were uncowed in the East and during the following year hosts of central Asian Alani spread themselves over Pontus, Cappadocia, Cilicia and Galatia, etching their course by the flames of cities and villages they pillaged.[57] As for the wild beasts of the earth, according to Elliott, it is a well-known law of nature that they quickly occupy the scenes of waste and depopulation—where the reign of man fails and the reign of beasts begins. After the reign of Gallienus and 20 or 30 years had passed, the multiplication of the animals had risen to such an extent in parts of the empire that they made it a crying evil.[58] One notable point of apparent difference between the prophecy and history might seem to be expressly limited to the fourth part of the Roman Earth, but in the history of the period the devastations of the pale horse extended over all. The fourth seal prophecy seems to mark the malignant climax of the evils of the two preceding seals to which no such limitation is attached. Turning to that remarkable reading in Jerome's Latin Vulgate which reads "over the four parts of the earth,"[59][60] it requires that the Roman empire should have some kind of quadripartition. Dividing from the central or Italian fourth, three great divisions of the Empire separated into the West, East and Illyricum under Posthumus, Aureolus and Zenobia respectively—divisions that were later legitimized by Diocletian.[61] Diocletian ended this long period of anarchy, but the succession of civil wars and invasions caused much suffering, disorder and crime which brought the empire into a state of moral lethargy from which it never recovered.[62] After the plague had abated, the empire suffered from general distress, and its condition was very much like that which followed after the Black Death of the Middle Ages. Talent and art had become extinct in proportion to the desolation of the world.[63] Interpretations[edit] Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian — Biblical texts — Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats — Major figures — Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist — Different views — Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism — Millennialism — Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism — Other events — Events of Revelation Rapture Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Shiva Islamic — Figures — Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Messiah Second Coming Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj — Events — Death Resurrection Last Judgement Jewish Messianism Book of Daniel Kabbalah Taoist Li Hong Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious End times Apocalypticism 2012 phenomenon Millenarianism Last Judgment Resurrection of the dead Gog and Magog Messianic Age v t e The Horsemen of the Apocalypse, in a woodcut by Albrecht Dürer (ca. 1497–98), ride forth as a group, with an angel heralding them, to bring Death, Famine, War, and Conquest unto man.[64] Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, Saint-Sever Beatus, 11th century. Christological interpretation[edit] Before the Reformation and the woodcut by Albrecht Dürer, the usual and more influential commentaries of the Book of Revelation thought there was only one horseman riding successively these four horses, who was the Christ himself. So did some medieval illuminations, and after that some modern commentators: Oecumenius, Greek bishop of Trikka in Thessaly writing about 990, Berengaudus a French Benedictine monk of Ferrières Abbey at the same period, Luis del Alcázar a Spanish Jesuit in 1612, Benito Arias Montano, a Spanish Orientalist, in 1622, Jacques de Bordes, a French capuchin en 1639, Emanuel Swedenborg a Swedish theologian in 1766[65] Prophetic interpretation[edit] Some Christians interpret the Horsemen as a prophecy of a future Tribulation,[8] during which many on Earth will die as a result of multiple catastrophes. The Four Horsemen are the first in a series of "Seal" judgements. This is when God will judge the Earth, and is giving the World a chance to repent before they die, and His new beautiful earth is created for all the people who are faithful to Him and accept him as their Savior.[citation needed] John Walvoord, a premillennialist, believes the Seals will be opened during the Great Tribulation and coincides with the arrival of the Antichrist as the first horseman, a global war as the second horseman, an economic collapse as the third horseman, and the general die off of 1/4 of the World's population as the fourth horseman, which is followed by a global dictatorship under the Antichrist and the rest of the plagues.[66] Historicist interpretation[edit] According to E.B. Elliott, the first seal, as revealed to John by the angel, was to signify what was to happen soon after John seeing the visions in Patmos and that the second, third and fourth seals in like manner were to have commencing dates each in chronological sequence following the preceding seal. Its general subject is the decline and fall, after a previous prosperous era, of the Empire of Heathen Rome. The first four seals of Revelation, represented by four horses and horsemen, are fixed to events, or changes, within the Roman Earth.[67] Preterist interpretation[edit] Some modern scholars interpret Revelation from a preterist point of view, arguing that its prophecy and imagery apply only to the events of the first century of Christian history.[28] In this school of thought, Conquest, the white horse's rider, is sometimes identified as a symbol of Parthian forces: Conquest carries a bow, and the Parthian Empire was at that time known for its mounted warriors and their skill with bow and arrow.[3][28] Parthians were also particularly associated with white horses.[3] Some scholars specifically point to Vologases I, a Parthian shah who clashed with the Roman Empire and won one significant battle in 62 AD.[3][28] Revelation's historical context may also influence the depiction of the black horse and its rider, Famine. In 92 AD, the Roman emperor Domitian attempted to curb excessive growth of grapevines and encourage grain cultivation instead, but there was major popular backlash against this effort, and it was abandoned. Famine's mission to make wheat and barley scarce but "hurt not the oil and the wine" could be an allusion to this episode.[28][44] The red horse and its rider, who take peace from the earth, might represent the prevalence of civil strife at the time Revelation was written; internecine conflict ran rampant in the Roman Empire during and just prior to the 1st century AD.[3][28] LDS interpretation[edit] Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe their first prophet, Joseph Smith, revealed that the book described by John "contains the revealed will, mysteries, and the works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence" and that the seals describe these things for the seven thousand years of the Earth's temporal existence, each seal representing 1,000 years.[68] About the first seal and the white horse, LDS Apostle Bruce R. McConkie taught, "The most transcendent happenings involved Enoch and his ministry. And it is interesting to note that what John saw was not the establishment of Zion and its removal to heavenly spheres, but the unparalleled wars in which Enoch, as a general over the armies of the saints, 'went forth conquering and to conquer' Revelation 6:2; see also Moses 7:13–18"[69] The second seal and the red horse represent the period from approximately 3,000 B.C. to 2,000 B.C. including the wickedness and violence leading to the Great Flood.[70] The third seal and black horse describe the period of ancient Joseph, son of Israel, who was sold into Egypt, and the famines that swept that period (see Genesis 41–42; Abraham 1:29–30; 2:1, 17, 21). The fourth seal and the pale horse are interpreted to represent the thousand years leading up to the birth of Jesus Christ, both the physical death brought about by great warring empires and the spiritual death through apostasy among the Lord's chosen people.[70] Other interpretations[edit] Artwork which shows the Horsemen as a group, such as the famous woodcut by Albrecht Dürer, suggests an interpretation where all four horsemen represent different aspects of the same tribulation.[71] American Protestant Evangelical interpreters regularly see ways in which the horsemen, and Revelation in general, speak to contemporary events. Some who believe Revelation applies to modern times can interpret the horses based on various ways their colors are used.[72] Red, for example, often represents Communism, the white horse and rider with a crown representing Catholicism, Black has been used as a symbol of Capitalism, while Green represents the rise of Islam. Pastor Irvin Baxter Jr. of Endtime Ministries espouses such a belief.[73] Some equate the Four Horsemen with the angels of the four winds.[74] (See Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Uriel, angels often associated with four cardinal directions). Some speculate that when the imagery of the Six Seals is compared to other eschatological descriptions throughout the Bible, the themes of the horsemen draw remarkable similarity to the events of the Olivet Discourse. The signs of the approaching end of the world are likened to birth pains, indicating that they would occur more frequently and with greater intensity the nearer the event of Christ's return. With this perspective the horsemen represent the rise of false religions, false prophets and false messiahs; the increase of wars and rumours of wars; the escalation of natural disasters and famines; and the growth of persecution, martyrdom, betrayal and loss of faith. According to Anatoly Fomenko, the Book of Revelation is largely astrological in nature. The 'Four Horsemen' represent the planets Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. [1] Also the in the television animated sketch show "Robot Chicken",the horsemen are portrayed in the sketch "Apocalypse Pony's".Where it is a satirical twist on the toys "My Little Pony's". Other Biblical references[edit] Zechariah[edit] The Book of Zechariah twice mentions colored horses; in the first passage there are three colors (red, speckled/brown, and white),[75] and in the second there are four teams of horses (red, black, white, and finally dappled/"grisled and bay") pulling chariots.[76] The second set of horses are referred to as "the four spirits of heaven, going out from standing in the presence of the Lord of the whole world."[76] They are described as patrolling the earth, and keeping it peaceful. It may be assumed by some Christian interpretation that when the tribulation begins, the peace is taken away, so their job is to terrify the places in which they patrol.[3] Ezekiel[edit] The four living creatures of Revelation 4:6-8 are written very similarly to the four living creatures in Ezekiel 1:5–12. In Revelation each of the living creatures summons a horseman, where in Ezekiel the living creatures follow wherever the spirit leads, without turning. In Ezekiel 14:21, the Lord enumerates His "four disastrous acts of judgment" (ESV), sword, famine, wild beasts, and pestilence, against the idolatrous elders of Israel. A symbolic interpretation of the Four Horsemen links the riders to these judgments, or the similar judgments in 6:11–12. See also[edit] Christianity portal Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. The Book with Seven Seals Events of Revelation (Chapter 6) Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in popular culture Four Horsemen of the Infocalypse, an analogous usage in the use of computers The Fifth Horseman (disambiguation), several concepts adding to the four horsemen References[edit] Citations ^ a b c d e Flegg, Columba Graham (1999). An Introduction to Reading the Apocalypse. Crestwood, N.Y.: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press. p. 90. ISBN 9780881411317. Retrieved 2015-04-10. ^ a b c Lenski, Richard Chales Henry (2008). The Interpretation of St. John's Revelation. Augsburg Fortress Publishers. p. 224. ISBN 978-0-8066-9000-1. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Mounce, Robert H. (2006). The Book of Revelation. Grand Rapids, Mich. [u.a.]: Eerdmans. p. 140. ISBN 9780802825377. Retrieved 2015-04-10. ^ Revelation 6:8 King James ^ "Revelation, Chapter 6". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. ^ a b "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Apocalypse". Newadvent.org. 1907-03-01. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ Revelation 6:1–2 ^ a b c Hendriksen, W. (1939). More More Than Conquerors: An Interpretation of the Book of Revelation (Commemorative ed.). Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker's Book House. p. 105. ISBN 0-8010-4026-4. ^ a b c Beale, G.K. (1999). The Book of Revelation (3rd ed.). Grand Rapids, MI: W.B. Eerdmans. pp. 375–379. ISBN 0-8028-2174-X. Retrieved 2009-08-14. ^ Rev. Brian Vos. "Outlook Article – The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse". Reformedfellowship.net. Archived from the original on 2014-01-21. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ References given by B. Gineste, Les Quatre Chevaux du Messie, Paris, 2d ed., 2019, pp. 53–54. ^ Ch. Fr. Zimpel, Le Millénaire, Franckfort-sur-le-Main, 1866, p 43. ^ Annotations on the Revelation, New York, 1898, p. 85. ^ W.C. Stevens, Revelation, Harrisburg, 1928, vol. 2, p. 129. ^ Graham, Billy (1985). Approaching Hoofbeats: The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. New York: Avon. p. 273. ISBN 0380-69921-4. ^ Elliott 1862, p. 129–131,134. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 140,142–144. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 131–133. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Herder German Bible, Freiburg im Breisgau 2007, p. 1348, annotation to Apc 6,7: "The four Horsemen of the Apocalypse symbolize various plagues: [1.] War, [2.] Civil War, [3.] famine and inflation, [4.] pestilence and death." (translated from German) ^ Singer, Isidore; Adler, Cyrus (1916). The Jewish Encyclopedia: A Descriptive Record of the History, Religion, Literature, and Customs of the Jewish People from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, Volume 10. Funk and Wagnalls. p. 392. ...and sees a white horse appear, with a rider holding a bow (representing, probably, Pestilence). ^ Stableford, Brian (2009). The A to Z of Fantasy Literature. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0810868298. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ (Revelation 6:7–8 ^ Ibáñez, Vicente Blasco (1916). The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (ch V). ^ Revelation 6:3–4 ^ "Sword – Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary". Merriam-webster.com. 2012-08-31. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ Jeffrey, David Lyle (1992). 0802836348 (22nd ed.). Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans. p. 363. ISBN 0802836348. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ "Crossed Swords". Seiyaku.com. Retrieved 2015-12-19. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Morris, Leon (1988). The Book of Revelation: An Introduction and Commentary (2nd ed.). Leicester, England: Inter-Varsity Press. pp. 100–105. ISBN 0-8028-0273-7. ^ Bible Prophecies fulfilled by 2012- Ch 2- by Alan R Peters ^ Elliott 1862, p. 147–148. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Gibbon 1776, p. 86–87. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGibbon1776 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 150–152. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Revelation 6:5–6 ^ Hutchinson, Jane Campbell (2013). Albrecht Durer: A Guide to Research. Routledge. p. 58. ISBN 978-1135581725. Retrieved 2015-04-10. ^ Hoeck, Andres; Manhardt, Laurie Watson (2010). Ezekiel, Hebrews, Revelation. Steubenville, Ohio: Emmaus Road Pub. p. 139. ISBN 978-1-931018-65-4. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ Elliott 1862, p. 161,164–167,170. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Gill, John (1776). An Exposition of the Revelation of S. John the Divine, both doctrinal and practical. London: George Keith. p. 71. ^ Gibbon 1776, p. 138–139. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGibbon1776 (help) ^ Revelation 6:7–8 ^ Rev 6:8 ^ Alexander of Bremen. "Expositio in Apocalypsim". Cambridge Digital Library. Retrieved 27 February 2014. ^ "See The Manuscript | Revelation |". Codex Sinaiticus. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, χλωρός". Perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ a b Case, Shirley Jackson (1919). The Revelation of John: A Historical Interpretation (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press. Retrieved 2015-04-10. ^ "The Pale Horse Vision~One of 4 Horses of the Apocalypse | Flickr – Photo Sharing!". Flickr. 2010-08-09. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ "Apocalypse | Flickr – Photo Sharing!". Flickr. 2006-11-30. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ "The riders on the chloros and the blood red apocalypse horses". Revelation4today.com. Archived from the original on 2013-11-02. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ "Revelation 6:8 Greek Text Analysis". biblehub.com. ^ Friedrich, Gerhard; Bromiley, Geoffrey W. (1968). Theological Dictionary of the New Testament (Reprinted. ed.). Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdmans. p. 996. ISBN 9780802822482. Retrieved 2015-04-10. ^ "Alexander Severus" . Encyclopædia Britannica (Eleventh ed.). 1911 – via Wikisource. ^ Elliott 1862, p. 191–192. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ "Gallienus, Publius Licinius Egnatius" . Encyclopædia Britannica (Eleventh ed.). 1911 – via Wikisource. ^ Elliott 1862, p. 192. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Gibbon 1776, p. 189. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGibbon1776 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 193. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Gibbon 1776, p. 246. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGibbon1776 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 197. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 194. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 201. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Muggleton, Lodowick (1665), True Interpretation of All the Chief Texts, and Mysterious Sayings and Visions Opened, of the Whole Book of the Revelation of St. John, London, p. 56 ^ Elliott 1862, p. 202. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Elliott 1862, p. 203. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ Niebuhr, Barthold Georg (1844), The History of Rome from the First Punic War to the Death of Constantine, 5, Rome: Taylor and Walton, p. 346 ^ Leeming, David (2006). The Oxford Companion to World Mythology. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. p. 22. ISBN 0195156692. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ Gineste, Bernard (2019). Les Quatre Chevaux du Messie (2d ed.). Paris: BoD. ISBN 9782322158799. Retrieved 2019-10-02. ^ Every Prophecy of the Bible, by John Walvoord ^ Elliott 1862, pp. 121, 122. sfn error: no target: CITEREFElliott1862 (help) ^ LDS Doctrine and Covenants, Section 77, verses 6 and 7 ^ Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. [1966–73], 3:477. ^ a b "Chapter 54: Revelation 4–11". www.churchofjesuschrist.org. ^ O'Hear, Natasha F.H. (2011). Contrasting Images of the Book of Revelation in Late Medieval and Early Modern Art: A Case Study in Visual Exegesis (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 100. ISBN 978-0-19-959010-0. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ Humphries, Paul D. (2005). A Dragon This Way Comes: Revelations Decrypted. Mustang, OK: Tate Publishing. pp. 13–85. ISBN 1-59886-061-5. Retrieved 2009-01-13. ^ Baxter, Irvin. "The Apocalypse". Endtime Ministries. Retrieved 2006-12-05. ^ Smith, Robert H.; Dürer, Albrecht (2000). Apocalypse: A Commentary on Revelation in Words and Images. Collegeville, Minn.: Liturgical Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-8146-2707-5. Retrieved 18 December 2015. ^ "Zechariah 1:8–17 NIV – During the night I had a vision, and". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 2014-04-03. ^ a b "Zechariah 6:1–8 NIV – Four Chariots – I looked up again, and". Bible Gateway. Retrieved 2014-04-03. Bibliography Elliott, Edward Bishop (1862), Horae Apocalypticae, I (5th ed.), London: Seely, Jackson and Halliday Gibbon, Edward (1776). The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Volume I. Strahan and Cadell. |volume= has extra text (help) External links[edit] The dictionary definition of api at Wiktionary Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Doomsday Clock Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Relativistic kinetic kill vehicle Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Nuclear warfare Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence AI takeover Technological singularity Transhumanism Year 2000 problem Year 2038 problem Year 10,000 problem Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Doomsday argument Self-Indication Assumption Doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust winter famine cobalt Societal collapse Collapsology World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Climate apocalypse Deforestation Desertification Extinction risk from global warming Tipping points in the climate system Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony Collapse Disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Little Rip Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Solar flare Stellar collision Mythological Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of Desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Dispensationalism Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Lake of fire Number of the Beast Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of Perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Post-tribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Revelation 12 sign prophecy World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films List of fictional doomsday devices Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios v t e Book of Revelation Bible (New Testament) Revelation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Places Armageddon Asia Babylon Egypt Ephesus Euphrates Jerusalem Laodicea Patmos Pergamum Philadelphia Sardis Smyrna Sodom Thyatira Persons Asher Balak Balaam Benjamin David Gad Issachar Jesus Christ Jezebel John Joseph Judah Levi Manasseh Michael Naphtali Reuben Simeon Zebulun Events/ Terms/ Phrases Abaddon/Apollyon Alpha and Omega Beast Book of Life Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Four Living Creatures Lake of Fire Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Revelation 12 sign prophecy Seven bowls Seven churches of Asia Seven seals Seven trumpets Son of Man Three Angels' Messages Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse Wormwood Related Authorship John of Patmos Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version ← Epistle of Jude Bible portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125