American science fiction television series For other uses, see Fringe. Fringe The "Prime Universe" title card used from seasons 1–3. Genre Science fiction Supernatural drama[1] Created by J. J. Abrams Alex Kurtzman Roberto Orci Starring Anna Torv Joshua Jackson John Noble Jasika Nicole Lance Reddick Blair Brown Kirk Acevedo Seth Gabel Mark Valley Theme music composer J. J. Abrams Composers Michael Giacchino1 (2008–11) Chris Tilton (2009–13) Mike McCready ("Northwest Passage") Country of origin United States Original language English No. of seasons 5 No. of episodes 100 (list of episodes) Production Executive producers J. J. Abrams Bryan Burk Alex Kurtzman Roberto Orci J. H. Wyman Jeff Pinkner Joe Chappelle Production locations Toronto, Ontario ("Pilot") New York City (Season 1) Vancouver, British Columbia (Seasons 2–5) Running time 81 minutes ("Pilot") 50 minutes (Season 1) 43 minutes (Seasons 2–5) Production companies Bad Robot Productions Warner Bros. Television Distributor Warner Bros. Television Distribution Release Original network Fox Picture format 720p (HDTV) Audio format Dolby Digital 5.1 Original release September 9, 2008 (2008-09-09) – January 18, 2013 (2013-01-18) External links Website (archived) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Fringe is an American science fiction television series created by J. J. Abrams, Alex Kurtzman, and Roberto Orci. It premiered on the Fox network on September 9, 2008, and concluded on January 18, 2013, after five seasons and 100 episodes. The series follows Olivia Dunham (Anna Torv), Peter Bishop (Joshua Jackson), and Walter Bishop (John Noble), all members of the fictional Fringe Division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, based in Boston, Massachusetts, under the supervision of Homeland Security. The team uses fringe science and FBI investigative techniques to investigate a series of unexplained, often ghastly occurrences, which are related to mysteries surrounding a parallel universe. The series has been described as a hybrid of fantasy, procedural dramas and serials, influenced by films like Altered States and television shows such as Lost, The X-Files and The Twilight Zone. The series began as a traditional mystery-of-the-week series and became more serialized in later seasons. Most episodes contain a standalone plot, with several others also exploring the series' overarching mythology. Critical reception was at first lukewarm but became more favorable after the first season, when the series began to explore its mythology, including parallel universes and alternate timelines. The show, along with cast and crew, were nominated for many major awards. Despite its move to the "Friday night death slot" and low ratings, the series developed a cult following. It also spawned two six-part comic book series, an alternate reality game, and three novels. Contents 1 Plot 1.1 Parallel universe 1.2 Glyph code 1.3 Opening sequence 2 Cast and characters 2.1 Main 2.2 Recurring 3 Development 3.1 Conception 3.2 Production 3.3 Casting 4 Reception 4.1 First season 4.2 Subsequent seasons 4.3 U.S. ratings and series renewal history 4.4 Awards and nominations 5 Distribution 5.1 International 5.2 Syndication 5.3 Home video releases 6 Other media 6.1 Games 6.2 Books and comics 6.3 Possible film 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Plot[edit] Main articles: List of Fringe episodes and Mythology of Fringe Fringe follows the casework of the Fringe Division, a Joint Federal Task Force supported primarily by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which includes Agent Olivia Dunham; Dr. Walter Bishop, the archetypal mad scientist; and Peter Bishop, Walter's estranged son and jack-of-all-trades. They are supported by Phillip Broyles (Lance Reddick), the force's director, and Agent Astrid Farnsworth (Jasika Nicole), who assists Walter in laboratory research. The Fringe Division investigates cases relating to fringe science, ranging from transhumanist experiments gone wrong to the prospect of a destructive technological singularity to a possible collision of two parallel universes. The Fringe Division's work often intersects with advanced biotechnology developed by a company called Massive Dynamic, founded by Walter's former partner, Dr. William Bell (Leonard Nimoy), and run by their common friend, Nina Sharp (Blair Brown). The team is also watched silently by a group of bald, pale white men who are called "Observers". Season 1 introduces the Fringe Division as they investigate cases that form "the Pattern" geographically centered around Reiden Lake in New York state, many of which are orchestrated by an international network of rogue scientists known as ZFT (Zerstörung durch Fortschritte der Technologie, or in English, Destruction through Advancement of Technology), led by David Robert Jones (Jared Harris), who are preparing for a doomsday event. The ZFT threat appears to end when Peter kills Jones as he attempts travel to a parallel universe.[2] Olivia comes to learn she was a child test subject for Walter years ago (then known as Olive) for a nootropic drug, Cortexiphan, giving her weak psionic abilities.[3] Walter also struggles with adjusting to normal life in Peter's care after living seventeen years in a mental institution while hiding the fact that Peter is from the parallel universe, "his" Peter having died as a child.[2] In Season 2, the occurrences are found to be in conjunction with activities of a parallel universe, which is plagued by singularities occurring at weakened points of the fabric between worlds; over there, scientists have developed an amber-like substance that isolates these singularities as well as any innocent people caught in the area on its release. The Fringe team deals with more cases that are leading to a "great storm" as the parallel universe appears to be at war with the prime one, engineered by human-machine hybrid shapeshifters from the parallel universe.[4] Walter is forced to tell Peter that he is from the parallel universe, a replacement for his own Peter, who died from a genetic disease. Walter had crossed over on the frozen ice of Reiden Lake in 1985 to administer the cure for the alternate version of Peter, but, after accidentally destroying a dose of the cure upon transport, he instead brought the boy across. On return, they fell through the ice but were saved by the Observer September (Michael Cerveris), who told Walter of the importance of "the boy", which Walter took to mean Peter.[5] Walter's crossing is what caused the singularities in the parallel universe, with Reiden Lake at their center. Walter has been looking for a sign of forgiveness in the form of a white tulip.[6] Season 3 presents episodes that alternate between the two universes. "Walternate", Walter's doppelgänger in the parallel universe, is the U.S. Secretary of Defense and has set events in motion to assemble the Machine, a doomsday device that reacts only to Peter's biology.[7] He also sent his Olivia, "Fauxlivia"2, to the prime universe, in Olivia's place, to engage the Fringe Division and assemble the prime universe's version of the device, while he studies Olivia's Cortexiphan-induced powers.[8] By happenstance, Fauxlivia becomes pregnant with Peter's child, Henry, before being outed and extracted to the parallel universe.[9] Walternate orchestrated acceleration of the pregnancy to gain a sample of the baby's blood, which he uses to activate the machine.[10] Peter, with Olivia's help, enters the prime version of the machine, and experiences a vision of the future where the parallel universe has been destroyed and the same fate threatens the prime one, and learns the Machine is really a device created by Walter and his associates from this future, sent back in time purposely to relay this vision of the future to Peter. Recovering in the present, Peter alters his plan and uses the Machine to merge the two rooms, creating a bridge where inhabitants of both universes can solve their dilemma, before time is re-written so September (The Observer) doesn't save him and is forgotten by both Walter and Olivia.[11] Season 4 begins in an alternate timeline, one in which September had failed to save the alternate version of Peter in 1985, according to the Observers.[12] This creates a butterfly effect influencing the main characters' pasts but otherwise stabilizing both universes due to the creation of the bridge. Peter is pulled into this new timeline due to the actions of the alternate timeline's Fringe team, which includes Lincoln Lee (Seth Gabel). Peter initially works to return to his own timeline, fueled by fears that his memories are altering Cortexiphan-dosed Olivia's of this timeline, but after encountering a wounded September, Peter comes to learn that this timeline is truly his home, and both he and Olivia come to accept the change, rekindling their affair.[13] September also reveals to Peter that the Observers needed to erase Peter's son, Henry, to assure their future will be created, though noting that Peter's future child with Olivia will be important.[14] Meanwhile, in the present, William Bell has instructed David Robert Jones, alive in this timeline, to work with the parallel universe's version of Nina Sharp to synchronize the two universes, aiming to collapse them both and pave the way for a third universe under Bell's control, using Olivia's Cortexiphan powers to enable the collapse. The Fringe division is forced to close the dimensional bridge, but this fails to stop Bell's plan. Walter is left with one choice, to shoot and kill Olivia, her death disrupting the process and saving the world. Olivia's "death" is only temporary, as the Cortexiphan in her body is consumed to repair the bullet wound, leaving her alive and healthy but lacking her psionic abilities. As Olivia and Peter begin their lives together, September appears to Walter and warns that the Observers "are coming".[15] The fifth and final season begins in 2036, following from the flash-forward fourth-season episode "Letters of Transit".[16] As September warned, Observers, bald white males, from the far future, having ruined Earth for themselves, time-traveled to 2015 and instituted "The Purge", wiped out much of humanity, subjected the survivors to their control, and began modifying the planet's environment to be more suitable for themselves.[17] The Fringe team was able to seal themselves in amber to avoid capture shortly after the Purge, and are reunited through Henrietta ("Etta") (Georgina Haig), Peter and Olivia's now adult daughter who disappeared shortly after the Observer arrival in 2015. Walter reveals he and September developed a plan to defeat the Observers, revealed through a series of pre-recorded videotapes ambered in the lab. The tapes lead to several components of a device, including a young Observer child, named Michael (Spencer List in Season 1 and Rowan Longworth in Season 5), but further allude to a man named Donald that had helped Walter prepare the plan. Etta is killed during these events, driving Olivia and Peter to complete the plan for her sake. Through Michael, they discover Donald is September, having been stripped of his Observer powers for helping the Fringe team, and that Michael is his genetic son, having been purposely grown as an anomaly in the far future. September explains the plan is to send Michael to the year 2167, where human genetic experiments to sacrifice emotion for intelligence would be started and leading to the creation of the Observers; by showing them Michael, who possesses both emotion and intelligence, the experiments would be stopped and the Observers never created. September is prepared to take Michael to the future as the plan is set in motion, but he is shot and killed at the last moment; Walter, already made aware that he will have to make a sacrifice, takes Michael through to the future to assure the plan's completion. As predicted, time is reset from the invasion onwards in 2015; the Observers never invade, and Peter, Olivia, and Etta, live their lives peacefully—though Peter receives one final letter from his father: a drawing of a white tulip. Parallel universe[edit] One of Fringe's location titles. In this example, from "Olivia", the episode takes place in the alternate universe's version of Manhattan, whose name is spelled with only one T. One notable difference in the alternate universe is that while the September 11 attacks occurred, the World Trade Center towers were not destroyed. Much of the story arc for Fringe involves an alternate universe that mostly mirrors the prime universe, but with numerous historical idiosyncrasies. A significant example element used is the effect of the September 11 attacks; though this event also occurred in the alternate universe, the World Trade Center was untouched by the attacks, leaving the buildings as predominant landmarks in the alternate world's skyline of "Manhatan". The South Tower was used as the office of William Bell in several episodes.[18][19] The producers were strongly interested in "world building," and the alternate universe allowed them to create a very similar world with a large amount of detail to fill in the texture of the world. An alternate universe also allowed them to show "how small choices that you make define you as a person and can change your life in large ways down the line," according to co-director Jeff Pinkner.[18] However, the producers also realized the concept of the alternate universe could be confusing to viewers. To avoid this, elements of the world were introduced in small pieces over the course of the first two seasons before the larger revelation in the second-season finale and the third season. J. H. Wyman stated that he would often pass the story ideas for the alternate universe by his father to see if it made sense, and would rework the script if his father found it confusing.[20] Such world building also gave them a risky opportunity to create stories that focused solely on characters from the alternate universe with nearly no ties to the main characters; as stated by Wyman, they would be able to "make two shows about one show," a concept that the network executives embraced.[21] Glyph code[edit] Marketing posters used to promote the series often featured one of the glyphs used in the show's interstitial, each being a twist on a common image. Pictured here is a leaf with an embedded Greek capital letter delta. Prior to commercial breaks, a brief image of a glyph is shown. Abrams revealed in an interview that the glyphs had a hidden meaning. "It's something that we're doing for people who care to figure it out and follow it, but it's not something that a viewer has to consider when they watch the show."[22] Abrams also revealed that the seemingly unrelated frogs which have the Greek letter Phi (Φ) imprinted on their back appeared in promos for the show have significance within the context of the series, saying "it's part of the code of the show."[22] The glyph code was cracked by an editor at the technology site Ars Technica, who discovered it to be a simple substitution cipher used to spell out a single thematic word for each episode; for example, the pilot episode's eight glyphs spell out the word "observer".[23] Additionally, the glyphs are representative of some of the means by which Walter solves a case (such as the moth/butterfly from "Johari Window", the seahorse strain of DNA from "The Bishop Revival"). In "Jacksonville", behind Walter as he speaks to Olivia about her treatment where the nootropic Cortexiphan was first studied as a trial, each of the glyphs is clearly visible on the daycare wall. An episode-by-episode key to the various glyphs was made available on Fringepedia.[24] Opening sequence[edit] The show's standard opening sequence interplays images of the glyph symbols alongside words representing fringe science topics, such as "teleportation" and "dark matter." Within the third season, with episodes that took place primarily in the parallel universe, a new set of titles was used, following a similar format, though tinted red instead of blue and using alternate fringe science concepts like "hypnosis" and "neuroscience". The difference in color has led some fans to call the prime universe the Blue one in contrast to the parallel Red one.[25] In the third-season episode "Entrada", the titles used a mix of both the blue- and red-tinted versions, given that the episode took place equally in each universe.[26] In the two flashback episodes, "Peter" and "Subject 13," a variation on the sequence, using retro graphics akin to 1980s technology and phrases like "personal computing" and "genetic engineering," was used.[27] For the dystopian future third-season episode "The Day We Died," a black-toned theme, with more dire phrases like "hope" and "water," was used.[28] The fourth-season premiere, "Neither Here Nor There" introduced an amber-toned title sequence with additional new terms that is used for nearly all fourth-season episodes.[29] The fourth-season episode "Letters of Transit," which returned to the future dystopian universe, and the subsequent fifth-season episodes, feature a cold-toned title sequence with phrases such as "joy," "private thought," "free will," and "freedom," ideas which have been lost in this future.[30] There is one frame in the opening sequence in which the words "Observers are here" flash very quickly, and the opening sequence must be paused to see them.[31] Cast and characters[edit] Main article: List of Fringe characters The cast and crew of Fringe at the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con. From left to right: Jasika Nicole (Astrid Farnsworth), Blair Brown (Nina Sharp), Lance Reddick (Phillip Broyles), John Noble (Walter Bishop), Joshua Jackson (Peter Bishop), Anna Torv (Olivia Dunham), and executive producers J. H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner Main[edit] Anna Torv as Olivia Dunham: a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agent assigned to investigate the spread of unexplained phenomena. She later discovers Walter performed tests on her when she was a child using nootropic drug Cortexiphan, giving her unusual abilities. Torv also plays Olivia's counterpart in the alternate universe, dubbed by the characters of the prime universe as "Fauxlivia", as well as William Bell. Joshua Jackson as Peter Bishop: a jack-of-all-trades who is brought in as a civilian consultant by Olivia to work with his estranged father, Walter. Peter is actually "Walternate's" son from the alternate universe, abducted by Walter shortly after his own Peter's death at a young age. John Noble as Dr. Walter Bishop: a former government researcher in the field of fringe science who was seen as a mad scientist and institutionalized after a lab accident in which his assistant was killed. Noble also portrays the Walter's alternate, dubbed "Walternate" by the characters in the prime universe. Walternate rose to power as the U.S. Secretary of Defense and instigated the war against the prime universe after the abduction of his son Peter. Lance Reddick as Phillip Broyles (seasons 1–4; recurring season 5): a Homeland Security agent and Senior-Agent-in-Charge (SAC) who runs Fringe Division. Reddick also portrays Broyles' alternate (known as Colonel Broyles), who finds sympathy for Olivia and sacrifices himself during the third season to allow her to escape the parallel universe. In the fourth season, in the alternate timeline, Colonel Broyles remains alive. Jasika Nicole as Astrid Farnsworth: an FBI Junior Agent and assistant to Olivia and Walter. Nicole also plays Astrid's counterpart in the alternate universe, who has symptoms similar to Asperger syndrome as tribute to Nicole's sister who has the disorder.[32] Blair Brown as Nina Sharp (season 1–4; recurring season 5): the Chief Operating Officer of Massive Dynamic, a leading firm in science and technology research and longtime friend of Walter and William. She also plays her doppelganger in the parallel universe within the alternate timeline of season 4 as an agent for David Robert Jones' plans. Kirk Acevedo as Charlie Francis (season 1–2; recurring season 3): An FBI senior agent, Olivia's colleague and close friend, and the second-in-command of Fringe Division before his demise. Though Charlie is killed early in the second season, Acevedo reprises the role of Charlie in the alternate universe. Mark Valley as John Scott (season 1): Olivia's former FBI partner and secret lover, whose death in "Pilot" leads Olivia to join the Fringe division. Seth Gabel as Lincoln Lee (season 4; guest star seasons 2 and 5; recurring season 3): an agent of the parallel universe Fringe Division. The prime universe version of Lincoln, also played by Gabel, was introduced in the episode "Stowaway" as a special agent stationed at the FBI building in Hartford, Connecticut, later joining Fringe division within season 4.[33][34] Mark Valley played Olivia's partner and lover, John Scott, in the first season. Seth Gabel, a guest star during seasons 2 and 3, joined Fringe as a series regular in season 4 as agent Lincoln Lee. He reappears in season 5. Michael Cerveris plays September, one of the bald-headed Observers, and appears several times throughout the series. Leonard Nimoy portrays William Bell, Walter's associate, both as a live action character in seasons 1, 2, and 4, and voicing an animated Bell in season 3. Recurring[edit] Michael Cerveris as September/the Observer/Donald: one of several "Observers," a traveling chronicler and enforcer of extraordinary events. An Observer appears in one form or another, usually in an Alfred Hitchcock-like cameo, in each episode. Ari Graynor as Rachel Dunham (seasons 1–2): Olivia's sister. Lily Pilblad as Ella Blake (seasons 1–3): Olivia's niece, the daughter of Rachel. Emily Meade portrays the future Ella. Leonard Nimoy as Dr. William Bell (seasons 1–4): Walter's former lab partner, the founder of Massive Dynamic, apparently killed in the season 2 finale. Nimoy, who had retired from acting after season 2, agreed to provide the voice of Bell, allowing for the character's reappearance via an animated character in season 3. He reappears in season 4 after the timeline is altered. Michael Gaston as Sanford Harris (season 1): an old nemesis of Olivia's assigned to assess Fringe Division. Jared Harris as David Robert Jones (seasons 1, 4): leader of the ZFT cult, and killed in the season 1 finale. In the alternate timeline Peter is projected into, it appears he is alive, and that the shapeshifters have been working for him. Chance Kelly as Mitchell Loeb (season 1): an FBI agent and mole working for ZFT. Ryan McDonald as Brandon Fayette (seasons 2–4): a scientist at Massive Dynamic. In the parallel universe, Brandon works directly for Secretary of Defense Bishop, overseeing many of his less ethical projects. Kevin Corrigan as Sam Weiss (seasons 2–3): Olivia's Yoda-like amateur psychologist and manager of a Boston-area bowling alley; his family line maintains knowledge of the "First People," a race of intelligent beings believed to have created the doomsday device. Sebastian Roché as Thomas Jerome Newton (seasons 2–3): the leader of the shapeshifters, human/machine hybrids and undercover agents from the alternate universe. The character commits suicide during the third season. Orla Brady as Elizabeth Bishop (seasons 2–4): Walter's wife and Peter's mother. Brady portrays both the prime and alternate versions. Philip Winchester as Frank Stanton (seasons 2–3): a virologist for the CDC and introduced as Fauxlivia's romantic interest in season 2. Their relationship ends off-screen in season 4. Michelle Krusiec as Nadine Park (season 4): a shape-shifting soldier from the alternate timeline, with different features from shapeshifters seen in the normal timeline. Georgina Haig as Henrietta (Etta) Bishop (seasons 4–5): Peter and Olivia's adult daughter in 2036. Though she is part of the Fringe team, loyal to the Observers, she secretly works with the human resistance to try to reclaim the earth for humans. Michael Kopsa as Captain Windmark (seasons 4–5): the lead Observer in 2036 and primary antagonist of the Resistance. Development[edit] Conception[edit] Co-created by J. J. Abrams, Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman, Fringe is produced by Bad Robot in association with Warner Bros. Television, as part of a commitment that Abrams previously made with the studio.[35] At the time, Abrams was working with Orci and Kurtzman on the Star Trek film, and met at one of the Comic-Cons during Star Trek's production to brainstorm ideas for the show.[35][36] Abrams later brought Bryan Burk, a producer on several of his films, to help with developing the series.[36] Abrams's inspiration for Fringe came from a range of sources, including the writings of Michael Crichton, the film Altered States, films by David Cronenberg, and the television series The X-Files and The Twilight Zone.[35][37] Orci stated that Fringe is a "new kind of storytelling", combining procedural shows such as Law & Order, and an "extremely serialized and very culty" series like Lost.[38] The procedural aspect was chosen because, at the time of its premiere, six of the ten top shows were procedural in nature; Orci stated that "you have to be a fool not to go study what it is that they're doing".[35] Abrams had originally considered naming the series The Lab, as they had envisioned Walter's laboratory to be "the epicenter of the conversation", and where "anything is possible".[36] Though the team saw this as a way of presenting "mystery of the week"-type episodes, they wanted to focus more on how these stories were told in unpredictable ways rather than the actual mystery, recognizing that most of their target audience has seen such mysteries before through previous shows and films.[38] Instead, they wanted their storytelling to be original and unexpected, and, as claimed by Kurtzman, one of the most challenging aspects of developing the individual episodes.[38] Serialization of the show was important to tell their overall story with larger plot elements, but Abrams recognized the difficulties that his earlier serialized shows, such as Lost and Alias, had in attracting and maintaining viewers that had not seen these shows from the start or who missed episodes sporadically.[35] For Fringe, Abrams instead sought to create, as stated by David Itzkoff of the New York Times, "a show that suggested complexity but was comprehensible in any given episode".[35][36] The writers aimed to balance a line between stand-alone episodes, a factor requested by Fox, and a heavily serialized show; they balanced these by moving the serialization aspect to the growth and development of their characters. This gave them the ability to write self-contained episodes that still contained elements related to the overall mythos.[36] However, as production continued, the creative staff found the show itself took on a more serialized nature and opted towards this approach in later seasons while still balancing self-contained episodes.[36] One method was by introducing overarching themes that individual episodes could be tied to, such as "The Pattern" in Season 1, providing information repeatedly about the larger plot over the course of several episodes or seasons.[35] Abrams also created characters whose alliances to the larger narrative were clear, avoiding a similar problem that had occurred during the first and second seasons of Alias.[35] A final step taken was to script out all of the major long-running plot elements, including the show's finale, prior to full-time production. Abrams contrasted this to the process used in Lost, where ideas like character flashbacks and the hatch from the second season were introduced haphazardly and made difficulties in defining when they should be presented to the viewers. Instead, with Fringe, they were able to create "clearly defined goalposts" (in Itzkoff's words) that could be altered as necessary with network and seasonal changes but always provided a clear target for the overarching plot.[35] These approaches also allowed the team to introduce unique plot elements to be introduced in time that would have altered the show's fate if known at the start. Abrams stated that "There are certain details that are hugely important that I believe, if shared, will destroy any chance of actually getting on the air."[35] Abrams noted that they are able to benefit from "how open Fox as a network has been to a show that is embracing the weirdness and the long-term stories that we want to tell".[38] During the third season, executive producer Jeff Pinkner noted that "We have six to eight seasons worth of material. We see it as having certain chapters that would enrich the overall story, but aren't necessary to tell the overall story. God willing, the network allows us the time to tell our complete story."[39] As part of the larger story, the writers have placed elements in earlier episodes that are referenced in episodes seasons later. For example, in the first-season episode "The Ghost Network", the Fringe team encounters an amber-like substance, which is later shown to be a critical means to combat the breakdown of the parallel universe and eventually for the same in the prime universe with the third-season episode "6B".[21] Pinkner compared this aspect to "planting seeds", some which they know how they plan to use later in the show's story, while others they can find ways of incorporating into these later episodes.[21] He further attributed these elements as part of the "world building" to flesh out the show beyond episodic content.[21] The producers have stated that when the show's mythology is introduced, it is not simply there to tie episodes together, but "to provide answers that generate consequences".[40] Certain elements of the show's mythology were established from the start. The parallel universe was always part of the original concept, though aspects of when and how to introduce it were tackled as the show proceeded.[41] The idea of Peter being from the parallel universe came early into the show's production, but this came to lead the team to jokingly refer to Peter as their "hatch", one of the early mysteries in Lost, as with the hatch in Lost, they initially had no idea how to introduce this within the show.[41] FOX's Reilly was also initially concerned about the parallel universe aspect, but as the show progressed into the first season and found its groove, the concept was readily accepted.[41] The most poignant introduction of the parallel universe was in the conclusion of the first-season finale, "There's More Than One of Everything", where they showed the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center were still standing in the parallel universe, a concept introduced by writer Andrew Kreisberg as an iconic image to leave viewers with; Jackson stated, "I don't know that we've ever had a better visual or a better cliff-hanger."[41] Other mythos elements were devised as the series progressed. The writers had originally envisioned only spending small portions of episodes within the parallel universe, but as they wrote these episodes within Season 3, they brought out the idea of setting entire episodes within the parallel universe.[41] This necessitated the development of the alternate versions of the main characters, which Pinkner considered "a great playground just for imagination".[41] The actors themselves found this concept exciting, as it allowed them to play different characters but with the same background and considered it a creative challenge.[41] Similarly, having Peter erased from the timeline as part of the finale for Season 3 was an idea that grew over the course of that season.[42] The writers were aware this would be a risky move but felt the idea was very appropriate for Fringe, and opted to write towards this after considering all the consequences.[42] Pinkner noted that this gave them an opportunity to "reset the character relationships" and determine the key aspects that would remain without Peter, as well as "making the audience uncomfortable at times".[42] The cast was not initially sold with the idea, but came around as the fourth season progressed.[42] Production[edit] Jeff Pinkner (left) and J. H. Wyman (right) served as showrunners for the majority of the series run. List of showrunners throughout the series' run: Season 1: Jeff Pinkner Season 2–4: Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman Season 5: J.H. Wyman After developing the core concepts of the show, Abrams began to seek studios to develop the show; Abrams' past successes led to Warner Bros. Television and the Fox Television Network to quickly jump on board the project. Peter Roth, the chief executive of Warner Bros. Television, had been actively seeking to bring any Abrams' project to his studio, and heard Abrams' pitch for Fringe at a dinner meeting in August 2007.[36] Similarly, Kevin Reilly, the entertainment chairman at Fox, knew that it was critical for him to bring the next Abrams' project to his network, and worked with Roth to assure this would happen.[36] Jeff Pinkner was selected to act as the head showrunner and executive producer. Abrams noted that he trusts Pinkner after working together with him on Alias and Lost.[43] Pinkner became interested in the show during a visit to the set of Star Trek, during which Abrams was discussing the concept of Fringe with Orci and Kurtzman, knowing that they would not be involved in the direct production of the work. Abrams pitched the idea to Pinkner, who was intrigued by the importance of characters in a science fiction drama.[36] In season two, J.H. Wyman was brought on as executive producer and showrunner with Pinkner. Wyman had been a science fiction enthusiast but had worried that he had not written anything in that genre but after learning about the concept of the show, felt his role as an executive producer was "a match made in heaven".[36] Michael Giacchino, Abrams' frequent collaborator, composed the music for the pilot of Fringe, before handing over duties to his assistants Chad Seiter and Chris Tilton; Tilton took over scoring duties from Season 2 onward.[44] While Giacchino retains an on-screen credit, Abrams himself wrote the series theme music.[45] The two-hour pilot episode, filmed in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, cost a total of $10 million to create.[46] A basement of an old church was used for Walter's lab set in the pilot, and this set was replicated at other film sites in New York and Vancouver when the show moved.[47] The lab set was designed by Carol Spier, the production designer for several of Cronenberg's films.[36] John Noble called his character's lab "the heart and soul of Fringe", so consequently, "That has to remain constant."[47] A cow used in the pilot episode had to be recast when production of Season 1 was moved to New York, due to livestock restrictions preventing it from being brought from Canada to the United States.[48][49] Other locations used in the first season included other universities to stage for the Harvard University campus, where Walter's lab is located. These included Pratt Institute and Yale University,[50] including its Old Campus (particularly Phelps Hall and Durfee Hall), Branford College, and the exterior of Yale Law School, University of Toronto's University College, Brooklyn College.[50] Filming of the Fringe episode "6B" in December 2010 at the Vancouver Film School building at Hastings and Cambie streets in Vancouver, staged as New York City On February 21, 2009, it was reported that in the event that Fringe would be renewed for a second season, the show would move production to Vancouver from New York City as a cost-cutting measure.[51] Executive producer Jeff Pinkner explained: We want to stay in New York, New York has been incredibly good to us. It feels like we're being kicked out of the city. I know we're not, but they're making it impossible for us to afford doing the show ... Our New York crew is spectacular, they've worked their [butts] off to make the show look great. But it looks like New York is not renewing a tax credit that makes it possible to make our budget in New York. So it looks like, out of necessity, we'll have to leave New York, which is not anything we are welcoming.[52] As plans were being made to move the production to Canada, the New York state legislature passed continuation of the film and tax credits, as planned.[53] Upon productions moving to Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada for season 2, the University of British Columbia now stands in for Harvard.[50] The area around New Westminster often serves as filming locations for Fringe stories that take place in the parallel universe.[54][55] Prior to the start of production for the fifth season, Pinkner announced that he was leaving the production of the show to pursue other projects; Wyman would remain as the sole showrunner for the show.[56] Casting[edit] The show's main characters, Olivia, Peter, and Walter, were at the core of the concept for Fringe. The creators recognized early that "the idea that telling a father-son story and a relationship story was a really compelling one and a very accessible one", according to Kurtzman.[38] They were able to provide the characters with backstories that, like with other long-term plot elements, could be alluded to over several episodes and seasons.[38] The characters would also contrast with the typical procedural genre show; rather than having clearly defined roles episode to episode, they instead "have an emotional memory and an emotional investment", as stated by Orci.[38] This also allowed for, as necessary, characters to be removed or introduced to the show and have a larger impact on the other characters.[38] The first actors cast were Kirk Acevedo and Mark Valley, who portrayed FBI agents Charlie Francis and John Scott, respectively.[57][58] John Noble and Lance Reddick, who play Dr. Walter Bishop and Homeland Security agent Phillip Broyles, joined the cast later on.[59][60] Casting of Anna Torv, Blair Brown, and Jasika Nicole, who play Olivia Dunham, Massive Dynamic employee Nina Sharp, and Astrid Farnsworth, a federal agent and assistant to Olivia Dunham, respectively, followed;[61] while Joshua Jackson, who plays Peter Bishop, was the last main character to be cast.[62] Jackson auditioned for James T. Kirk in Abrams' Star Trek and believed this is what impressed the producer to cast him in his television project,[63] though Abrams later clarified that it was recalling his previous experience with working with Jackson on his television series Felicity.[36] For the principal and recurring actors, they were all intrigued by the script for the pilot, comparing it to a two-hour-long movie, as well as Abrams' reputation.[36] On April 8, 2009, it was announced that Leonard Nimoy would appear as Walter Bishop's former lab partner, Dr. William Bell, in the first season's finale, which explores the existence of an ominous parallel universe. This choice led one reviewer to question if Fringe's plot might be a homage to the Star Trek episode "Mirror, Mirror", which explored the concept of an alternate reality referred to as a "mirror universe", and an evil version of Spock distinguished by a goatee.[64] Nimoy returned as Dr. Bell for an extended arc, and according to Orci, Bell is "the beginning of the answers to even bigger questions."[65][66] Nimoy reprised his role in the second-season finale, where his character and Walter met for a "showdown".[67] Nimoy's character is apparently dead after the season finale, having used himself to help Walter, Peter and the Alternate Olivia back to the prime universe. As he had retired from acting, it was thought unlikely that his character would return.[68] In February 2011 however, he announced his definite plan to return to Fringe and reprise his role as William Bell.[69] He returned to voice the character in the animated segments of the third-season episode "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide",[70] and appeared as a computer-generated character in the fourth-season episode "Letters of Transit".[71] In the two-part finale of the fourth season, Nimoy returned to play the ultimate antagonist of the alternate timeline story arc. Reception[edit] Early reception through the first season was generally lukewarm, with many noting its "lackluster" start and the "dullness" of the characters. However, changes in the approach and storytelling of the show in the second and subsequent seasons led to more positive critical reception and made it a media favorite. As a whole, the series was well received by the critics and has developed a cult following.[72] First season[edit] The pilot episode was watched by 9.13 million viewers, garnering 3.2/9 Nielsen ratings among adults 18–49, with ratings improving over the course of the episode.[73] Ratings improved greatly for the second episode, "The Same Old Story" which 13.27 million people watched, making it the fifth most watched show of the week.[74] As of October 2008, the show had achieved the first place in the 18–49 demographic among new shows.[75] Barry Garron at The Hollywood Reporter found it promising and "reminiscent of battle-of-the-sexes charm."[76] Robert Bianco, of USA Today, said, "What Abrams brings to Fringe is a director's eye for plot and pace, a fan's love of sci-fi excitement, and a story-teller's gift for investing absurd events with real emotions and relatable characters."[77] Travis Fickett of IGN gave it 7.6 out of 10, calling it "a lackluster pilot that promises to be a pretty good series".[78] While Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle remarked that it was "boundlessly ambitious",[79] Chicago Sun-Times's Misha Davenport called it an "update of The X-Files with the addition of terrorism and the office of Homeland Security".[80] In a 2016 retrospective of the series, A.V. Club writer Joshua Alston noted that the similarities to The X-Files, including the "monster of the week" approach and tepid romance between two of the series' lead characters, as well as the relatively recent release of The X-Files: I Want to Believe, had turned audiences off the show since "it was retreading what The X-Files had already done."[72] In its 2008 Year in Review, Television Without Pity declared Fringe one of the year's biggest TV disappointments, commenting that the show is "entertaining" and "the cast is largely strong" but the character development is insufficient, and describing main character Olivia Dunham as "wooden and distant." [81] Meanwhile, in other articles recounting the best and worst of 2008, The New York Times stated that Fringe "is the best of a rash of new series that toy with the paranormal". The author goes on to praise the cast saying that "Much credit belongs to Anna Torv who stars as an F.B.I. agent investigating bizarre murders that all appear to be linked to a powerful and mysterious multinational corporation", and "Ms. Torv is backed up ably by John Noble as a crazy but brilliant fringe scientist and his level-headed but skeptical son, played by Joshua Jackson".[82] Subsequent seasons[edit] Seasons of Fringe after the first season were seen as vast improvements on the first.[72] Entertainment Weekly stated, "The best new show of the year took a few weeks to grow on me, but now it's a full-blown addiction."[83] The Los Angeles Times called Walter Bishop one of the best characters of 2008, noting, "the role of the modern-day mad scientist could so easily have been a disaster, but the 'Fringe' writers and the masterful John Noble have conspired to create a character that seems, as trite as it sounds, more Shakespearean than sci-fi."[84] Chicago Tribune stated that some episodes are "distressingly predictable and formulaic" but adds that there have also been some excellent episodes.[52] The New York Times named Fringe one of the top 10 television shows in 2010,[85] while Television Without Pity, previously dismissive of the show, listed it amongst their 2010 "Most Memorable TV Moments", stating "there were so many great Fringe moments this year" and "we were treated to some of the best sci-fi on television this past fall".[86] The A.V. Club named Fringe the 15th best show of 2010, stated that the episode "Peter" gave "the series' overarching storyline a devastating emotional core", making the series a "rare blend of inventive ideas, wild ambition, and unexpected soulfulness".[87] IGN named Fringe the 18th best science fiction show of all time in a 2011 listing, stating that since the middle of the first season, "it's been nothing but a series of satisfyingly jaw-dropping 'holy eff!' moments layered with wonderful, nuanced performances from Anna Torv, Joshua Jackson and John Noble".[88] In 2012, Entertainment Weekly listed the show at #17 in the "25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years", saying, "Fringe was conceived as a mass-appeal genre procedural, with a background mythology that wouldn't detract from monster-of-the-week episodes. ... But the mythology overtook the monsters following the revelation of a parallel universe. By its third season, Fringe was overpopulated by multiple versions of every character. Unfortunately, that increasing narrative complexity has steadily pigeonholed it as a niche show."[89] In 2015, Bustle declared "White Tulip" as "one of the greatest hours in television history". He wrote, "'White Tulip' is an hour of television that shouldn't work, that technically doesn't even exist ... but thank god it does, because it's one of the most powerful episodes ever created — and it showcases why Fringe is one of the most criminally underrated series of our time."[90] U.S. ratings and series renewal history[edit] The following is a table of seasonal U.S. rankings (based on total viewers per episode including reruns) of Fringe on Fox. Season Timeslot (ET) Episodes Premiered Ended Rank Viewers (in millions) Date Premiere viewers (in millions) Date Finale viewers (in millions) Season 1 Tuesday 9:00 p.m. 20 September 9, 2008 9.13[91] May 12, 2009 9.28[92] #41 10.02[93] Season 2 Thursday 9:00 p.m. Monday 9:00 p.m. ("Unearthed" only) 23 September 17, 2009 7.98[94] May 20, 2010 5.68[95] #79 6.25[96] Season 3 Thursday 9:00 p.m. (2010) Friday 9:00 p.m. (2011) 22 September 23, 2010 5.83[97] May 6, 2011 3.29[98] #99 5.83[99] Season 4 Friday 9:00 p.m. 22 September 23, 2011 3.48[100] May 11, 2012 3.11[101] #140 4.22[102] Season 5 Friday 9:00 p.m. 13 September 28, 2012 3.12[103] January 18, 2013 3.28[104] #111 4.27[105] Fringe premiered in the 2008 United States television season at a regular timeslot of 9:00 p.m. Eastern on Tuesdays. During Season 1, Fringe was part of a Fox initiative known as "Remote-Free TV". Episodes of Fringe were longer than standard dramas on current network television. The show ran with half the commercials, adding about six minutes to the show's runtime.[106] When the show went to a commercial, a short bumper aired informing the viewer of roughly how much time commercials would consume before the program resumed. The pilot episode was leaked via BitTorrent, three months before the series premiere; similar to leaked fellow Fox series Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles.[107] The series was renewed for a second season on May 4, 2009,[108] and moved to 9:00 p.m. on Thursday.[109] It was renewed for a third season on March 6, 2010.[110] As part of a reorganization of its 2010 midseason line up to capture more market for American Idol, the Fox network shifted Fringe to 9:00 p.m. on Fridays. This timeslot, commonly considered the "Friday night death slot" for several previous Fox shows due to cancellation shortly following the move to that slot, left critics considering the show's fate. While The X-Files originally premiered during this slot and would continue to be a highly successful series, critics were unsure if Fringe could duplicate this performance. In this slot, the show competed with Supernatural, a series that attracts similar types of viewers.[111] Fox's Entertainment President Kevin Reilly, in response to these concerns, stated that 45% of Fringe's viewership is from time shifting recording through digital video receivers, and does not expect the viewership numbers to change significantly with the change to Friday. Reilly further postulated that "If it does anywhere near what it did on Thursdays, we can glue that show to the schedule because it can be a big win for us".[112] Further promoted by the critical reaction to the rescheduling, the Fox network created a self-deprecating promotional advertisement acknowledging the reputation of the time slot, including quotes from other media outlets concerned about the move, but asserted that the move would "re-animate" the show.[113][114] The network also created a music video, set to "Echoes" by the band Klaxons as a means of summarizing the third season to date prior to the first Friday broadcast.[115] Joshua Jackson, who plays Peter Bishop on the show, cautioned that time-shifted viewership may not be enough to save the show: "It's not that not enough people are watching Fringe, it's that not enough people are watching Fringe during the hour that it's on the air, which is key for the network."[116] Producers Pinkner and Wyman also were excited about the move to Fridays, considering the slot as "open territory that can be conquered" and that they "can actually deliver like The X-Files did".[117] Series creator Abrams was less optimistic of the move to Friday nights, aware that the show's likelihood to be renewed for a fourth season would be highly dependent on the number of niche viewers that continue to watch the show.[118] Abrams did affirm that moving to Friday nights allows them to take more creative freedoms to maintain viewership in the new timeslot, but feels that if the show was not renewed for another season, they would be "hard pressed" to resolve the story by the end of the third season.[118] The show's first episode at the Friday 9:00 p.m. timeslot ("The Firefly") scored a 1.9 in the key 18–49 demographic which was an increase of 12% over its last Thursday-aired episode ("Marionette") which scored a 1.7,[119] and maintained similar numbers in the second week for "Reciprocity".[120] Though viewership slipped in further weeks, the show was renewed for a fourth season in March 2011. The move was unexpected based on these ratings, given the past performance of shows with similar viewership numbers in the Friday night slot, but several critics attribute it to the strong fanbase that the show has garnered, which contributes in part to consistently higher time-shifted viewership.[121] Fox's Reilly stated that: Fringe has truly hit a creative stride and has distinguished itself as one of television's most original programs. The series' ingenious producers, amazingly talented cast and crew, as well as some of the most passionate and loyal fans on the planet, made this fourth-season pickup possible. When we moved the show to Fridays, we asked the fans to follow and they did. We're thrilled to bring it back for another full season and keep it part of the Fox family. — Kevin Reilly, President of Fox Entertainment[122] Reilly further added that the renewal was also prompted by the high risk of trying to replace Fringe with another show with unknown viewership metrics; he commented that they "have a far better shot of sticking with a show that has an audience that [they] think [they] can grow".[123] Prior to the onset of the fourth season, Reilly reiterated that they do not expect any significant growth in Fringe's viewership within that season: "It's a pretty complex show. If Fringe can do exactly what Fringe did last year, we're going to be very happy. They're right in the pocket creatively once again."[124] Wyman stated in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter that the Fox network had been "supportive throughout this process", and though the show's viewership "wasn't exactly what they would've hoped for", aspects such as a loyal fan base and supportive critics were enough to take the show forward for another season.[125] Pinkner commented that "there were no creative conditions" on the show's renewal, nor any cuts in the show's budget, though was unsure if the show will be moved to a different time slot.[126] Noble, at the 2011 Comic-Con Fringe panel, reiterated that the fans were responsible for the livelihood of the show, stated, "Seriously, without your efforts, your rabid support, we wouldn't be here right now. You are the best fans that ever existed".[127] The fourth season premiered on September 23, 2011.[128] Before the renewal of the fifth season, Abrams stated some skepticism for a renewal opportunity, but hoped that if it was cancelled, that it may be picked up by another network. On the other hand, Abrams considered that if Fox did pick up the show for a fifth season, "the next year would be the great ending for the show".[129] Similarly, Fox's Reilly remained cautious about a renewal, noting that while the show is one of the top shows in the Friday night slot, "it's an expensive show. We lose a lot of money on the show."[129] Reilly further reiterated the dedication of the fans of the show for helping it to its fourth season and continued success.[129] When asked about whether the writers would have enough notice to write the fourth-season finale as a series finale if necessary, Reilly stated, "That's a Peter Roth issue" (chief executive of Warner Bros. Television).[130] To which Roth responded, "We have no plans to give viewers closure this season because we expect the series to continue".[131] In late January 2012, Fox and Warner Bros. Television were working on negotiating a lower licensing cost for the show to allow a fifth season to occur; this would not only help Fox reduce its losses on the show, but would also bring the total number of episodes above 100, giving Warner Bros. a better opportunity to syndicate reruns of the show.[132] Before the announcement of the fifth season, Wyman and Pinkner stated that they would have created a series finale for the end of the fourth season should the show be cancelled; Wyman stated "We want to take care of the fans. We want them to see where it would have gone, but we also know the show has been a commitment and we want everyone to be satisfied with it."[133] The show was officially renewed for a fifth and final season for the 2012–2013 television season, consisting of a shortened set of 13 episodes, on April 26, 2012, with its premiere on September 28, 2012.[134][135] Reilly, in announcing the renewal, stated that "Fringe is a remarkably creative series that has set the bar as one of television's most imaginative dramas. Bringing it back for a final 13 allows us to provide the climactic conclusion that its passionate and loyal fans deserve".[136] The writing team crafted an idea for a cohesive story-driven set of thirteen episodes as a means to complete the series, and to "honor the audience that had served us so well was to say a proper farewell", according to Roth.[137] Noble called it "the season for the fans", with the story revisiting many of the elements from the show's past.[137] Awards and nominations[edit] Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Fringe Fringe and its cast and crew have been nominated and won several awards including Emmys, Saturn Awards, Golden Reel Awards, Satellite Awards, and Writers Guild of America Awards. Award Year Category Nominee(s) Episode Result Primetime Emmy Awards 2009 Outstanding Special Visual Effects[138] Kevin Blank, Jay Worth, Andrew Orloff, Johnathan Banta, Steve Graves, Jonathan Spencer Levy, Scott Dewis, Steve Fong, Tom Turnball "Pilot" Nominated 2010 Outstanding Sound Editing in a Series[139] Paul Curtis, Rick Norman, Bruce Tanis, Paul Apelgren, Shelley Roden, Rick Partlow "White Tulip" Nominated Golden Reel Awards 2009 Best Sound Editing – Long Form Dialogue and ADR in Television[140] Bruce Honda, Bob Redpath, Chris Reeves, David M. Cowman, Mitchell C. Gettleman, Tom A. Harris, Virginia Cook McGowan "Pilot" Nominated Best Sound Editing – Short Form Dialogue and ADR in Television[141] Tom A. Harris, Christopher Reeves, Gabrielle Reeves, Jay Keiser "Safe" Nominated Best Sound Editing – Long Form Sound Effects and Foley in Television[142] Walter Newman, Bob Redpath, Micheal Ferdie, Kenneth Young, Adam Johnston, David Werntz, Ron Salaises, Casey Crabtree, Michael Crabtree "Pilot" Nominated 2010 Best Sound Editing – Short Form Sound Effects and Foley in Television[143] Thomas A. Harris, Michael Ferdie, Nick Neutra, Robert Kellough, Joe Schultz, Sanaa Cannella, Cynthia Merrill "Unleashed" Nominated Best Sound Editing – Short Form Music in Television[144] Paul Apelgren "Night of Desirable Objects" Nominated 2011 Best Sound Editing – Short Form Music in Television[145] Paul Apelgren "The Box" Nominated Best Sound Editing – Short Form Musical In Television[146] Paul Apelgren "Brown Betty" Nominated Satellite Awards 2008 Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries, or Television Film[147] John Noble Nominated 2009 Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries, or Television Film[148] John Noble Nominated Saturn Awards 2008 Best Network Television Series[149] Fringe Nominated Best Actress on Television[149] Anna Torv Nominated 2009 Best Network Television Series[150] Fringe Nominated Best Actress on Television[150] Anna Torv Won Best Supporting Actor on Television[150] John Noble Nominated Best Guest Star on Television[150] Leonard Nimoy Won 2010 Best Network Television Series[151][152] Fringe Won Best Actress on Television[151][152] Anna Torv Won Best Supporting Actor on Television[151][152] John Noble Won Best Supporting Actor on Television[151] Lance Reddick Nominated Best Guest Star on Television[151] Seth Gabel Nominated 2011 Best Network Television Series[153][154] Fringe Won Best Actress on Television[153][154] Anna Torv Won Best Supporting Actor on Television[153][154] John Noble Nominated Best Guest Star on Television[153][154] Orla Brady Nominated 2012 Best Network Television Series[155] Fringe Nominated Best Actress on Television[156] Anna Torv Won Best Actor on Television[155] Joshua Jackson Nominated Best Supporting Actor on Television[155] John Noble Nominated Best Guest Star on Television[155] Lance Reddick Nominated Best Guest Star on Television[155] Blair Bown Nominated Writers Guild of America Awards 2009 Long Form – Original[157] J. J. Abrams, Alex Kurtzman, Roberto Orci "Pilot" Nominated Distribution[edit] International[edit] Fringe premiered in Canada on CTV simultaneous to its U.S. premiere and was the most watched program in Canada that week.[158] The show would fluctuate between airing on CTV and A during its first two seasons. Beginning with the third season, Fringe was broadcast on City in Canada.[159] A version of the show (edited for time) premiered on the Nine Network in Australia on September 17, 2008. In the season one episode "In Which We Meet Mr. Jones", the opening scene where doctors discover a parasite on Detective Loeb's heart was cut, going straight to the opening credits.[160] Nine Network later dropped the show from its primetime schedule.[161] This was temporary as the show returned during the December to January non-ratings period.[162] The series later moved to Nine's digital multi-channel, GO!, where the last few seasons were played out. The series premiered in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on October 5, 2008.[163] Syndication[edit] With 13 episodes in its final season, Fringe has a total of 100 episodes, a critical number for syndication deals for Warner Bros., and considered part of the reason for the show's final renewal. The show premiered in syndication on the Science Network on November 20, 2012.[164][165] Home video releases[edit] The first season of Fringe was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on September 8, 2009 in region 1.[166][167] In addition to all the episodes that had been aired, extras include three commentary tracks, unaired scenes, gag reels and behind the scenes features. A "Fringe Pattern Analysis" feature is included on the Blu-ray version as an exclusive. The sets were released on September 28, 2009 in region 2[168] and on September 30, 2009 in region 4.[169] The second season features four commentary tracks, a gag reel, deleted scenes, behind the scenes videos, and the episode "Unearthed", an episode, produced for the first season, which aired out of schedule during the second season. It was released on DVD and Blu-ray on September 14, 2010 in region 1,[170][171] on September 27, 2010 in region 2,[172] and on November 10, 2010 in region 4.[173] The third season features two commentary tracks, a gag reel, behind the scenes videos, and two features exclusive to the Blu-ray version. It was released on DVD and Blu-ray on September 6, 2011 in region 1,[174][175] on September 26, 2011 in region 2,[176] and on October 26, 2011 in region 4.[177] The fourth season includes several special features, including "The Culture of Fringe", a roundtable discussion with series writers and university professors regarding the science featured in the series; features on how the disappearance of Peter affects the timeline, and the role of the Observers; two features covering the Fringe comic series; and a gag reel.[178] It was released on DVD and Blu-ray on September 4, 2011 in region 1,[179] on September 24, 2012 in region 2,[180] and on October 31, 2012 in region 4.[181] The fifth season includes featurettes titled "A Farewell to Fringe" and "Fringe Panel at Comic-Con 2012", as well audio commentaries and a gag reel. It was released on Blu-ray and DVD on May 7, 2013 in region 1[182] and on May 13, 2013 in region 2.[183] A complete series box set was also released on the same dates of the fifth season release in the respective regions.[184][185] Other media[edit] Games[edit] An alternate reality game, centered on the fictional Massive Dynamic corporation, was introduced during the pilot and featured "strange symbols paired with glowing dots" appearing throughout the episode and an "advertisement" for the company shown at the end with a web address for the game.[186] Books and comics[edit] On August 27, 2008, a prequel comic book (leading right up to the moment in the pilot where Olivia 'first' meets Walter) written by Zack Whedon was released by DC Comics under its WildStorm imprint.[187][188] This was to be the first issue of a monthly 6-issue limited series but the others were delayed until January 2009, when monthly publication resumed, with the sixth and final issue scheduled for release on June 17.[189] The Vice President of WildStorm, Hank Kanalz, explained the publication hiatus: "The writers of the show want to make sure the comic book is integrated into the mythology of the Fringe world, so we have decided to refocus the direction of the comic book. Unfortunately, this means that we will have some delays, but will be back in January."[190] On June 23, 2010, the first issue of Tales From the Fringe, the second six-part monthly series, was released, while the final issue was released on November 24, 2010.[191] Additionally, in September 2011, DC released the first issue of Beyond the Fringe comic series. With the first story written by Joshua Jackson titled "Peter and the Machine". The comic issues will alternate with an 'A' story and a 'B' story each. For example, "Peter and the Machine" will take place in issues one, three, and so on until the story is finished and a new 'A' story starts up.[192] An encyclopedia guide, September's Notebook — The Bishop Paradox, written by Tara Bennett and Paul Terry who had previously written the Lost Encyclopedia for Lost, was released in March 2013.[193] A three-part series of prequel novels written by Christa Faust was released throughout 2013 and 2014. Each novel deals with a member of the Fringe team's past. The first is titled The Zodiac Paradox and is about Walter and his discovery of Cortexiphan. The second in the series is titled The Burning Man and is based on Olivia and how she was first exposed to Cortexiphan. The third is titled Sins of the Father and is about Peter's life in 2008 just before the point of time when the series starts.[194] Possible film[edit] At San Diego Comic-Con 2012, actor John Noble mentioned that a film could be made further down the line.[195] Notes[edit] ^ Despite Michael Giacchino's name still credited in the TV series, he did not compose music from Season 2 onwards. ^ Fauxlivia: Faux, French for false References[edit] ^ Buchanan, Jason. "Fringe [TV Series] (2008)". AllMovie. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 18, 2013. ^ a b Brad Anderson (director), Jeff Pinkner (teleplay), J. H. Wyman (teleplay), Akiva Goldsman (story), Bryan Burk (story) (2009-05-12). "There's More Than One of Everything". Fringe. Season 1. Episode 20. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Norberto Barba (director), David H. Goodman (teleplay), Glen Whitman (story), Robert Chiappetta (story) (2009-02-10). "Ability". Fringe. Season 1. Episode 14. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Joe Chappelle (director), Zack Stentz (writer), Ashley Edward Miller (writer) (2009-10-08). "Momentum Deferred". Fringe. Season 2. Episode 4. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ David Straiton (director), Jeff Pinkner (teleplay/story), J. H. Wyman (teleplay/story), Josh Singer (teleplay/story), Akiva Goldsman (story) (2010-04-01). "Peter". Fringe. Season 2. Episode 16. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Anthony, Ted (January 20, 2011). "Fox's 'Fringe' a Not-So-Distant Mirror of Our Era". Associated Press. Retrieved January 21, 2011. ^ Akiva Goldsman (director/writer), Jeff Pinkner (writer) J. H. Wyman (writer) (September 25, 2016). "Over There". Fringe. Season 2. Episode 22–23. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Joe Chappelle (director), Jeff Pinkner (writer), J. H. Wyman (writer) (2010-09-23). "Olivia". Fringe. Season 3. Episode 1. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Brad Anderson (director), Jeff Pinkner (writer), J. H. Wyman (writer) (2010-12-02). "Entrada". Fringe. Season 3. Episode 8. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Dennis Smith (director), Alison Schapker (writer), Monica Owusu-Breen (writer) (2011-03-25). "Bloodline". Fringe. Season 3. Episode 18. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Joe Chappelle (director), Jeff Pinkner (teleplay/story), J. H. Wyman (teleplay/story), Akiva Goldsman (story) (2011-05-06). "The Day We Died". Fringe. Season 3. Episode 22. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Joe Chappelle (director), Jeff Pinkner (teleplay/story), J. H. Wyman (teleplay/story), Akiva Goldsman (story) (2011-09-23). "Neither Here Nor There". Fringe. Season 4. Episode 1. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ J. H. Wyman (director/writer), Graham Roland (writer) (2012-03-23). "A Short Story About Love". Fringe. Season 4. Episode 15. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Jeffrey Hunt (director), David Fury (writer) (2012-02-24). "The End of All Things". Fringe. Season 4. Episode 14. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Joe Chappelle (director), Jeff Pinkner (writer), J. H. Wyman (writer), Akiva Goldsman (writer) (2012-05-11). "Brave New World". Fringe. Season 4. Episode 21–22. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Truitt, Brian (July 15, 2012). "'Fringe' stars, fans feel the love going into final season". USA Today. Retrieved July 16, 2012. ^ Joe Chappelle (director), Akiva Goldsman (writer), J. H. Wyman (writer), Jeff Pinkner (writer) (2012-04-20). "Letters of Transit". Fringe. Season 4. Episode 19. Fox. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ a b Shen, Maxine (October 30, 2010). "'Fringe' goes over there". New York Post. Retrieved December 19, 2010. ^ Huddleston, Kathie (September 23, 2010). "A sneak peek at tonight's season 3 Fringe debut". Blastr. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012. Retrieved May 10, 2012. ^ Truitt, Brian (September 16, 2010). "'Fringe' producers on alternate universes and a third season: 'We're interested in world building'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 22, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2010. ^ a b c d Goldman, Eric (March 30, 2011). "Fringe's Future: Walternate's Plan, Olivia as Bell, More". IGN. Retrieved March 30, 2011. ^ a b Topel, Fred (August 5, 2008). "J.J. Abrams on TV's Fringe". SuicideGirls.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved January 8, 2009. ^ Sadun, Erica (April 7, 2009). "Ars cracks TV Fringe code". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 8, 2009. ^ Sanchez, Julian (April 7, 2009). "Solution to the Fringe Glyph Cipher". Retrieved March 29, 2011. ^ Link, Jessie (October 15, 2010). ""Fringe" recap: Two shapeshifters revealed". Salon. Retrieved June 5, 2011. ^ Tucker, Ken (December 2, 2010). "'Fringe' recap: 'Entrada' and exits, lives saved and lost". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 4, 2011. ^ Murray, Noel (April 1, 2010). "Peter". The A.V. Club. Retrieved June 5, 2011. ^ Jensen, Jeff (May 13, 2011). "'Fringe': Exec producers Jeff Pinkner, J.H. Wyman answer fan questions about the finale -- EXCLUSIVE". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 5, 2011. ^ Hanson, Andrew (September 24, 2011). "'Fringe' recap: In a world without Peter ..." Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 24, 2011. ^ Brown, Laurel (April 18, 2012). "'Fringe' Videos: A 'Letters of Transit' Promo and New Title Sequence". Buddy TV. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2012. ^ "Another Look At The FRINGE Future Intro Sequence – Screencaps & Video". Seriable. May 7, 2011. Archived from the original on December 17, 2011. Retrieved April 22, 2012. ^ Truitt, Brian (July 28, 2010). "Jasika Nicole looks to family for 'Fringe' inspiration". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 24, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2010. ^ Wieselmann, Jaret (March 4, 2011). "'Fringe' exec producer plays 'What If?'". New York Post. Archived from the original on March 6, 2011. Retrieved March 4, 2011. ^ Holbrook, Damian (March 9, 2011). "Fringe's Seth Gabel Previews the Lincoln Lee We Haven't Met Yet". TV Guide. Retrieved March 23, 2011. ^ a b c d e f g h i j Itzkoff, David (August 24, 2008). "Complexity Without Commitment". New York Times. Retrieved March 27, 2011. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Abrams, Natalie (January 14, 2013). "Fringe Oral History: Building the World of "Science Fact" - Part 1". TV Guide. Retrieved January 17, 2013. ^ Hibberd, James (November 30, 2010). "J.J. Abrams: 'Fringe' isn't directly inspired by 'X-Files'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ a b c d e f g h Huddleston, Kathie (September 8, 2008). "J.J. Abrams, Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci dig deep to discover "the pattern" in their new Fox series, Fringe". Science Fiction Weekly. Archived from the original on March 19, 2009. Retrieved March 27, 2011. ^ Wieselmann, Jarret (March 4, 2011). "'Fringe' exec producer plays 'What If?'". New York Post. Archived from the original on March 7, 2011. Retrieved March 9, 2011. ^ Hart, Hugh (February 4, 2010). "'Big Answer' Looms in Fringe's Mythology-Rich Winter Finale". Wired. Retrieved April 1, 2011. ^ a b c d e f g Abrams, Natalie (January 15, 2013). "Fringe Oral History: Dual Universes Open Up a New World Of Possibility". TV Guide. Retrieved January 17, 2013. ^ a b c d Abrams, Natalie (January 16, 2013). "Fringe Oral History: How the Series Changed Forever with One Sacrificial Act". TV Guide. Retrieved January 17, 2013. ^ "Pinker Reunites with Abrams for Fringe". Comingsoon.net. April 9, 2008. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ Hurwitz, Matt (August 24, 2009). "Composing: a collaborative process". Variety. Retrieved May 3, 2012. ^ Hanson, Andrew (May 20, 2010). "Pinkner and Wyman: the Evil Geniuses behind 'Fringe'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 31, 2011. ^ Schweitzer, Kate (September 10, 2008). "From LSD Brain to Dead Autopilot, Fringe Premiere Skirts Reality". Popular Mechanics. Popular Mechanics. Retrieved September 16, 2008. ^ a b Hanson, Andrew (September 17, 2009). "'Fringe': The complete and definitive chat with John Noble". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 17, 2011. ^ Salem, Rob (July 15, 2008). "Is Fringe the next Lost?". Toronto Star. Retrieved September 16, 2008. ^ Doyle, John (August 19, 2008). "Harper's hearth have you fuming? Dive into Abrams's Fringe". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on September 20, 2008. Retrieved September 16, 2008.(subscription required) ^ a b c Scott, Walter (April 13, 2010). "'Fringe' Films on Rival Turf". Parade. Retrieved March 31, 2011. ^ Soll, Lindsay (February 21, 2009). "'Fringe' moves production to Canada". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ a b Ryan, Maureen (2009-02-24). "Keeping up with Mr. Jones: Details on 'Fringe's' future". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29. Retrieved 2011-01-25. ^ "New York's Film Tax Credit in the 2010 Legislature (The Entertainment, Arts and Sports Law Blog)". nysbar.com. ^ Strachan, Alex (March 29, 2011). "Fringe returns from the brink". Vancouver Sun. Missing or empty |url= (help) ^ "Photos: TV series Fringe filming in downtown Vancouver". Vancouver Sun. August 19, 2010. Retrieved May 3, 2012. ^ Ng, Philiana (June 19, 2012). "'Fringe' Co-Showrunner Jeff Pinkner Exits for Final Season". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 20, 2012. ^ Dahl, Oscar (January 17, 2008). "New Abrams Series 'Fringe' Gets Two Cast Members". Buddy TV. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ TV Guide News (January 17, 2008). "J.J. Abrams' Fringe Goes on Casting Binge". TV Guide. Retrieved March 29, 2011. ^ Andreeva, Nellie (January 24, 2008). "Fox draws Noble, Reddick into its "Fringe"". Reuters. Retrieved June 5, 2011. ^ Hooper, Mark (January 24, 2008). "Catch of the day: Cloverfield, Star Trek and now Fringe". The Guardian. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ "Fringe TV Behind the Scenes - Meet the Cast: Supporting Players". IGN. September 9, 2008. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ "Creek star 'set for sci-fi role'". BBC News. February 8, 2008. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ Lesnick, Silas (February 9, 2009). "Eyeing Captain Kirk's Chair, Joshua Jackson Auditioned For 'Star Trek'". MTV Movies Blog. Retrieved February 9, 2009. ^ "TV Review: FRINGE - SEASON ONE - 'The Road Not Taken'". iFMagazine.com. May 5, 2009. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ Godwin, Jennifer (April 8, 2009). "Fringe & Trek: Dish on Leonard Nimoy's Big New Gigs". E! Online. Archived from the original on March 20, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ O'Connor, Mickey (April 8, 2009). "Fringe: Meet Dr. William Bell". TV Guide. Retrieved April 9, 2009. ^ Ausiello, Michael (January 25, 2010). "'Fringe' exclusive: It's Walter vs. William in the finale!". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 26, 2010. ^ "Nimoy Retiring From Acting". Cinemablend.com. April 21, 2010. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ "Leonard Nimoy Confirms Return To Fringe". trekmovie.com. Retrieved February 25, 2011. ^ Tucker, Ken (April 15, 2011). "Fringe recap: LSD and the red door: Feed your head". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 13, 2011. ^ Zalben, Alex (April 20, 2012). "FRINGE's "Letters Of Transit" Is A Tangible Reason To Give The Show A Fifth Season (Recap)". MTV Geek. Retrieved May 3, 2012. ^ a b c Alston, Joshua (July 7, 2016). "In its stellar 3rd season, Fringe combined the best of both worlds". The A.V. Club. Retrieved July 7, 2016. ^ Kissell, Rick (September 10, 2008). "'Fringe' underwhelms but wins night". Variety. Retrieved September 12, 2008. ^ "Weekly Program Rankings". ABC Medianet. September 23, 2008. Retrieved September 24, 2008. ^ Schneider, Michael (October 1, 2008). "Fox orders more 'Fringe'". Variety. Retrieved October 5, 2008. ^ Garron, Barry (September 8, 2008). "TV Review: Fringe". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 12, 2008. ^ Bianco, Robert (August 19, 2008). "Something great is out there: Fox's 'Fringe'". USA Today. Retrieved September 12, 2008. ^ Fickett, Travis (September 8, 2008). "Fringe: "Pilot" Review". IGN. Retrieved September 12, 2008. ^ Goodman, Tim (September 8, 2008). "Geek squad likely to stick with 'Fringe'". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved September 12, 2008. ^ Davenport, Misha (September 8, 2008). "Critic Reviews for Fringe Season 1 at Metacritic". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved September 12, 2008. ^ "Year in Review 2008: Biggest TV Disappointments". Television Without Pity. Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008. ^ Stanley, Alessandra (December 19, 2008). "Politics Gets the Entertainment Vote". New York Times. Retrieved May 23, 2011. ^ Tucker, Ken (December 19, 2008). "10 Best TV Shows of 2008: Ken Tucker's Picks". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ "Grateful for 'Life,' 'In Treatment,' 'Dexter' ..." Los Angeles Times. December 21, 2008. Archived from the original on January 30, 2009. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ Hale, Mike (December 19, 2010). "Cartoons, Quarterbacks and Comedians". New York Times. Retrieved December 19, 2010. ^ "Year in Review 2010: Most Memorable TV Moments". Television Without Pity. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ "The 25 best television series of 2010". The A.V. Club. December 20, 2010. Retrieved December 20, 2010. ^ "Top 50 Sci-Fi TV Shows". IGN. February 23, 2011. Retrieved February 23, 2011. ^ "25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years." Entertainment Weekly. August 3, 2012, p. 41. ^ Grubbs, Jefferson (October 10, 2015). "Why 'Fringe' Season 2 Episode "White Tulip" Is One Of The Greatest Hours In Television History". Bustle. Retrieved February 12, 2016. ^ Gorman, Bill (September 17, 2008). "Top Fox Primetime Shows, September 8–14". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 26, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2008. ^ Seidman, Robert. "Top Fox Primetime Shows, May 11–17, 2009". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on March 19, 2011. Retrieved May 20, 2009. ^ "Final 2009-10 Broadcast Primetime Show Average Viewership". ABCmedianet. June 2, 2009. Archived from the original on June 19, 2009. Retrieved October 27, 2011. ^ Gorman, Bill (September 18, 2010). "TV Ratings Thursday: Strong: Bones; Weak: Parks, Office, Survivor; Good Start: Community". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 9, 2011. Retrieved April 2, 2011. ^ Gorman, Bill (May 21, 2010). "Grey's Anatomy Rules Finale Thursday; Bones, FlashForward, CSI, Parks, 30 Rock, Ref Rise". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 25, 2011. Retrieved May 22, 2010. ^ Gorman, Bill (June 16, 2010). "Final 2009-10 Broadcast Primetime Show Average Viewership". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 21, 2010. Retrieved April 2, 2011. ^ Seidman, Robert (September 24, 2010). "TV Ratings Thursday: 'The Big Bang Theory' Scores at 8pm; 'Grey's Anatomy' Tops Night With Young Adults; 'My Generation' Premiere Stalls". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 17, 2010. Retrieved September 25, 2010. ^ Gorman, Bill (May 9, 2011). "Friday Final Ratings: 'Supernatural,' 'CSI:NY' Adjusted Up, No Adjustments To 'Fringe'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved May 9, 2011. ^ Gorman, Bill (June 1, 2011). "2010-11 Season Broadcast Primetime Show Viewership Averages". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2011. ^ Gorman, Bill (September 26, 2011). "Friday Final Broadcast TV Ratings: No Adults 18-49 Adjustments, Plus 'Fringe' & 'A Gifted Man' 15 min. Ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved September 26, 2011. ^ Bibel, Sara (May 14, 2012). "Friday Final TV Ratings: 'Shark Tank', 'CSI:NY', 'Who Do You Think You Are' Adjusted Up; 'Primetime: What Would You Do?' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012. ^ Gormam, Bill (May 24, 2012). "Complete List Of 2011-12 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'American Idol,' 'NCIS' & 'Dancing With The Stars'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2012. ^ Bibel, Sara (October 1, 2012). "Friday Final TV Ratings: '20/20' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2012. ^ Bibel, Sara (January 22, 2013). "Friday Final TV Ratings: 'Fringe' Finale and 'Malibu Country' Adjusted Up". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. ^ Bibel, Sara (May 29, 2013). "Complete List Of 2012-13 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'NCIS,' 'The Big Bang Theory' & 'NCIS: Los Angeles'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2013. ^ Schneider, Michael (May 15, 2008). "New Fox dramas to limit commercials". Variety. Retrieved May 18, 2008. ^ Jenna, Wortham (June 17, 2008). "Fringe Pilot Leaks Online Three Months Before Premiere". Wired. Retrieved September 16, 2008. ^ Seidman, Robert (May 4, 2009). "FOX renews Fringe for a full second season". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 24, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2010. ^ Goldman, Eric (May 18, 2009). "Fringe Moves to Risky Timeslot; Dollhouse Stays Put on Fridays". IGN. Retrieved May 3, 2012. ^ Rice, Lynette (May 6, 2011). "Exclusive: Fringe picked up for a third season". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 23, 2011. ^ Goldman, Eric (November 19, 2010). "Fringe's Scary New Timeslot". IGN. Retrieved November 19, 2010. ^ Rice, Lynette (November 22, 2010). "Fox execs on 'American Idol,' 'Fringe' moves: 'It's the right moment'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 30, 2010. ^ Buchaan, Kyle (December 14, 2010). "Fox Markets Fringe With New 'Friday Death Slot' Ad". New York Magazine. Retrieved December 16, 2010. ^ Jensen, Jeff (December 16, 2010). "'Fringe' exclusive: Fox execs on its 'deathslot'-spoofing promo and plans to attract new viewers". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 16, 2010. ^ Jensen, Jeff (January 18, 2011). "Watch the 'Fringe' music video 'Echoes' -- EXCLUSIVE". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 18, 2011. ^ Sacks, Ethan (January 21, 2011). "Joshua Jackson returns with new season of 'Fringe' hoping to soldify show's uncertain future". New York Daily News. Retrieved January 21, 2011. ^ Huddleson, Kathie (December 2, 2010). "Fringe producers: Why our move to Fridays is a GOOD thing". Blastr. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2011. ^ a b Topel, Fred (January 12, 2011). "J.J. Abrams' reaction to Fox moving Fringe to Fridays: 'Sh*t!'". Blastr. Archived from the original on September 13, 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2012. ^ Gorman, Bill (January 22, 2011). "Updated TV Ratings Friday: 'Fringe' Premieres Up, 'Medium' Series Finale Rises, 'Kitchen Nightmares' Starts Well". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 24, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2011. ^ Seidman, Robert (January 29, 2011). "Updated TV Ratings Friday: 'Fringe' Holds Steady, 'Kitchen Nightmares' Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 30, 2011. Retrieved January 29, 2011. ^ Hanks, Henry (March 28, 2011). "'Fringe' renewed: Can fan passion trump". CNN. Archived from the original on April 23, 2011. Retrieved March 30, 2011. ^ Ausiello, Michael (2011-03-25). "Breaking: Fox Renews Fringe for Season 4!". TVLine.com. Retrieved 2011-03-25. ^ Levin, Gary (April 1, 2011). "Save our shows! TV series fight for survival". USA Today. Retrieved April 1, 2011. ^ Hibbart, James (August 5, 2011). "Fox doesn't expect 'Fringe' to grow in ratings". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 6, 2011. ^ Ng, Philiana (March 25, 2011). "'Fringe' Executive Producer Calls Season 4 Renewal 'Gutsy'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 25, 2011. ^ Jansen, Jeff (April 15, 2011). "'Fringe' scoop: More on Leonard Nimoy's 'animated' return. Plus: The producers on the show's 'anti-climactic' renewal". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 15, 2011. ^ Rice, Lynette (July 24, 2011). "'Fringe' at Comic-Con: Is Jeff Probst or Zach Quinto replacing Josh Jackson? -- VIDEO". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 25, 2011. ^ "FOX Announces Fall Premiere Dates for the 2011-2012 Season" (Press release). Fox. June 23, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2011. ^ a b c Goldman, Eric (January 8, 2012). "Fringe: J.J. Abrams, FOX on a Potential Season 5". IGN. Retrieved January 12, 2012. ^ Hibberd, James (January 9, 2012). "Joshua Jackson reacts to Fox's 'Fringe' warning". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 19, 2012. ^ Young, Susan (January 9, 2012). "FOX chief warns that the future of 'Fringe' is in doubt". The Clicker. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012. ^ Ausiello, Michael (January 23, 2012). "Fringe Update: Season 5 Discussions Underway, J.J. Abrams 'Hopeful' Show Will Be Back". TV Line. Retrieved January 23, 2012. ^ Hickley, David (February 23, 2012). "'Fringe' hopes for a future, but is ready for an end". New York Daily News. Retrieved March 2, 2012. ^ Hibberd, James (April 26, 2012). "Official: 'Fringe' renewed for final season!". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 26, 2012. ^ Jensen, Jeff (July 1, 2012). "Comic-Con Exclusive: Sneak peek at 'Fringe' poster ... and Observageddon!". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 8, 2010. ^ Warner, Kara (April 26, 2012). "'Fringe' Renewed For Fifth And Final Season". MTV. Retrieved April 26, 2012. ^ a b Abrams, Natalie (January 17, 2013). "Fringe Oral History: The Road to the Series Finale". TV Guide. Retrieved January 26, 2013. ^ "Primetime Emmy Awards nominations for 2009 - Outstanding Special Visual Effects For A Series". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Retrieved May 9, 2012. ^ "Primetime Emmy Awards nominations for 2010 - Outstanding Sound Editing For A Series". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Retrieved May 9, 2012. ^ "Best Sound Editing in Television Long Form Dialogue & ADR Nominees" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2010. Retrieved March 11, 2009. ^ "Best Sound Editing in Television Short Form Dialogue & ADR Nominees" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2010. Retrieved March 11, 2009. ^ "Best Sound Editing in Television Long Form Sound Effects & Foley Nominees" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2010. Retrieved March 11, 2009. ^ "Golden Reel 2010 Sound Editing Nominees" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2010. Retrieved June 26, 2010. ^ "Golden Reel 2010 Music Nominees" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 15, 2010. Retrieved June 26, 2010. ^ "Best Sound Editing: Short Form Music In Television" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2011. Retrieved January 28, 2011. ^ "Best Sound Editing: Short Form Musical In Television" (PDF). Motion Picture Sound Editors. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2011. Retrieved January 28, 2011. ^ "2009 13th Annual Satellite Awards". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2009. ^ "2009 14th Annual Satellite Awards". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on September 28, 2010. Retrieved June 26, 2010. ^ a b McMillan, Graeme (March 11, 2009). "Saturn Award Nominees Announced". io9. Retrieved March 8, 2014. ^ a b c d "Saturn Awards - 36th Annual Results". L.A. Times. June 25, 2010. Retrieved June 26, 2010. ^ a b c d e "The 37th Annual Saturn Award Nominations". Bloody Disgusting!. February 11, 2011. Retrieved March 8, 2014. ^ a b c Jeffery, Morgan (June 24, 2011). "'Fringe', 'True Blood' win at 37th Saturn Awards". Digital Spy. Retrieved June 24, 2011. ^ a b c d Goldberg, Matt. "Saturn Award Nominations Announced; HUGO and HARRY POTTER Lead with 10 Nominations Each". Collider. Retrieved March 8, 2014. ^ a b c d Vary, Adam B. (July 27, 2012). "'Fringe', 'True Blood' win at 37th Saturn Awards". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 27, 2012. ^ a b c d e Moore, Debi (February 20, 2013). "2013 Saturn Award Nominees Announced". Dread Central. Retrieved March 8, 2014. ^ Taylor, Drew (June 27, 2013). "Saturn Awards 2013 Winners List: 'Avengers' Named Best Sci-Fi Film of the Year". Moviefone. Retrieved March 8, 2014. ^ "2009 Writers Guild Awards Television & Radio Nominees Announced for 2009". Writers Guild of America. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2009. ^ "Top Programs – Total Canada (English) September 8–14, 2008" (PDF) (Press release). BBM Canada. September 19, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 6, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2011. ^ Bailey, Katie (August 11, 2010). "Citytv unveils fall premiere dates". Playback. Retrieved May 25, 2011. ^ "Fringe - Series Premiere - Wednesday, September 17 AT 8:30PM on Nine" (Press release). Nine Network. September 4, 2008. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved September 16, 2008. ^ Knox, David (October 17, 2008). "Gone: Fringe". TV Tonight. Retrieved December 13, 2008. ^ Knox, David (December 3, 2008). "Nine switches Fringe episodes". TV Tonight. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ "Fringe: What's it All About?". Sky1. December 3, 2008. Retrieved May 3, 2012. ^ Andreeva, Nellie (May 23, 2012). "'Fringe' Sells In Off-Network Syndication To Science Channel". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 20, 2012. ^ Busis, Hillary (November 12, 2012). "'Fringe': Science Channel to re-air all five seasons". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 18, 2013. ^ "Fringe: The Complete First Season (2008)". Retrieved May 8, 2012. ^ "Fringe - Warner's Official Press Release Reveals Street Date for Season 1 Blu-ray & DVD". TVShowsOnDVD. May 28, 2009. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2011. ^ "Fringe Season 1 (R2/UK BD) in September - Artwork added". Home Cinema. July 24, 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2011. ^ "Fringe - The Complete 1st Season (7 Disc Box Set)". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on July 8, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2012. ^ "Fringe: The Complete Second Season (2009)". Retrieved May 8, 2012. ^ "Fringe - The Complete 2nd Season Now Officially Announced on DVD and Blu-ray". TVShowsOnDVD. June 16, 2010. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2011. ^ "Fringe & Supernatural (UK) in September". Home Cinema. July 22, 2010. Retrieved May 15, 2011. ^ "Fringe - The Complete 2nd Season (4 Disc Set) (Blu-ray)". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on July 8, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2012. ^ "Fringe: The Complete Third Season (2010)". Retrieved May 8, 2012. ^ Lambert, David (June 15, 2011). "Fringe - Street Date, Pricing, Specs and Bonus Material for 'Season 3' on DVD and Blu-ray". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on June 19, 2011. Retrieved June 16, 2011. ^ "Fringe - Season 3 (DVD)". Amazon.co.uk. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ "Fringe - The Complete 3rd Season (6 Disc Set)". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ Brown, Kenneth (September 4, 2012). "Fringe: The Complete Fourth Season Blu-Ray". Blu-ray.com. Retrieved October 17, 2012. ^ "Fringe: The Complete Fourth Season (2011)". Retrieved October 17, 2012. ^ "Fringe: The Complete Fourth Season (2011)". Amazon.co.uk. Retrieved October 17, 2012. ^ "Fringe: The Complete 4th Season". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2012. ^ Lambert, David (January 23, 2013). "Fringe - Spring Date, Pricing, Extras and Early Art for 'The Complete 5th and Final Season'". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Retrieved January 23, 2013. ^ "Fringe - Season 5". Amazon.co.uk. Retrieved December 25, 2012. ^ Lambert, David (February 7, 2013). "Fringe - Package Images Arrive for 'The Complete Series' on DVD and Blu-ray Disc". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on February 10, 2013. Retrieved February 7, 2013. ^ "Fringe - The Complete Season 1-5". Amazon.co.uk. Retrieved February 7, 2013. ^ Woerner, Meredith (September 7, 2008). "Fringe's ARG Upsets Nature, Messes With Your Mind". i09. Retrieved May 3, 2012. ^ Gundersen, Edna; David Colton (June 13, 2008). "Coming Attractions: The Radiators, Natalie Cole, Jeremy DeCoursey, J.J. Abrams". USA Today. Retrieved September 16, 2008. ^ Vineyard, Jennifer (August 29, 2008). "Doctor Horrible Sings Again, Gets Moist". MTV News. Retrieved September 16, 2008. ^ "DC Comics Solicitations for June, 2009". Comic Book Resources. March 23, 2009. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ Brady, Matt (October 10, 2008). "DC's 'Fringe' Comic Delayed Until January". Newsarama. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ "Fringe: Tales from the Fringe Comic Books". IGN. Retrieved May 22, 2011. ^ Jensen, Jeff (September 11, 2011). "'Fringe': Joshua Jackson pens key mythology tale in new digital comic 'Beyond the Fringe' -- FIRST LOOK". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 7, 2012. ^ Holbrook, Dale (January 11, 2013). "Fringe First Look: September's Notebook". TV Guide. Retrieved January 13, 2013. ^ "FRINGE Prequel Novels: The Zodiac Paradox, The Burning Man — Details & Pre-Ordering". Fringe Bloggers. January 22, 2013. Retrieved April 28, 2013. ^ Gallagher, Brian (July 15, 2012). "COMIC-CON 2012: Fringe Movie May Happen Says John Noble!". MovieWeb. Retrieved October 14, 2012. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Fringe Fringe on Facebook Fringe at IMDb Fringe at TV.com Fringe at TV Guide Fringepedia v t e Fringe Episodes Season 1 "Pilot" "The Same Old Story" "The Ghost Network" "The Arrival" "Power Hungry" "The Cure" "In Which We Meet Mr. Jones" "The Equation" "The Dreamscape" "Safe" "Bound" "The No-Brainer" "The Transformation" "Ability" "Inner Child" "Unleashed" "Bad Dreams" "Midnight" "The Road Not Taken" "There's More Than One of Everything" Season 2 "A New Day in the Old Town" "Night of Desirable Objects" "Fracture" "Momentum Deferred" "Dream Logic" "Earthling" "Of Human Action" "August" "Snakehead" "Grey Matters" "Unearthed" "Johari Window" "What Lies Below" "The Bishop Revival" "Jacksonville" "Peter" "Olivia. In the Lab. With the Revolver." "White Tulip" "The Man from the Other Side" "Brown Betty" "Northwest Passage" "Over There (Parts 1 & 2)" Season 3 "Olivia" "The Box" "The Plateau" "Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep?" "Amber 31422" "6955 kHz" "The Abducted" "Entrada" "Marionette" "The Firefly" "Reciprocity" "Concentrate and Ask Again" "Immortality" "6B" "Subject 13" "Os" "Stowaway" "Bloodline" "Lysergic Acid Diethylamide" "6:02 AM EST" "The Last Sam Weiss" "The Day We Died" Season 4 "Neither Here nor There" "One Night in October" "Alone in the World" "Subject 9" "Novation" "And Those We've Left Behind" "Wallflower" "Back to Where You've Never Been" "Enemy of My Enemy" "Forced Perspective" "Making Angels" "Welcome to Westfield" "A Better Human Being" "The End of All Things" "A Short Story About Love" "Nothing As It Seems" "Everything in Its Right Place" "The Consultant" "Letters of Transit" "Worlds Apart" "Brave New World (Parts 1 & 2)" Season 5 "Transilience Thought Unifier Model-11" "In Absentia" "The Recordist" "The Bullet That Saved the World" "An Origin Story" "Through the Looking Glass and What Walter Found There" "Five-Twenty-Ten" "The Human Kind" "Black Blotter" "Anomaly XB-6783746" "The Boy Must Live" "Liberty" "An Enemy of Fate" Characters Olivia Dunham Peter Bishop Walter Bishop Astrid Farnsworth Lincoln Lee See also Awards and nominations Fringepedia Mythology (Massive Dynamic) v t e J. J. Abrams Films Director Mission: Impossible III (2006, also wrote) Star Trek (2009, also produced) Super 8 (2011, also wrote, produced) Star Trek Into Darkness (2013, also produced) Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015, also wrote, produced) Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019, also wrote, produced) Writer Taking Care of Business (1990) Regarding Henry (1991) Forever Young (1992) Gone Fishin' (1997) Armageddon (1998) Joy Ride (2001, also produced) Producer The Pallbearer (1996) The Suburbans (1999) Cloverfield (2008) Morning Glory (2010) Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol (2011) Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation (2015) 10 Cloverfield Lane (2016) Star Trek Beyond (2016) The Cloverfield Paradox (2018) Mission: Impossible – Fallout (2018) Overlord (2018) Television Felicity (1998–2002) Alias (2001–2006) Lost (2004–2010) Fringe (2008–2013) Undercovers (2010) Demimonde (TBA) Related Bad Robot Productions Unrealized projects S. v t e Saturn Award for Best Television Series 1980s Star Trek: The Next Generation (1988) 1990s Star Trek: The Next Generation (1989/90) Dark Shadows (1991) The Simpsons (1992) Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman (1993) The X-Files (1994) The Outer Limits (1995) The X-Files (1996) Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997) The X-Files (1998) Now and Again (1999) 2000s Buffy the Vampire Slayer (2000) Buffy the Vampire Slayer (2001) Alias (2002) Angel/CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (2003) Lost (2004) Lost (2005) Heroes (2006) Lost (2007) Lost (2008) Lost (2009) 2010s Fringe (2010) Fringe (2011) Revolution (2012) Hannibal / Revolution (2013) Hannibal (2014) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125