This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2016) Frostbiter: Wrath of the Wendigo Directed by Tom Chaney Produced by Tom Chaney Bill Siemers David Thiry Written by Tom Chaney Starring Ron Asheton Lori Baker Devlin Burton John Bussard Patrick Butler Alan Madlane Music by Steve Quick Cinematography Tom Chaney Edited by Tom Chaney Kaye Davis Distributed by Troma Entertainment Release date 1996 (1996) Running time 98 minutes Country United States Language English Frostbiter: Wrath of the Wendigo, is an independent comedy horror film, filmed sometime in 1988 but released in 1996 by Troma Entertainment. One of the stars, Ron Asheton, was the guitarist for The Stooges. Contents 1 Synopsis 2 Details 3 References 4 External links Synopsis[edit] Two friends go hunting in the woods of Northern Michigan. While wandering the woods, they accidentally break a sacred circle, releasing a terrible monster: the Wendigo. The Wendigo goes on a terrible killing spree, leaving a gun-toting hero and his female love-interest to destroy the monster. Details[edit] The film owes a large debt to Sam Raimi's Evil Dead films with its mix of horror and comedy, in fact featuring a torn Evil Dead II poster in much the same way The Evil Dead features a torn The Hills Have Eyes poster. The film also gives "special thanks" to Bruce Campbell, the star of the Evil Dead films. This connection was reinforced in Japan, where the movie was released on video under the misleading title Shiryōnoharawata Sai Tsui Shō. Since the Japanese title of Evil Dead is Shiryōnoharawata, the distributors obviously tried to cash in on the success of Raimi's trilogy. Also, the Japanese videocassette box puts the emphasis on a creature with a skull's head, reminiscent of the original Evil Dead II poster.[1] At one part of the film, footage from Frank Capra's It's a Wonderful Life, with some scenes in the film claiming to take place in Bedford Falls, much like the Christmas classic. The movie was filmed primarily in southeast Michigan, in particular on a hunting cabin set built inside an old schoolhouse in Tecumseh. References[edit] ^ Details on the Japanese release of Frostbiter (in Japanese) External links[edit] API at IMDb Frostbiter: Wrath of the Wendigo at AllMovie This article about a comedy horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e