an anthropomorphic animal character who lives and acts like a human This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2012) This article gives self-sourcing popular culture examples without describing their significance in the context of the article. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources that describe the examples' significance, and by removing less pertinent examples. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged or removed. (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) API The rabbits in Beatrix Potter's stories are funny animals: Peter wears a jacket and shoes; he and his family live in a rabbit hole that has a human kitchen, human furniture, and a shop where his mother sells various items. A funny animal is an anthropomorphic animal character who lives and acts like a human. They speak a human language (most commonly English) and are typically bipedal, wear clothes, live in houses, drive and ride vehicles, and have jobs or may even be recognized citizens of countries, which distinguish them from other animal characters who may nonetheless display anthropomorphic characteristics such as speaking or showing facial expressions. Funny animal (also talking animal) is also the genre of comics and animated cartoons which primarily feature funny animals.[1] While many funny animal stories are light-hearted and humorous, with the funny characters often acting in a comedic and sometimes childish way, the genre is not exclusively comedic. Dark or serious stories featuring characters of this sort can also be grouped under the "funny animals" category, sometimes referred to as anthropomorphic characters[2] to avoid confusion over the range of genres. These stories may intersect with any other genre or group of genres, including historical fiction, science fiction, superhero, western, slapstick comedy, children's/family entertainment, and satire.[3] Contents 1 History 1.1 Print media 1.2 Animated cartoons 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading History[edit] Print media[edit] The White Rabbit. Illustration by John Tenniel (1865). Early examples of funny characters in literature can be found in Jean Ignace Isidore Gérard Grandville's Les Métamorphoses du Jour (1828–1829), a series of illustrations which anthropomorphized humans as animals [4] and in the 1865 book Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll with rabbits such as the March Hare. Peter Rabbit is another funny rabbit, created by Beatrix Potter. The oldest funny animal comic strip is James Swinnerton's The Little Bears, which debuted in 1892. [5] The earliest example of funny animals in a British comic strip was Arthur White's Jungle Jinks (1898–1947), which featured a group of school children, anthropomorphized as animals. The comic strip ran in Playbox, a supplement of Home Chat, for years. [6] Jungle Jinks in particular paved the way for a whole stream of British comics about funny characters, such as Tiger Tim, Teddy Tail and Rupert Bear.[7] An early example of a novel which made exclusive use of funny animals was the 1908 children's book The Wind in the Willows by Kenneth Grahame. This story featured the character Mr. Toad who is human in almost every sense, except physical appearance. Other characters in the book, such as a mole, water rat, and badger, are also act very similar to humans, with the exception of preferring their species' native habitats. The mole, for example, lives underground, but in a finished home.[8] In the United States the most well known funny animal comic was Krazy Kat (1913) by George Herriman. It featured a cat, a mouse Ignatz and a dog police officer named Offissa Pup.[9] Animated cartoons also inspired a whole industry of comic strips and comic books based on funny characters, often produced under license, such as Felix the Cat, Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Bugs Bunny. The 1945 novel Animal Farm by George Orwell notably features several talking characters who transition to bipedal, clothes-wearing funny characters by the end of the story. In the 1940s, Fawcett Comics published a comic book entitled Funny Animals, featuring such characters as Hoppy the Marvel Bunny, an anthropomorphic rabbit version of Captain Marvel.[10] Charles M. Schulz's dog character Snoopy from Peanuts and the title cat character of Jim Davis's comic strip Garfield are non-speaking pets, so are not funny animals by the above definition; however they both came to develop some funny animal-like traits. Initially depicted as quadrupedal, they became increasingly bipedal and anthropomorphic. Snoopy in particular began as an entirely quadrupedal character in 1950 and had no dialogue at all; but by the late 1960s he was frequently shown writing books, playing shortstop and eventually wearing clothes, e.g. Joe Cool (1971, a sweater and sunglasses) and The Red Baron. Instead of verbalizing as humans would with speech balloon, Snoopy, Garfield and some others instead use thought balloons to convey messages. This tactic allows for the relationship between human and animal to be ambiguous, as it may not be clear whether the human can understand what the animal is thinking. When the Peanuts specials were adapted for television, producers opted to not verbalize Snoopy's thoughts through voice acting, instead opting to have him communicate his feelings in a pantomime fashion. The only exceptions are in the animated adaptions of the stage musicals You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown and Snoopy! The Musical, where Snoopy's inner monologue is voice acted. Another way Snoopy has communicated in various Peanuts animated works, as well as in the original comic strip, is when Snoopy makes use of a typewriter, with the resulting text often visible to the viewer; Snoopy Come Home features an example of this. The ambiguous relation between Garfield and his owner, Jon Arbuckle, inspired a number of derivative works, among them being Garfield Minus Garfield, a collection of strips with the title character edited out and Arbuckle effectively speaking to himself. U.S. Acres is another comic strip created by Jim Davis, featuring a group of barnyard animal characters, such as Orson the pig and Wade the duck. The primary characters of the strip, all of which are bipedal, are all closer to the above definition of "funny animal" than Garfield. Unlike Garfield, they speak with ordinary speech bubbles (as opposed to thought bubbles). Despite the fact that the characters are largely unclothed barnyard animals, and are not typically depicted outside the farm, the characters still exhibit funny animal-like behavior; for example, in one strip, Wade uses a hairdryer and an electric razor.[11] In early strips, Orson is shown to be able to converse with humans.[12] The newspaper comic Pearls Before Swine features various funny animals each named after their respective species, such as the characters Rat and Pig. In 1984 Marvel Comics published Marvel Tails Starring Peter Porker, the Spectacular Spider-Ham (an alternate-reality tale with Peter Parker as a pig). Since the mid 1960s subversions of the innocence of funny animal stories have been generated by the underground comix movement, with Robert Crumb's Fritz the Cat and Kim Deitch's Waldo the Cat as prime examples. Here the funny cats are portrayed doing drugs, having sex and acting far more violently than what mainstream media would dare to portray. Beginning in the 1980s, there was a subgenre of original funny animal alternative comics with subject matter created largely for mature readers. These creations included the political science fiction allegory in Albedo Anthropomorphics, the sexually explicit serial drama of Omaha the Cat Dancer, the noir style of Blacksad and the Pulitzer Prize-winning graphic Holocaust narrative, Maus. Animated cartoons[edit] Sylvester the Cat and Foghorn Leghorn in Crowing Pains (1947) The funny animal genre evolved in the 1920s and 1930s, at a time when blackface became less socially acceptable. Early black-and-white funny animals, including Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, Mickey Mouse, Foxy the Fox, Felix the Cat and Flip the Frog, maintained certain aspects of the blackface design, including (especially with the advent of sound film) heavy emphasis on song and dance routines. The increased use of Technicolor and other color film processes in the 1930s allowed for greater diversity in the ability to design new "funny animals", leading to a much wider array of funny animal shorts and the near-total demise (except for Mickey Mouse and a few other Disney characters of the era) of the blackface characters. Song and dance fell out of favor and were largely replaced by comedy and satire. The Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies shorts by Warner Bros. Animation, for instance, introduced dozens of funny animals, many of whom have reached iconic status in American culture. Other notable funny animals from the color film era included Universal's Woody Woodpecker, Wally Walrus, Chilly Willy and Andy Panda; MGM's Screwy Squirrel, Barney Bear and Droopy; and Terrytoons' Heckle and Jeckle, Gandy Goose, Dinky Duck and Mighty Mouse. MGM's Tom and Jerry also exhibit a lot of funny animal traits, even though Tom is depicted as a pet housecat. In Disney's Mickey Mouse cartoons, most of Mickey Mouse's friends are funny animals, including Goofy, who is a funny animal dog, also known as a dogface. Pluto, another dog character in the cartoons, is not a funny animal, as he is a pet with few anthropomorphic traits beyond his facial expressions. The stark difference between Goofy and Pluto's portrayals has been commented upon by media outlets.[13][14] Television changed the dynamic of animation in that, although budgets were much smaller and schedules much tighter, this prompted a shift from the physical comedy that predominated film shorts to more dialogue-oriented jokes (including celebrity impressions and one-liner jokes). Hanna-Barbera Productions focused almost exclusively on these kinds of funny animal TV series, creating an extensive line of funny animal television series starring characters such as Huckleberry Hound, Yogi Bear, Snagglepuss and Top Cat. Jay Ward Productions also produced Rocky and Bullwinkle (also known as Rocky and his Friends, The Bullwinkle Show or The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show), a series starring a "plucky" flying squirrel named Rocky and his incompetent moose sidekick and best friend, Bullwinkle J. Moose, as they fought against Eastern European (human) espionage. The series was a representative of the genre (albeit with much stronger Cold War overtones than the shows of Hanna-Barbera exhibited); Ward was also responsible for the lighter funny animal series Super Chicken and Hoppity Hooper, and his contemporary Total Television (which used the same Mexican animation studio) produced a complementary string of animal cartoons of its own, famously Underdog. By the 1970s, most funny animals and other anthropomorphic characters had lost their lead status and had been relegated to members of an ensemble cast of mostly humans or supporting characters; the Scooby-Doo franchise, for example, inspired several ensemble mystery-comedies with funny animals existing alongside humans. During this period there were standout creations like Ralph Bakshi's iconoclastic feature animated film, Fritz the Cat, the first animated feature intended explicitly for adult viewers as marked by its X rating by the MPAA, and Walt Disney Productions' Robin Hood in 1973, the studio's first animated feature to feature exclusively humanoid animal characters, which proved a major inspiration for furry fandom. Funny animals and animal-like characters made a brief comeback in the late 1980s and into the 1990s (most notably through various Warner Bros. and Disney television creations, and through the decidedly cruder work of Bakshi and John Kricfalusi). Gromit from Wallace and Gromit is a funny animal dog who has no animalistic qualities aside from his face. The subsequent years also had numerous successful animated feature film franchises that featured funny characters like DreamWorks Animation's Kung Fu Panda series, Walt Disney Animation Studios' Zootopia and Illumination Entertainment's Sing. Artists have created increasingly more unusual examples of funny animals in this era, such as SpongeBob SquarePants from the Nickelodeon's TV series of the same name, who is unusual as he is a sea sponge, an animal that is seldom anthropomorphized; and the fish characters from Disney's Fish Hooks, who live similar lives to those of humans, even though they are shown to live in an aquarium in a pet store. Netflix's BoJack Horseman features adult themes played out by a mixture of animals and humans who rarely mention their differences, and when the differences are mentioned it is sometimes taken as a racial slight. Phineas and Ferb has Perry the Platypus, a secret agent who pretends to be a pet around his human family. Family Guy has a funny animal dog, Brian, who mostly does things a human can do, such as smoking and driving a car. See also[edit] American comic book Kemono Furry fandom Golden Age of American animation Human–animal hybrid Talking animal List of anthropomorphic animal superheroes References[edit] ^ Katalin Orban, Ethical Diversions: The Post-Holocaust Narratives of Pynchon, Abish, DeLillo, and Spiegelman, New York, London: Routledge, 2005, p. 52: "'funny animal' or 'talking animal' type of comics, such as Donald Duck, Mickey Mouse or Krazy Kat." ^ M. Keith Booker (ed.), Comics through Time: A History of Icons, Idols, and Ideas, Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, 2014, p. 177. ^ Markstein, Don. "Toonopedia: Funny Animal". Archived from the original on 2009-10-16. Retrieved 2006-12-27. ^ "J. J. Grandville". lambiek.net. Retrieved 2021-04-09. ^ "James Swinnerton". lambiek.net. Retrieved 2021-04-09. ^ "Arthur White". lambiek.net. Retrieved 2021-04-09. ^ "Arthur White". lambiek.net. Retrieved 2021-04-09. ^ Green, Peter (1983). Beyond the wild wood : the world of Kenneth Grahame, author of The wind in the willows. Internet Archive. New York : Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-87196-740-4. ^ "George Herriman". lambiek.net. Retrieved 2021-04-09. ^ "6 DC Characters Shazam 2 Should Introduce". CINEMABLEND. 2020-06-03. Retrieved 2020-09-21. ^ https://garfield.com/usacres/1987/05/17 ^ https://garfield.com/usacres/1986/03/30 ^ Bethy Squires (23 March 2019). "New Mickey Mouse Cartoon Weighs In on the Pluto vs. Goofy Paradox". Vulture. Retrieved 3 April 2020. ^ Cecil Adams (22 September 1989). "If Pluto is a dog, what is Goofy?". The Straight Dope. Retrieved 3 April 2020. Further reading[edit] Williams, P.; Lyons, J. (2010), The Rise of the American Comics Artist: Creators and Contexts, University Press of Mississippi, ISBN 9781604737929 Meskin, A. and Cook, R.T. and Ellis, W. (2011), The Art of Comics: A Philosophical Approach, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 9781444354829CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) Encyclopedia of Comic Books and Graphic Novels, ABC-CLIO, 2010, ISBN 9780313357473 v t e Comics Glossary of comics terminology Formats Comic book Ashcan comic Minicomic Comic strip Comic strip formats Daily comic strip Lianhuanhua Sunday comics Topper Yonkoma Digital comics Mobile comic Webcomic Webtoon Gag cartoon Graphic novel Trade paperback Political cartoon Techniques Film comic Motion comic Photo comics Text comics Creators Cartoonists list Colorists Editors Inkers Letterers Publishing companies Writers By format Editorial list Minicomics Webcomics By country American Jewish American Australian Canadian Cuban Japanese (manga) Macedonian Other Female comics creators list History Years in comics American Golden Age Silver Age Bronze Age Modern Age events Japanese (manga) Webcomics Narratology Genres Abstract Adult Alternative Ambiguous Anthropomorphic Autobiographical Celebrity Crime Dystopian Erotic Fantasy list Gekiga Horror Romance list Science fiction Superhero Teen humor Tijuana bible Underground War Western Wrestling Tropes Antihero Funny animal Masking Rogue Superhero Supervillain Widescreen comics Themes Ethnic stereotypes Feminist Gender and webcomics LGBT American mainstream Portrayal of black people African characters Portrayal of women The Hawkeye Initiative Women in Refrigerators By country Africa South Africa Americas Argentina Brazil Canada Quebec Mexico United States list Asia China and Taiwan list Hong Kong India list Japan lists Korea list Philippines list Thailand Vietnam Europe Czech Republic France and Belgium list Belgium Germany Hungary Italy list Netherlands Poland Portugal Serbia Spain list United Kingdom Wales Oceania Australia Lists By format Comic books Comic strips Manga magazines Webcomics By source Based on fiction Based on films Based on television programs Based on video games Other lists Awards Best-selling comic series manga manga magazines Comic books on CD/DVD Comics and comic strips made into feature films Comics solicited but never published Limited series Collections and museums Belgian Comic Strip Center Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum National Cartoon Museum British Cartoon Archive Caricature & Cartoon Museum Basel Cartoon Art Museum The Cartoon Museum Fred Waring Cartoon Collection Gibiteca Antonio Gobbo Michigan State University Comic Art Collection Museum of Comic and Cartoon Art ToonSeum Words & Pictures Museum Schools Center for Cartoon Studies The Kubert School Organizations Professional Academy of Comic Book Arts Association of Canadian Cartoonists Association of Comics Magazine Publishers Australian Cartoonists' Association National Cartoonists Society Samahang Kartunista ng Pilipinas Critical and academic Association des Critiques et des journalistes de Bande Dessinée Canadian Comic Book Creator Awards Association Comic & Fantasy Art Amateur Press Association Sequart Organization Svenska Serieakademien Charitable and outreach Academy of Comic-Book Fans and Collectors British Amateur Press Association (comics) Comic Book Legal Defense Fund Comic Legends Legal Defense Fund Finnish Comics Society Friends of Lulu The Hero Initiative Xeric Foundation Category Portal WikiProject v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125