Gargantua VHS cover Directed by Bradford May Produced by Peter V. Ware Written by Ronald Parker Starring Adam Baldwin Julie Carmen Emile Hirsch Music by J. Peter Robinson Cinematography John Stokes Edited by Buford F. Hayes Production company Fox Television Studios Distributed by Twentieth Century Fox Release date May 19, 1998 (1998-05-19) (United States) Running time 86 minutes Language English Budget $8 million[1] Gargantua is a American 1998 giant monster television film, starring Adam Baldwin, Julie Carmen and Emile Hirsch. It was directed by Bradford May and written by Ronald Parker. The film was shot on location throughout Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.[2] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 In other media 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] On the island of Malau, marine biologist Jack Ellway (Adam Baldwin) studies the effect of seismic activity on the area's marine life. A string of mysterious drownings soon turns their research project into a beachfront disaster as Jack learns that a nearby underwater trench is home to a family of giant amphibians that have mutated after prolonged exposure to buried pesticides. As Jack and local doctor Alyson Hart (Julie Carmen) explore the surrounding ocean for the creatures, the military comes and tries to investigate. Jack's son, Brandon (Emile Hirsch), discovers and befriends a baby creature that is able to leave the ocean and walk on land, and the parent creature tries to find the baby and go on a rampage. After its first rampage, the military gets involved and kills the parent. The next morning, it turns out that there is another parent, and it returns to the ocean with the baby. Cast[edit] Adam Baldwin as Dr. Jack Ellway Julie Carmen as Dr. Alyson Hart Emile Hirsch as Brandon Ellway Bobby Hosea as Coronel Wayne Doug Penty as Paul Bateman Peter Adams as Dr. Ralph Hale Alexander Petersons as Derek Lawson Monroe Reimers as Presidente Manny Moki Darren Selby as Kikko Tony Briggs as Police Chief Don Battee as T J In other media[edit] Gargantua was novelized by K. Robert Andreassi, a pseudonym for Keith R.A. DeCandido, and published by Tor Books. Reception[edit] Gargantua made its television premiere on the same night that one of its rival projects, Godzilla (1998), had its theatrical release.[2] Gargantua holds a 21% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.[3] Julie Carmen was nominated for the ALMA Award in 1999 for her performance in this movie. She was indicated in the category "Outstanding Individual Performance in a Made-for-Television Movie or Mini-Series in a Crossover Role".[4] References[edit] ^ "Fox's Monstrous 'Gargantua' A Real Fright". sfgate.com. SFGate. ^ a b "Gargantua". IMDb.com. 19 May 1998. Retrieved 2017-01-07. ^ "Gargantua". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 2017-01-07. ^ "1999 NCLR ALMA AWARDS" (PDF). Almaawards.com. Retrieved 2017-01-07. External links[edit] API at IMDb This article related to an American TV movie is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e