This article is about the 2006 comic by Slave Labor Graphics based on the Disney TV cartoon. For the 1995 series by Marvel Comics based on the Disney TV cartoon, see Gargoyles (TV series) § Marvel. For the Marvel Comics characters named "Gargoyle", see Gargoyle (comics). For other uses, see Gargoyle (disambiguation). Gargoyles Cover of Gargoyles #1 by Greg Guler Publication information Publisher Slave Labor Graphics Schedule Bi-monthly Genre Superhero Publication date 2006 - 2009 No. of issues 12 Main character(s) Manhattan Clan Creative team Created by Greg Weisman (uncredited) and others Written by Greg Weisman Penciller(s) David Hedgecock Greg Guler Nir Paniry Karine Charlebois Gordon Purcell David Hutchison Ben Dunn Colorist(s) Will Terrell Dustin Evans Stephanie Lostimolo Robby Bevard Editor(s) Jennifer de Guzman Gargoyles is a fictional team of characters appearing in comic book series by Slave Labor Graphics and Creature Comics which appeared between 2006 and 2009. It was based on the 1994 animated television series Gargoyles, and was written by series co-creator Greg Weisman. The comic continued the storyline of the first two seasons, but ignores much of the third season, The Goliath Chronicles. Contents 1 Storyline 2 Production 3 Spin-offs 4 Issues 4.1 Gargoyles 4.2 Gargoyles: Bad Guys 4.3 Collections 5 Awards 6 References 7 External links Storyline[edit] The comic acted as a continuation of the animated series after episode 65, picking up after the climactic second season finale, "Hunter's Moon, Part III". The first two issues of the comic translate episode 66 "The Journey", which was the only third season Gargoyles episode Weisman considers to be canonical (as well as the only Gargoyles episode Weisman wrote). Issue #3 of the Gargoyles comic then began a completely new storyline, which deliberately ignored the rest of the events of the televised third season. Weisman has confirmed that the in-universe timeline of the comic starts in 1996, just after the conclusion of the final episode of the series' second season. Issue #10 was the first issue set in 1997. Production[edit] In June 2005, it was announced that a series of Disney-licensed, bi-monthly Gargoyles comic books would be created by Slave Labor Graphics in association with CreatureComics. Gargoyles #1 was released on June 21, 2006 and promptly sold out, ensuring a second printing. After an extended delay, Gargoyles #2 was released on December 13, 2006. Issue #6 contains an error: the artwork on page 12 and 16 was switched, even though the text is correct. Slave Labor has acknowledged this error, and the corrected issue was reprinted on November 14. Greg Guler, character designer for the original TV series, and Stephanie Lostimolo have produced the cover art for each issue. Story art is primarily being produced by David Hedgecock and colored by Dustin Evans, although issues #4, #5, and #6 were drawn by guest artists. Gargoyles #6 used the unpublished script that Weisman wrote for the Marvel series.[1] In August 2008, Greg Weisman announced that, due to Disney increasing its licensing fees, Slave Labor Graphics would not be renewing its license of Gargoyles after it ran out on August 31, 2008. The final two issues of Bad Guys and four of Gargoyles were released in the comic trades collecting both series in August 2009. Weisman also stated that SLG President Dan Vado has not given up on the Gargoyles franchise, and hopes to pursue the idea of Gargoyles graphic novels in the future.[2] Spin-offs[edit] One of Greg Weisman's planned Gargoyles spin-offs, Bad Guys, appeared as a black-and-white six-issue limited series in 2007/08. The first issue was released on November 28, 2007. The series was written by Weisman and drawn by Karine Charlebois, with cover art by Greg Guler and Stephanie Lostimolo. Had the comics continued, Gargoyles: Pendragon would have been next in line, followed by Gargoyles: Timedancer. Each of these would have also appeared as a six-issue black-and-white limited series. Issues[edit] Note that Gargoyles issues #9–12 and Bad Guys issues #5–6 were only published in the collections. Gargoyles[edit] Title Issue # Release date "Nightwatch" 1 June 21, 2006 Pencil artist: David Hedgecock Color artist: Will Terrell Cover Artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo As the public learns of the existence of gargoyles in NYC, the Manhattan Clan goes into hiding atop the Eyrie Building while an anti-gargoyle group known as the Quarrymen are formed by John Castaway. Meanwhile the police set up a task force led by Matt Bluestone to deal with the issue. When Goliath later visits Elisa to discuss their troubles, the two find themselves on the run from a squad of Quarrymen. "The Journey" 2 December 13, 2006 Pencil artist: David Hedgecock Color artist: Will Terrell Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo Elisa and a wounded Goliath are pursued through Manhattan by the murderous Quarrymen, while a debate about gargoyles between ADA Margot Yale and "Lennox MacDuff" continues on the local news. "Invitation Only" 3 March 28, 2007 Pencil artist: David Hedgecock Color artist: Dustin Evans Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo Xanatos arranges a Halloween costume party on top of the Eyrie Building, and the gargoyles plan to attend, pretending to be wearing gargoyle "costumes." However, Elisa and Goliath's relationship has taken a sudden turn. And the shadowy Illuminati are making plans of their own concerning the gargoyles. "Masque" 4 May 16, 2007 Pencil artist: Nir Paniry Color artist: Dustin Evans Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo The gargoyles mingle with humans in the Eyrie building under cover of a costume party. Thailog returns from his supposed death to claim his "property", and Xanatos is absent from his own party, visiting the White House. "Bash" 5 July 18, 2007 Pencil artist: Karine Charlebois Color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo The confrontation between Thailog, Goliath, and the clones turns violent, and Delilah must choose a side. Meanwhile, Xanatos meets with a mysterious man in Washington D.C. "Reunion" 6 October 10, 2007 Reprint: November 14, 2007 Pencil Artist: Gordon Purcell Color artist: Dustin Evans Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo Thailog is told of a lost tale from the Avalon World Tour by his new executive assistant. The tale involves Goliath and company meeting up with Coldstone in the Himalayas. The issue ends with Xanatos meeting up with a familiar face. "The Rock" 7 December 12, 2007 Pencil artist: David Hedgecock Color Artist: Robby Bevard Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard Macbeth is aided by Lexington and Hudson to safeguard the Stone of Destiny while it's being taken from London to Scotland. Meanwhile Xanatos prepares for his mission from the Illuminati and recruits Coldsteel and Coyote (Now 5.0). "Rock & Roll" 8 March 26, 2008 Pencil artist: David Hedgecock Color artist: Robby Bevard Cover artist: David Hedgecock Cover color artist: Jorge Molina After Macbeth and the gargoyles make their acquaintance with the London Clan, they unite to protect the Stone from Coldsteel. "Rock of Ages" 9 See Clan-Building, Volume Two Pencil artist: David Hedgecock Color artist: Robby Bevard Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard The Gargoyles, now joined by Coldstone and Coldfire, continue their fight to protect the Stone from Coldsteel, while their opponents implement the rest of their scheme. (This is David Hedgecock's last issue as artist for the series, due to his inability to stay on schedule.) "The Gate" 10 See Clan-Building, Volume Two Pencil artist: Greg Guler Color artist: Robby Bevard Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard The Phoenix Gate returns to Manhattan, breaks into the Phoenix itself and whisks Brooklyn back to 997 Scotland in the first trip of his 40 year Timedance (which may eventually be created into its own spin-off series, called Timedancer). Greg Guler guest pencils.[3] "Tyrants" 11 See Clan-Building, Volume Two Pencil artist: David Hutchison Color artist: Robby Bevard Cover artist: David Hutchison Cover color artist: Robby Bevard "Phoenix" 12 See Clan-Building, Volume Two Pencil artist: Ben Dunn Color artist: Robby Bevard Cover artist: David Hutchison Cover color artist: Robby Bevard Brooklyn and Demona's clan join the fight against the usurper King Constantine. Back in 1997, Goliath's brooding about his clan's survival is interrupted by a pair of unexpected and joyous reunions and additions to the family. Gargoyles: Bad Guys[edit] Title Issue # Release date "Strangers" 1 November 28, 2007 Pencil artist: Karine Charlebois Color artist: N/A Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Stephanie Lostimolo The Redemption Squad (Dingo, Matrix, Fang, Yama and Robyn Canmore/Hunter) is on its way to a mission when it comes under attack. The tale of how Dingo came to join the group after his first encounter with the Hunter is recounted. "The Lost" 2 April 30, 2008[4] Pencil artist: Karine Charlebois Color artist: N/A Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard The Redemption Squad continues its mission. The rest of the issue details Yama's recruitment and ends with a familiar face visiting Fang in the Labyrinth.[4] "Estranged" 3 May 21, 2008 Pencil artist: Christopher Jones Color artist: N/A Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard As the title suggests, this issue mostly deals with Robyn Canmore's current relationship with her two brothers Jason and Jon with flashbacks to the night when their father was killed during a fight with Demona. "Louse" 4 August 20, 2008 Pencil artist: Karine Charlebois Color artist: N/A Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard "Strangled" 5 See Bad Guys: Redemption Pencil artist: Karine Charlebois Color artist: N/A Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard "Losers" 6 See Bad Guys: Redemption Pencil artist: Karine Charlebois Color artist: N/A Cover artist: Greg Guler Cover color artist: Robby Bevard Collections[edit] Title Volume # Release date "Clan-Building, Volume One" 1 of 2 January 23, 2008 Pages: 168 Price: $19.95 Cover Artist: Greg Guler Cover Color Artist: Stephanie Lostimolo Collects issues #1-6 of the Clan-Building Arc. Introduction by Wendy Pini. "Clan-Building, Volume Two" 2 of 2 August 2009[5] Pages: 168 Price: $19.95 Cover Artist: David Hutchison Cover Color Artist: Robby Bevard Collects issues #7-12, completing the Clan-Building Arc. "Bad Guys: Redemption" 1 of 1 August 2009[6] Pages: 168 Price: $17.95 Cover Artist: Greg Guler Cover Color Artist: Robby Bevard Collects issues #1-4 including the planned #5 and #6 as bonus material. Awards[edit] Award name Year Status Ursa Major Award - Best Comic Book 2007 Won[7] References[edit] ^ Product description for Gargoyles #6 ^ http://s8.org/gargoyles/askgreg/search.php?rid=795 ^ Search : Ask Greg : Gargoyles : Station Eight ^ a b Hunt, James (May 5, 2008). "Gargoyles: Bad Guys #2". Comic Book Resources News. Retrieved September 13, 2010. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Ask Greg ramble about trade paperback releases ^ SLG Publishing Summer Schedule Update ^ The Ursa Major Awards - 2007 winners External links[edit] Save the Gargoyles Comic!...And Other Gargoyles News Gargoyles Comic Interview with Weisman - March, 2006 Wondercon 2007 Panel Greg Weisman - March 4, 2007 GREG WEISMAN TALKS "THE AMAZING SPIDER-MAN" & "GARGOYLES" - March 8, 2007 Greg Weisman's interview on BAD GUYS & GARGOYLES comic books - October 2, 2007 Charlebois' BAD GUYS & GARGOYLES - October 18, 2007 Greg Weisman discusses the new Gargoyles comic series - July, 2008 Gargoyles at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) v t e Gargoyles Characters Goliath Elisa Maza David Xanatos Demona Related Episodes Voice actors Comic Video game Gargoyles the Movie: The Heroes Awaken