Fictional superhero This article is about the Marvel Comics fictional characters named "Gargoyle" found in comics. For the comic book series about the Disney show, see Gargoyles (comics). For other uses, see Gargoyle (disambiguation). Gargoyle is a name shared by two fictional characters appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Contents 1 Publication history 2 Fictional character biography 2.1 Gargoyle (Yuri Topolov) 2.2 Gargoyle (Isaac Christians) 3 Powers and abilities 4 In other media 4.1 Television 4.2 Video games 5 References 6 External links Publication history[edit] The first Gargoyle, Yuri Topolov, appears in The Incredible Hulk #1 (May 1962), and was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby.[1] The Gargoyle's appearance in Rampaging Hulk #1 is merely part of one of Bereet's fictional techno-art films.[citation needed] The first Gargoyle received an entry in the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Deluxe Edition #17, where his real name was revealed. The second Gargoyle, Isaac Christians, is a human/demon hybrid and a member of the Defenders. He was created by writer J. M. DeMatteis and artist Don Perlin. Perlin's design was inspired by a sequence in Prince Valiant in which the titular hero disguises himself as a gargoyle.[2] During his long run on The Defenders, Gargoyle also was the co-star of Marvel Team-Up #119, written by his co-creator DeMatteis, who later described the issue as "one of my favorite favorite stories".[3] In 1985 Marvel published a four-issue Gargoyle limited series, written by DeMatteis and drawn by Mark Badger. DeMatteis said of the series, "It was a psychological fantasy. You take the interior life and make it concrete... give it substance... and play with it".[4] Explaining why he decided to do a limited series starring Gargoyle, he said, I'd always wanted to do that character the right way. We'd had him in Defenders for years and Don Perlin and I were... We came to like him so much, as a person... this was a classic case of the character coming alive for us. We came to like Isaac Christians, this little old man inside the Gargoyle's body, so much that it began to mellow out the way we portrayed the outer shell, the gargoyle aspect. And, before you know it, he's this cute little funny animal. Which he was never intended to be.[3] In a 2013 interview DeMatteis said that Gargoyle "is a character I still have tremendous fondness for".[2] Fictional character biography[edit] Gargoyle (Yuri Topolov)[edit] Gargoyle Publication information Publisher Marvel Comics First appearance The Incredible Hulk #1 (May 1962) Created by Stan Lee, Jack Kirby In-story information Alter ego Yuri Topolov Team affiliations KGB Abilities Highly intelligent Used a gun that fired will-weakening pellets Yuri Topolov, was a Soviet scientist and the first foe of the Hulk. An atomic accident caused by working with radiation mutated him into a grotesque, large-headed dwarf of extremely high intelligence. He was informed of the Hulk by an imprisoned spy using a miniature transmitter, and succeeded in capturing him and Rick Jones using a gun that fired will-weakening pellets. Bruce Banner managed to cure him using Gamma rays. He gratefully used his rocket to send Banner and Jones back to the United States and managed to destroy several Soviet generals and 'die like a man' in an explosion he set off.[5] However, he passed this deformity on to his son, the Gremlin. Gargoyle (Isaac Christians)[edit] Gargoyle Publication information Publisher Marvel Comics First appearance The Defenders #94 (Apr 1981) Created by J. M. DeMatteis, Don Perlin In-story information Alter ego Isaac Christians Team affiliations Defenders Heroes for Hire The Six-Fingered Hand Abilities Superhuman strength, durability, and physical resistance Regeneration Biomystical energy manipulation Flight Limited immunity to magic spells Isaac Christians was an elderly man who sold his soul to an alliance of minor demons styling themselves as "The Six-Fingered Hand" in exchange for prosperity for the dying hometown that his ancestors had founded (the fictional town of Christiansboro, Virginia). Christians made a pact with the demon Avarrish to inhabit the body of an ancient gargoyle and act as an agent of the Six-Fingered Hand. The demons of the Six-Fingered Hand transferred Christians' life force into the Gargoyle body and sent him on a mission to capture Patsy Walker, at that time operating as Defenders member Hellcat. Christians battled the Defenders, but rebelled against the Six-Fingered Hand. He was trapped in the gargoyle's body, but joined the Defenders.[6] The Defenders then helped him defeat the Six-Fingered Hand.[7] As a member of the Defenders, Gargoyle helped the Squadron Supreme defeat the Overmind and Null the Living Darkness.[8] The Gargoyle briefly fell under the control of an Afghan wizard, and he was forced to battle the Defenders.[9] Christians later returned to Christianboro, and was later released from the Gargoyle body and the original demon spirit re-inhabited it. Christians, to prevent the chaos being wreaked by the gargoyle, re-assumed the body with the help of a druid and killed his original human body to prevent the demon from returning.[10] Moondragon, under the influence of the Dragon of the Moon, later separated Christians' life force from the gargoyle body. The body was to be used as a vessel for the Dragon of the Moon, and it became larger and more grotesque. The gargoyle body was carbonized and transformed into a statue of ash, when the Defenders defeated Moondragon and the Dragon of the Moon.[11] Christians' life force came to reside in a crystal talisman. He reconciled with the spirit of Moondragon, and journeyed with Pamela Douglas to Titan, where he witnessed the rebirth of Moondragon. The former Defender known as Cloud created a new body for Christians, with the ability to change back and forth between his gargoyle and human form.[12] Alongside the Presence, Starlight, Jack of Hearts, and others, he returned to Earth from the Stranger's laboratory world.[13] When the final confrontation between Gabriel, Devil Hunter, and Hellstrom left Gabriel irretrievably insane, only capable of babbling incoherently, Hellstrom left him in the care of the Gargoyle.[14] Following the "Civil War" storyline, Christians was one of the registered superhumans seen in Avengers: The Initiative #1. He was shown flying in an attack against HYDRA;[15] this helped save the President from an assassination attempt. He is shown in battle against KIA.[volume & issue needed] Gargoyle was also seen aiding Hellcat.[16] He ignored Nighthawk's offer to join the Last Defenders[volume & issue needed] and remained at Camp Hammond to serve as an instructor training the Initiative cadets[volume & issue needed] before retiring.[17] He returns to assist in defeating a deranged copy of Thor called 'Ragnarok'.[18] Alyosha Kravinoff later captured Gargoyle and placed him in his zoo for animal-themed superhumans which also consisted of Bushmaster, Tiger Shark, Kangaroo, Aragorn (the version that was owned by the Vatican Black Knight), Vulture, Mongoose, Man-Bull, Dragon Man, Swarm, Mandrill, Grizzly, Frog-Man, and Rhino.[19] Isaac Christians later opened up a restaurant called Isaac's Oysters in Greenwich with Eugene Patilio as his busboy. Both of them were approached by Iron Man for help in rescuing James Rhodes from Korvac.[20] Powers and abilities[edit] The second Gargoyle is the result of the magical transfer of Isaac Christians' spirit into the body of the Gargoyle. Gargoyle possessed superhuman strength and durability in his gargoyle form. His leathery hide offered resistance to various forms of physical attack. He could manipulate "bio-mystical" energy to numerous effects, including concussive blasts and projection of the emotion of fear into others. He could siphon bio-mystical energy from others, causing temporary debilitating weakness. Surrounding himself in a field of bio-mystical energy granted Gargoyle limited immunity to certain types of spells. Gargoyle could fly via mystical levitation; his wings were incapable of producing sufficient lift but could be used for navigation. Gargoyle could regenerate lost or damaged limbs, although they would differ wildly in appearance from the original limb. Over-expenditure of bio-mystical energy over a short time could weaken or kill the Gargoyle; also, he could be commanded to act against his will by a wizard who spoke a particular obscure spell. Isaac Christians was a student of the occult with minor mystical ability. Prior to his transformation, Christians had some ability to manipulate mystical forces, including rudimentary spell-casting and summoning demons. In other media[edit] Television[edit] The Yuri Topolov version of Gargoyle appeared in the Hulk segment of The Marvel Super Heroes, but he was called the Gorgon and not the Gargoyle in the TV version of the comic.[citation needed] The Yuri Topolov version of Gargoyle appeared in the 1996 The Incredible Hulk animated series, voiced by Mark Hamill. Gargoyle is always trying to find a cure for his mutation even allying himself with Leader. In the episode "Mortal Bounds", he accidentally released a gamma virus (infecting amongst others Betty Ross) in his search for a cure where he was restored to a near normal state yet also infected. When Betty Ross was dying from the virus, Gargoyle gave Bruce Banner the antidote as Gargoyle is also cured. Before leaving, Gargoyle warns Banner that the next time they met he would not be so favorable. His position with Leader was one of grudging subservience, although he did become the dominant member when Leader temporarily lost his powers at the beginning of the second season. From then on like MODOK in the Iron Man animated series, he became the bumbling comic relief with a crush on She-Hulk. Video games[edit] The Yuri Topolov version of Gargoyle appears in Lego Marvel's Avengers.[citation needed] References[edit] ^ DeFalco, Tom; Sanderson, Peter; Brevoort, Tom; Teitelbaum, Michael; Wallace, Daniel; Darling, Andrew; Forbeck, Matt; Cowsill, Alan; Bray, Adam (2019). The Marvel Encyclopedia. DK Publishing. p. 145. ISBN 978-1-4654-7890-0. ^ a b DeAngelo, Daniel (July 2013). "The Not-Ready-For-Super-Team Players: A History of the Defenders". Back Issue!. TwoMorrows Publishing (65): 12. ^ a b Salicrup, Jim; Higgins, Mike (October 1986). "J. Marc DeMatteis (part 2)". Comics Interview (39). Fictioneer Books. pp. 7–19. ^ Salicrup, Jim; Higgins, Mike (September 1986). "J. Marc DeMatteis (part 1)". Comics Interview (38). Fictioneer Books. pp. 20–35. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ The Incredible Hulk #1 ^ Defenders #94. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Defenders #99-100. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Defenders #112-114. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Defenders #136-13. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Gargoyle #1-4. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Defenders #152. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Solo Avengers #16, 18, 20. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Quasar #19-20. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Hellstorm #21. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Avengers: The Initiative #2 (July 2007). Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Marvel Comics Presents Vol. 2 #3-4 ^ Avengers: The Initiative #21 (2007). Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Avengers: The Initiative #22 (2007). Marvel Comics (New York). ^ The Punisher War Journal vol. 2 #13–15. Marvel Comics (New York). ^ Iron Man Vol. 6 #5. Marvel Comics (New York). External links[edit] Gargoyle (Christians) at The Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe Gargoyle (Christians) at MarvelDirectory.com v t e Defenders Roy Thomas Ross Andru Founding members Doctor Strange Hulk Namor the Sub-Mariner Recurring members Andromeda Angel Ant-Man Ardina Atlas Beast Black Cat Blazing Skull Captain America Clea Colossus Dagger Daimon Hellstrom Darkhawk Daredevil Deadpool Deathlok Devil-Slayer Doctor Druid Drax the Destroyer Gargoyle Ghost Rider Hawkeye Hellcat Iceman Interloper Iron Fist Jessica Jones Junta Loa Luke Cage Lyra Manslaughter Moondragon Namorita Nighthawk Nomad Northstar Nova Overmind Paladin Red Guardian (Tania Belinsky) Red Raven Red She-Hulk Scarlet Witch Sepulchre She-Hulk Silver Surfer Sleepwalker Spider-Man Spider-Woman Thunderstrike U.S. Agent Valkyrie War Machine Warlord Krang Wasp Wolverine Yellowjacket Other characters Aragorn Black Knight Black Panther Ghost Rider Howard the Duck Mister Fantastic Punisher Thing Wonder Man Wong Enemies Main enemies Alpha the Ultimate Mutant Attuma Dormammu Dracula Eel Enchantress Gargantua Karnilla Loki Lunatik Mandrill Mephisto Nebulon Null the Living Darkness Overmind Plantman Pluto Porcupine Presence Red Ghost Satannish Xemnu the Living Titan Yandroth Group enemies A.I.M. Brotherhood of Mutants Emissaries of Evil Cobalt Man Egghead Rhino Solarr The Hand Headmen Chondu the Mystic Gorilla-Man Ruby Thursday Shrunken Bones HYDRA Maggia Mutant Force Secret Empire Sons of the Serpent Squadron Sinister Undying Ones Wrecking Crew Wrecker Bulldozer Piledriver Thunderball Other media The Defenders Related topics List of Defenders members Marvel Feature v t e The Hulk Stan Lee Jack Kirby Hulk family Hulk/Bruce Banner Devil Hulk Guilt Hulk She-Hulk/Jennifer Walters Skaar Red Hulk Thunderbolt Ross Robert Maverick A-Bomb/Rick Jones She-Hulk/Lyra Hiro-Kala Red She-Hulk/Betty Ross Hulk/Amadeus Cho Weapon H Supporting characters Avengers Black Widow Captain America Doctor Strange Hawkeye Iron Man Spider-Man Thor Defenders Doc Samson Fantastic Four Gamma Corps Glorian Jack McGee/Jackie McGee Jarella Jim Wilson Marlo Chandler Namor Pantheon Rebecca Banner S.H.I.E.L.D. Nick Fury Teen Brigade Warbound Caiera Elloe Kaifi Hiroim Korg Miek No-Name X-Men Wolverine Enemies Main enemies Abomination Absorbing Man Brian Banner Bi-Beast Gargoyle Glenn Talbot Juggernaut Leader Madman Maestro Red Hulk Red King Rhino Ringmaster Thunderbolt Ross Tyrannus Wendigo Xemnu Zzzax Group enemies A.I.M. Alpha Flight Circus of Crime Enclave Hulkbusters Maggia Riot Squad Secret Empire Thunderbolts U-Foes Winter Guard Other enemies Arsenal Attuma Boomerang Cobalt Man Constrictor D'Spayre Devastator Doctor Doom Flux Glob Gold Bug Gremlin Grey Gargoyle Guilt Hulk Hammer and Anvil Hulk Robot It the Living Colossus John Ryker Killer Shrike Klaatu Man-Beast Man-Bull Metal Master Minotaur Missing Link Mister Hyde MODOK Moonstone Nightmare Professor Phobos Psyklop Puffball Collective Ravage Sandman Shaper of Worlds Super-Adaptoid Umar Woodgod Neutral rivals Doc Samson Hulkbuster suit (Iron Man) Namor Sabra Sasquatch Thing Thor Thunderbolt Ross Thundra Wolverine Television Live action The Incredible Hulk (1977–1982) episodes soundtrack home video releases The Incredible Hulk Returns The Trial of the Incredible Hulk The Death of the Incredible Hulk Animation The Marvel Super Heroes (1966) The Incredible Hulk (1982–1983) (characters) The Incredible Hulk (1996–1997) Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. (episodes) Films Live action Hulk (2003) The Incredible Hulk (2008) soundtrack Bruce Banner (Marvel Cinematic Universe) Animation Marvel Animated Features Iron Man and Hulk: Heroes United Where Monsters Dwell Video games Questprobe featuring The Hulk The Incredible Hulk (1994) The Pantheon Saga Hulk (2003) Ultimate Destruction The Incredible Hulk (2008) Titles The Incredible Hulk Hulk Comic The End The Manga Tales to Astonish The Rampaging Hulk 5 Ronin Storylines "Planet Hulk" "World War Hulk" "Fall of the Hulks" "World War Hulks" Related articles The Incredible Hulk (comic strip) Other versions Maestro Ultimate Hulk Hulk 2099 Tyrone Cash Hulk Hands The Incredible Hulk Coaster The Incredible Hulks Hulk Classics hysterical strength Category v t e Jack Kirby Bibliography Marvel Comics 2001: A Space Odyssey Absorbing Man Adam Warlock Agatha Harkness Alicia Masters Amazing Adventures Amphibion Annihilus Ant-Man / Giant-Man Hank Pym Arnim Zola Asgard Astonishing Tales Attuma Avengers Avengers Mansion Awesome Android Balder Baron Strucker Baron Zemo Heinrich Zemo Batroc the Leaper Baxter Building Betsy Ross Betty Ross Black Panther Blastaar Blob Boomerang Brother Tode Brotherhood of Mutants Bucky Bucky Barnes Burner Captain America shield Celestial Cerebro Circus of Crime Contemplator Cosmic Cube Crusaders Cyttorak Daily Bugle Danger Room Deviant Devil Dinosaur Destroyer Diablo Doctor Doom Doctor Druid Doctor Faustus Doughboy Dragon Man Dredmund the Druid Egghead Ego the Living Planet Enchantress Enclave Erik Josten Eternals Ajak Druig Forgotten One Ikaris Kingo Sunen Makkari Sersi Sprite Thena Zuras Executioner Fafnir Fantastic Four Human Torch Invisible Woman Mister Fantastic Thing Fenris Wolf Fin Fang Foom Fixer Forbush Man Franklin Richards Franklin Storm Frightful Four Galactus Giants Giganto Goom Gorgilla Grey Gargoyle Groot Growing Man H.E.R.B.I.E. Hate-Monger Heimdall Hela Helicarrier High Evolutionary Hippolyta Hulk Hulk Robot Human Cannonball HYDRA Immortus Impossible Man Inhumans Black Bolt Crystal Gorgon Karnak Lockjaw Maximus Medusa Triton Iron Man armor It! The Living Colossus Jane Foster Jasper Sitwell Journey into Mystery Juggernaut Ka-Zar Kala Kang the Conqueror Karkas Karnilla Klaw Krang Kree Ronan the Accuser Sentry Supreme Intelligence Kro Latveria Laufey Lifter Loki Lucifer Machine Man Mad Thinker Magneto Man-Beast Mangog Marvel Fireside Books Masters of Evil Mentallo Miracle Man MODOK Mole Man Molecule Man Monsteroso Moon-Boy Mastermind (Jason Wyngarde) Mutants Negative Zone New Men Nick Fury Norn Stones Odin Olympians Ares Artemis Athena Hera Hercules Hermes Pluto Zeus Orrgo Painter Peggy Carter Peepers Plunderer Power Broker Psycho-Man Puppet Master Quicksilver Radioactive Man Randall Darby Rawhide Kid Red Ghost Red Skull Resistants Rick Jones Ringmaster S.H.I.E.L.D. Savage Land Scarlet Witch Scorpion Secret Empire Sentinel Master Mold Bolivar Trask Sharon Carter Sif Silver Surfer Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos Dino Manelli Dum Dum Dugan Gabe Jones Happy Sam Sawyer Howling Commandos Izzy Cohen Junior Juniper Pinky Pinkerton Rebel Ralston Skrull Dorrek VII Morrat Super-Skrull Sleeper Slither Stark Industries Stark Tower Tales of Suspense Tales to Astonish Stranger Subterranea Super-Adaptoid Surtur T'Chaka The Galactus Trilogy The Incredible Hulk This Man... This Monster! Thor Mjolnir Thunderbolt Ross Toad Trapster Tricephalous Trolls Tumbler Tutinax Two-Gun Kid Tyr Tyrannus Ulik Ultimate Nullifier Uncanny X-Men Uni-Mind Unicorn Unus the Untouchable Vanisher Vision (Timely Comics) Volla Wakanda Warriors Three Fandral Hogun Volstagg Wasp Watchers Uatu Whirlwind Willie Lumpkin Wizard Wonder Man Wong-Chu Wrecker Wyatt Wingfoot X-Mansion X-Men Angel Beast Cyclops Iceman Marvel Girl Professor X Yancy Street Gang Ymir Young Allies Yuri Topolov Zabu Zarrko DC Comics 1st Issue Special Agent Axis Anti-Life Equation Apokolips Darkseid DeSaad Devilance Doctor Bedlam Female Furies Bernadeth Lashina Mad Harriet Stompa Glorious Godfrey Granny Goodness Kalibak Kanto Mantis Parademons Steppenwolf Virman Vundabar Atlas Black Racer Boom tube Boy Commandos Bruno Mannheim Challengers of the Unknown Ace Morgan Red Ryan Crazy Quilt Dan Turpin Dingbats of Danger Street Dubbilex Etrigan the Demon Fourth World Funky Flashman Global Peace Agency OMAC Guardian House of Secrets Infinity-Man Intergang Kamandi Klarion the Witch Boy Kobra Manhunter Manhunters Metron Morgan Edge Morgaine le Fey Mother Box Mr. Scarlet Newsboy Legion New Gods New Genesis Bekka Big Barda Forager Forever People Highfather Lightray Mister Miracle Orion Oberon Project Cadmus Sandman (Garrett Sanford) Shilo Norman Sonny Sumo Source Star Spangled Comics Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen Super Powers Weird Mystery Tales Other Black Magic Boys' Ranch Captain 3-D Captain Glory Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers Destroyer Duck The Double Life of Private Strong Fighting American The Fly Headline Comics (For The American Boy) Jack Kirby's Galactic Bounty Hunters Justice Traps the Guilty The Kirbyverse My Date Comics Our Fighting Forces Secret City Saga Silver Star Sky Masters Street Code Young Love Young Romance Television work The Centurions Goldie Gold and Action Jack Mister T Thundarr the Barbarian Related articles Kirby Krackle Stan Lee Joe Simon Mainline Publications Kirby: Genesis Kirby: King of Comics Category v t e Stan Lee Media Titles Backstreet Project Heroes for Hope How to Draw Comics the Marvel Way Just Imagine... Marvel Fireside Books Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos Stan Lee's God Woke The Amazing Spider-Man The Incredible Hulk The Sensational Spider-Man Ultimo Uncanny X-Men Storylines "Astonishing Tales" "Epic Illustrated" "Marvel Super-Heroes" "Green Goblin Reborn!" "If This Be My Destiny...!" "Snafu" "Stan Lee Meets..." "The Galactus Trilogy" "The Six Arms Saga" "This Man... This Monster!" "Venus" Shows Heroman Stan Lee's Superhumans Stan Lee's World of Heroes Stan Lee's Lucky Man Stripperella The Reflection Who Wants to Be a Superhero? Who Wants to Be a Superhero? (U.K. TV series) Films The Comic Book Greats Stan Lee's Mutants, Monsters & Marvels The Condor Lightspeed Mosaic Related Joan Boocock Lee (wife) Larry Lieber (brother) List of cameos Stan Lee Foundation Stan Lee Media productions Stan Lee's LA Comic Con POW! Entertainment Created Characters Heroes Ant-Man / Giant-Man Hank Pym Bill Foster Avengers Black Knight Sir Percy Dane Whitman Black Panther Black Widow Blonde Phantom Brother Voodoo Captain Marvel Mar-Vell Linda Carter Millie Collins Daredevil Destroyer Doctor Druid Doctor Strange Falcon Fantastic Four Human Torch Invisible Woman Mister Fantastic Thing Forbush Man Frankenstein Monster Goliath Groot Guardians of the Galaxy Hawkeye Hercules Howling Commandos Izzy Cohen Dum Dum Dugan Nick Fury Gabe Jones Eric Koenig Rebel Ralston Junior Juniper Pinky Pinkerton Dino Manelli Hulk Inhumans Black Bolt Crystal Gorgon Karnak the Shatterer Lockjaw Medusa Triton Iron Man Ka-Zar Kid Colt Man-Thing Marvel Boy (Robert Grayson) Mimic Prowler Quicksilver Ravage 2099 Rawhide Kid Scarlet Witch Sersi She-Hulk S.H.I.E.L.D. Spider-Man Stan Lee's Mighty 7 Starborn Swordsman The Guardian Project Thor Two-Gun Kid Venus Vision Adam Warlock Wasp Witness Wonder Man X-Men Angel Beast Cyclops Iceman Jean Grey Professor X Yondu Zombie Villains Abomination Absorbing Man A.I.M. Air-Walker Amphibion Annihilus Ape-Man Ares Asbestos Man Attuma Awesome Android Baron Mordo Baron Strucker Baron Zemo Heinrich Zemo Batroc the Leaper Beetle Abner Jenkins Big Man Frederick Foswell Black Knight (Nathan Garrett) Blastaar Blizzard Blob Boomerang Brotherhood of Mutants Burglar Cat-Man Chameleon Circus of Crime Clown Cobra Collector Count Nefaria Crime Master Crimson Dynamo Cyttorak Death-Stalker Destroyer Diablo Doctor Doom Doctor Faustus Doctor Octopus Doombot Doomsday Man Dormammu Dorrek VII Dragon Man Dredmund the Druid Eel Egghead Ego the Living Planet Electro Emissaries of Evil Enchantress Enclave Enforcers Fancy Dan Montana Ox Executioner Fafnir Femizons Fenris Wolf Fin Fang Foom Fixer Richard Fisk Freak Frightful Four Funky Flashman Galactus Galaxy Master Gibbon Giganto Gladiator Gorgilla Green Goblin Norman Osborn Grey Gargoyle Grizzly Growing Man Hate-Monger Hela High Evolutionary Hippolyta Human Cannonball HYDRA Immortus Impossible Man Jackal Jester Erik Josten Juggernaut Kaecilius Kala Kaluu Kangaroo Kang the Conqueror Karnilla Kingpin Klaw Krang Kraven the Hunter Laufey Leader Leap-Frog Living Brain Living Laser Lizard Loki Looter/Meteor Man Lucifer Machinesmith Madame Masque Mad Thinker Maggia Magneto Man-Beast Mandarin Mangog Man Mountain Marko Masked Marauder Master Khan Mastermind Masters of Evil Matador Maximus Melter Mentallo Mephisto Merlin Metal Master Midgard Serpent Mimic Mindless Ones Miracle Man Mister Fear Mister Hyde MODOK Molecule Man Mole Man Molten Man Monsteroso Mordred Morgan le Fay Morrat Mother Night Mysterio Nightmare Overmind Owl Painter Plantman Plunderer Pluto Porcupine Princess Python Prowler Psycho-Man Purple Man Puppet Master Radioactive Man Ravonna Rattler Red Barbarian Red Ghost Rhino Ringmaster Ronan the Accuser Sandman Scarecrow Scorpion Secret Empire Sentinel Master Mold Bolivar Trask Sentry Shocker Silvermane Sinister Six Sleeper Sons of the Serpent Spencer Smythe Spider-Slayer Spymaster Farley Stillwell Stranger Mendel Stromm Strongman Super-Adaptoid Super-Skrull Surtur Swordsman Glenn Talbot Thunderbolt Ross Tiboro Tinkerer Titanium Man Toad Yuri Topolov Trapster Tricephalous Tumbler Tyrannus Ulik Ultimo Unicorn Unus the Untouchable Vanisher Vulture Whiplash Whirlwind Wizard Wong-Chu Wrecker Yon-Rogg Ymir Zarrko Supporting Liz Allan Ancient One Artemis Athena Aunt May Balder Sally Avril Betty Brant Peggy Carter Sharon Carter Clea Billy Connors Martha Connors Eternity Vanessa Fisk Jane Foster Frigga Goom Agatha Harkness Happy Hogan Happy Sam Sawyer Heimdall Hera H.E.R.B.I.E. Hermes J. Jonah Jameson John Jameson Edwin Jarvis Rick Jones Ned Leeds Living Tribunal Willie Lumpkin Alicia Masters Jack Murdock Foggy Nelson Neptune Harry Osborn Odin Karen Page Richard and Mary Parker Pepper Potts Redwing Franklin Richards Randy Robertson Robbie Robertson Betty Ross Shalla-Bal Sif Jasper Sitwell George Stacy Gwen Stacy Supreme Intelligence Franklin Storm T'Chaka Teen Brigade Flash Thompson Tyr Uatu Uncle Ben Anna Watson Mary Jane Watson Wong Wyatt Wingfoot Valkyrior Volla Warriors Three Fandral Hogun Volstagg Yancy Street Gang Ho Yinsen Zabu Zeus Species Asgardians Kree Giants Goblins Mutants New Men Olympians Skrulls Trolls Uranians Watchers Locations and businesses Asgard Avengers Mansion Baxter Building Daily Bugle Empire State University Latveria Midtown High School Negative Zone Oscorp Sanctum Sanctorum Savage Land Stark Industries Stark Tower Subterranea Wakanda X-Mansion Artifacts and technology Cerebro Cosmic Cube Eye of Agamotto Mjolnir Norn Stones Ultimate Nullifier Vibranium Category v t e Fifty State Initiative Characters Staff Baron Von Blitzschlag Black Widow Gauntlet Hank Pym Henry Peter Gyrich Hellcat Justice Nighthawk Stingray Taskmaster Thing Tigra War Machine Graduates 3-D Man Ant-Man Batwing Bengal Cloud 9 Constrictor Debrii Geldoff Gorilla Girl Gravity Komodo MVP Mutant Zero Prodigy Rage Slapstick Thor Girl Teams Dark Avengers Mighty Avengers Defenders Force Works Freedom Force Great Lakes Initiative The Order Psionex Rangers U-Foes Publications Avengers: The Initiative Fear Itself: Youth In Revolt See also Superhuman Registration Act Avengers Academy