This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article is missing information about the film's production. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Garuda Thai poster Directed by Monthon Arayangkoon[1] Produced by Monthon Arayangkoon Pawinee Wichayapongkul Written by Monthon Arayangkoon Starring Sornram Teppitak Sara Legge Dan Fraser Chalad Na Songkhla Yani Tramod Phairote Sangwaribut Distributed by R.S. Film Tokyo Shock (U.S. DVD Release) Release date 1 April 2004 (2004-04-01) Running time 115 minutes Country Thailand Languages Thai, English Garuda (in Thailand known as Paksa wayu) is a 2004 Thai Kaiju film. Contents 1 Plot 2 Release 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2015) The discovery of a mysterious fossil sets the stage for a terrifying confrontation between modern day man and Thai folklore. A tunnel excavation has revealed a rock so dense that it cannot be penetrated by even the strongest drill. When the workers discover a collection of unrecognizable fossils that bear no similarities to the familiar dinosaur types, they enlist the aid of archeologist Lenna Pierre and her American partner Tim in revealing the origins of the mysterious geological find. Awakened by the large scale excavation and enraged at having been trapped beneath the Bangkok concrete for hundreds of years, the ancient Garuda sets out on a bloody rampage as Leena, Tim, and the military struggle to find a means of bringing Garuda's destructive reign of terror to an end.[2] Release[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2015) Garuda was released in North America on Video on Demand in 2007, then later on DVD by Tokyo Shock.[3] Reception[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2015) Critical reception for the film is mostly negative. Dread Central awarded the film a score of 2 / 4, criticizing the film's acting, and special effects.[4] Joseph Savitski from Beyond Hollywood.com gave the film a negative review, stating, "Garuda had potential to be a great monster movie. Most of the film’s faults can be attributed to oftentimes sloppy direction and editing by the writer/director, whose own script barely makes any sense. This is too bad, because “Garuda” has decent special effects, as well as an appealing female lead in Sara Legge. Unfortunately, like most monster movies, “Garuda” ends up treading formula instead of creating new ones, resulting in a film that doesn't stand out from the crowd".[5] Adam Arseneau from DVD Verdict gave the film a negative review, criticizing the film's poor plot, bad acting, poorly executed special effects, and overuse of action film clichés.[6] References[edit] ^ https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0470124/ ^ Buchanan, Jason. "Garuda: Plot Synopsis". Allmovie. Retrieved 2010-01-10. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Garuda (2004) - Monthon Arayangkoon". AllMovie.com. Allmovie. Retrieved 16 July 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Barton, Steve. "Garuda (DVD)- Dread Central". Dread Central. Steve Barton. Retrieved 16 July 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Savitski, Joseph. "Garuda (2004) Movie Review". Beyond Hollywood.com. Joseph Savitski. Retrieved 16 July 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Arseneau, Adam. "DVD Verdict Review - Garuda". DVD Verdict.com. Adam Arseneau. Archived from the original on 13 May 2006. Retrieved 16 July 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Garuda at IMDb Garuda at Rotten Tomatoes Garuda at AllMovie This article related to Thai film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a science-fiction horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e