This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese. (February 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:がしゃどくろ]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|がしゃどくろ}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Utagawa Kuniyoshi, "Souma no furudairi (相馬の古内裏)" also known as "Takiyasha the Witch and the Skeleton Spectre". Gashadokuro (がしゃどくろ/ 餓者髑髏, literally "starving skeleton", also known as Odokuro) are mythical creatures in Japanese mythology. Description[edit] The Gashadokuro are spirits that take the form of giant skeletons and are fifteen times larger than an average person, said to be created from the amassed bones of people who died of starvation or in battle, without being buried. These yōkai roam after midnight, grabbing lone travelers and biting off their heads to drink their spraying blood. There is a way to know of their approach, as the victim would hear the sound of loud ringing in the ear. The Gashadokuro are said to possess the powers of invisibility and indestructibility, though Shinto charms are said to ward them off.[1][better source needed] In the entry for Gashadokuro in Mizuki's book, a related tale from the Nihon Ryōiki is introduced. It tells of a man in Bingo Province (Hiroshima Prefecture) who is in a field at night and, hearing an eerie voice moaning, "My eye hurts," finds a skeleton there with a bamboo shoot growing from its eye socket. He removes the bamboo shoot and offers the skeleton dried boiled rice, upon which the skeleton tells him the story of its murder and its personal history, and rewards him for his kindness. Though this tale has been conflated with that of the Gashadokuro, the two are in fact unrelated, the Gashadokuro having originated in the later half of the 20th century. References[edit] ^ Jonathan Maberry (2006). Vampire Universe: The Dark World of Supernatural Beings That Haunt Us, Hunt Us, and Hunger for Us. ISBN 9780806528137. v t e Japanese folklore Folktales Awa Tanuki Gassen Bunbuku Chagama Hakuzōsu Hanasaka Jiisan Issun-bōshi Kachi-kachi Yama Kasa Jizō Kintarō Kobutori Jiisan Kurozuka Momotarō Nezumi no Sumō Saru Kani Gassen Shita-kiri Suzume Taketori Monogatari Tamamo-no-Mae Tawara Tōda Tsuru no Ongaeshi Urashima Tarō Yamata no Orochi Yotsuya Kaidan Oto-hime Texts Konjaku Monogatarishū Otogi-zōshi Uji Shūi Monogatari Legendary creatures Abura-akago Abura-sumashi Aka Manto Akaname Akashita Akateko Akuma Amabie Amanojaku Amazake-babaa Amefurikozō Ameonna Amikiri Aobōzu Aonyōbō Aosaginohi Ashinagatenaga Ayakashi Azukiarai Bake-kujira Bakeneko Baku Basan Binbōgami Chimimōryō Daidarabotchi Dodomeki Dragon Enenra Funayūrei Furaribi Fūri Futakuchi-onna Gagoze Gashadokuro Goryō Hanako-san Harionago Hibagon Hiderigami Hitogitsune Hitotsume-kozō Hitotsume-nyūdō Hone-onna Hyōsube Ikiryō Ikuchi Inugami Ishinagenjo Isonade Janjanbi Jinmenju Jorōgumo Jubokko Kamaitachi Kamikiri Kappa Kasa-obake Kasha Kawauso Keukegen Kijimuna Kinoko Kirin Kitsune Hakuzōsu Kitsunebi Kodama Komainu Konaki-jiji Korpokkur Koromodako Kotobuki Kuchisake-onna Kuda-gitsune Kudan Kyubi Mikaribaba Mikoshi-nyūdō Miage-nyūdō Misaki Mizuchi Mokumokuren Mononoke Mōryō Mujina Namahage Namazu Nekomata Ningyo Noderabō Noppera-bō Nue Nuppeppō Nurarihyon Nure-onna Nurikabe Nyūdō-bōzu Obake Oboroguruma Oiwa Okiku Ōmukade Oni Ibaraki-dōji Kijo/Onibaba Kidōmaru Rashōmon no oni Shuten-dōji Onibi Onikuma Onryō Ōnyūdō Osaki Otoroshi Ouni Raijū Rokurokubi Samebito Sankai Satori Sazae-oni Shachihoko Shidaidaka Shikigami Shinigami Shiranui Shirime Shiryō Shōjō Shōkera Sōjōbō Sunekosuri Takaonna Tanuki Danzaburou-danuki Inugami Gyōbu Shibaemon-tanuki Yashima no Hage-tanuki Ten Tengu Tennin Tenome Tesso Tōfu-kozō Tsuchigumo Tsuchinoko Tsukumogami Abumi-guchi Bakezōri Biwa-bokuboku Boroboroton Chōchin-obake Ittan-momen Kasa-obake Koto-furunushi Menreiki Ungaikyō Tsurubebi Tsurara-onna Tsurube-otoshi Ubagabi Ubume Umi zatō Umibōzu Ushi-oni Uwan Waira Wanyūdō Yamabiko Yamawaro Yamajijii Yama-uba Yanari Yobuko Yōkai Yōsei Yosuzume Yuki-onna Yume no seirei Yūrei Zashiki-warashi Folklorists Kunio Yanagita Keigo Seki Lafcadio Hearn Shigeru Mizuki Inoue Enryō Mythology in popular culture This article relating to Japanese mythology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e