For other uses, see Deutsch (disambiguation) and German. Not to be confused with Germanic languages. This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: The article's scope is unclear, article is contradicting. E.g.: Infobox: Language family: High German -- Infobox: ISO 639-3: nds – Low German, Article: Dialects and Low German. Low German is not a High German variety. Grammar section covers Standard High German, which has its separate article: Standard German. Please help improve this article if you can. (February 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) West Germanic language German Deutsch Pronunciation [dɔʏtʃ] Region German-speaking Europe Native speakers 95 million (2014)[1] L2 speakers: 10–15 million (2014)[1] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic High German German Early forms Old High German Middle High German Early New High German Standard forms Standard German (German, Swiss, Austrian) Writing system Latin script (German alphabet) German Braille Signed forms Signed German Official status Official language in 6 countries  Austria  Belgium  Germany  Liechtenstein  Luxembourg   Switzerland 2 subdivisions South Tyrol (Italy) 31 gminas in Opole Voivodeship and Silesia Voivodeship (Poland) Recognised minority language in 9 countries (recognized minority/national language)  Brazil (9 municipalities)  Czech Republic  Denmark (Syddanmark)  Hungary  Namibia  Poland  Romania  Russia (Azovo German National District)  Slovakia (regional) Regulated by No official regulation (Orthography regulated by the Council for German Orthography)[2] Language codes ISO 639-1 de ISO 639-2 ger (B) deu (T) ISO 639-3 Variously: deu – German gmh – Middle High German goh – Old High German gct – Colonia Tovar German bar – Bavarian cim – Cimbrian geh – Hutterite German ksh – Kölsch nds – Low German[nb 1] sli – Lower Silesian ltz – Luxembourgish[nb 2] vmf – Mainfränkisch mhn – Mòcheno pfl – Palatinate German pdc – Pennsylvania German pdt – Plautdietsch[nb 3] swg – Swabian German gsw – Swiss German uln – Unserdeutsch sxu – Upper Saxon wae – Walser German wep – Westphalian hrx – Riograndenser Hunsrückisch yec – Yenish Glottolog high1289  High German fran1268  Middle German high1286  Upper German Linguasphere 52-ACB–dl (Standard German) 52-AC (Continental West Germanic) 52-ACB (Deutsch & Dutch) 52-ACB-d (Central German) 52-ACB-e & -f (Upper and Swiss German) 52-ACB-h (émigré German varieties, including 52-ACB-hc (Hutterite German) & 52-ACB-he (Pennsylvania German etc.) 52-ACB-i (Yenish) Totalling 285 varieties: 52-ACB-daa to 52-ACB-i   (Co-)Official and majority language   Co-official, but not majority language   Statutory minority/cultural language   Non-statutory minority language This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA. The German language (Deutsch, pronounced [dɔʏtʃ] (listen))[nb 4] is a West Germanic language mainly spoken in Central Europe. It is the most widely spoken and official or co-official language in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and the Italian province of South Tyrol. It is also a co-official language of Luxembourg, Belgium and parts of southwestern Poland, as well as a national language in Namibia. German is most similar to other languages within the West Germanic language branch, including Afrikaans, Dutch, English, the Frisian languages, Low German (Low Saxon), Luxembourgish, Scots, and Yiddish. It also contains close similarities in vocabulary to Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish, although these belong to the North Germanic group. German is the second most widely spoken Germanic language after English. One of the major languages of the world, German is a native language to almost 100 million people worldwide and is spoken by a total of over 130 million people.[5] It is the most spoken native language within the European Union.[1] German is also widely taught as a foreign language, especially in Europe, where it is the third most taught foreign language after English and French, and the United States. The language has been influential in the fields of science and technology, where it is the second most commonly used scientific language and among the most widely used languages on websites. The German-speaking countries are ranked fifth in terms of annual publication of new books, with one tenth of all books (including e-books) in the world being published in German. German is an inflected language, with four cases for nouns, pronouns, and adjectives (nominative, accusative, genitive, dative); three genders (masculine, feminine, neuter); and two numbers (singular, plural). It has strong and weak verbs. The majority of its vocabulary derives from the ancient Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family, while a smaller share is partly derived from Latin and Greek, along with fewer words borrowed from French and Modern English. As a pluricentric language, the standardized variants of German are German, Austrian, and Swiss Standard High German. It is also notable for its broad spectrum of dialects, with many varieties existing in Europe and other parts of the world. Some of these non-standard varieties have become recognized and protected by regional or national governments. Due to the limited intelligibility between certain varieties and Standard High German, as well as the lack of an undisputed, scientific distinction between a "dialect" and a "language", some German varieties or dialect groups such as Bavarian and Low German have been variously described as either "dialects" or separate languages.[6] Contents 1 Classification 2 History 2.1 Old High German 2.2 Middle High German 2.3 Early New High German 2.4 Austrian Empire 2.5 Standardisation 3 Geographical distribution 3.1 Europe 3.1.1 German Sprachraum 3.1.2 Outside the Sprachraum 3.2 Africa 3.2.1 Namibia 3.2.2 South Africa 3.3 North America 3.4 South America 3.5 Oceania 3.6 As a foreign language 4 Standard German 4.1 Varieties 5 Dialects 5.1 Low German and Low Saxon 5.2 Low Franconian 5.3 High German 5.3.1 Central German 5.3.2 High Franconian 5.3.3 Upper German 5.3.3.1 Alemannic 5.3.3.2 Bavarian 6 Grammar 6.1 Noun inflection 6.2 Verb inflection 6.2.1 Verb prefixes 6.3 Word order 6.3.1 Auxiliary verbs 6.3.2 Modal verbs 6.3.3 Multiple infinitives 7 Vocabulary 7.1 English to German cognates 8 Orthography 8.1 Present 8.2 Past 8.3 Orthography Reform 9 Phonology 9.1 Vowels 9.2 Consonants 9.2.1 Consonant spellings 9.2.2 Consonant shifts 10 Literature 11 Loanwords in the English language 12 Organisations 12.1 Goethe Institut 12.2 Deutsche Welle 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References 16 Bibliography 17 External links Classification[edit] The Germanic languages in Europe Modern Standard German is a West Germanic language in the Germanic branch of the Indo-European languages. The Germanic languages are traditionally subdivided into three branches, North Germanic, East Germanic, and West Germanic. The first of these branches survives in modern Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Faroese, and Icelandic, all of which are descended from Old Norse. The East Germanic languages are now extinct, and Gothic is the only language in this branch which survives in written texts. The West Germanic languages, however, have undergone extensive dialectal subdivision and are now represented in modern languages such as English, German, Dutch, Yiddish, Afrikaans, and others.[7] Within the West Germanic language dialect continuum, the Benrath and Uerdingen lines (running through Düsseldorf-Benrath and Krefeld-Uerdingen, respectively) serve to distinguish the Germanic dialects that were affected by the High German consonant shift (south of Benrath) from those that were not (north of Uerdingen). The various regional dialects spoken south of these lines are grouped as High German dialects, while those spoken to the north comprise the Low German/Low Saxon and Low Franconian dialects. As members of the West Germanic language family, High German, Low German, and Low Franconian have been proposed to be further distinguished historically as Irminonic, Ingvaeonic, and Istvaeonic, respectively. This classification indicates their historical descent from dialects spoken by the Irminones (also known as the Elbe group), Ingvaeones (or North Sea Germanic group), and Istvaeones (or Weser-Rhine group).[7] Standard German is based on a combination of Thuringian-Upper Saxon and Upper Franconian dialects, which are Central German and Upper German dialects belonging to the High German dialect group. German is therefore closely related to the other languages based on High German dialects, such as Luxembourgish (based on Central Franconian dialects) and Yiddish. Also closely related to Standard German are the Upper German dialects spoken in the southern German-speaking countries, such as Swiss German (Alemannic dialects) and the various Germanic dialects spoken in the French region of Grand Est, such as Alsatian (mainly Alemannic, but also Central- and Upper Franconian dialects) and Lorraine Franconian (Central Franconian). After these High German dialects, standard German is less closely related to languages based on Low Franconian dialects (e.g. Dutch and Afrikaans), Low German or Low Saxon dialects (spoken in northern Germany and southern Denmark), neither of which underwent the High German consonant shift. As has been noted, the former of these dialect types is Istvaeonic and the latter Ingvaeonic, whereas the High German dialects are all Irminonic; the differences between these languages and standard German are therefore considerable. Also related to German are the Frisian languages—North Frisian (spoken in Nordfriesland), Saterland Frisian (spoken in Saterland), and West Frisian (spoken in Friesland)—as well as the Anglic languages of English and Scots. These Anglo-Frisian dialects did not take part in the High German consonant shift. History[edit] Main article: History of German Old High German[edit] Main article: Old High German The history of the German language begins with the High German consonant shift during the migration period, which separated Old High German dialects from Old Saxon. This sound shift involved a drastic change in the pronunciation of both voiced and voiceless stop consonants (b, d, g, and p, t, k, respectively). The primary effects of the shift were the following below. Voiceless stops became long (geminated) voiceless fricatives following a vowel; Voiceless stops became affricates in word-initial position, or following certain consonants; Voiced stops became voiceless in certain phonetic settings.[8] Voiceless stop following a vowel Word-initial voiceless stop Voiced stop /p/→/ff/ /p/→/pf/ /b/→/p/ /t/→/ss/ /t/→/ts/ /d/→/t/ /k/→/xx/ /k/→/kx/ /g/→/k/ While there is written evidence of the Old High German language in several Elder Futhark inscriptions from as early as the sixth century AD (such as the Pforzen buckle), the Old High German period is generally seen as beginning with the Abrogans (written c. 765–775), a Latin-German glossary supplying over 3,000 Old High German words with their Latin equivalents. After the Abrogans, the first coherent works written in Old High German appear in the ninth century, chief among them being the Muspilli, the Merseburg Charms, and the Hildebrandslied, and other religious texts (the Georgslied, the Ludwigslied, the Evangelienbuch, and translated hymns and prayers).[8][9] The Muspilli is a Christian poem written in a Bavarian dialect offering an account of the soul after the Last Judgment, and the Merseburg Charms are transcriptions of spells and charms from the pagan Germanic tradition. Of particular interest to scholars, however, has been the Hildebrandslied, a secular epic poem telling the tale of an estranged father and son unknowingly meeting each other in battle. Linguistically this text is highly interesting due to the mixed use of Old Saxon and Old High German dialects in its composition. The written works of this period stem mainly from the Alamanni, Bavarian, and Thuringian groups, all belonging to the Elbe Germanic group (Irminones), which had settled in what is now southern-central Germany and Austria between the second and sixth centuries during the great migration.[8] In general, the surviving texts of OHG show a wide range of dialectal diversity with very little written uniformity. The early written tradition of OHG survived mostly through monasteries and scriptoria as local translations of Latin originals; as a result, the surviving texts are written in highly disparate regional dialects and exhibit significant Latin influence, particularly in vocabulary.[8] At this point monasteries, where most written works were produced, were dominated by Latin, and German saw only occasional use in official and ecclesiastical writing. The German language through the OHG period was still predominantly a spoken language, with a wide range of dialects and a much more extensive oral tradition than a written one. Having just emerged from the High German consonant shift, OHG was also a relatively new and volatile language still undergoing a number of phonetic, phonological, morphological, and syntactic changes. The scarcity of written work, instability of the language, and widespread illiteracy of the time explain the lack of standardization up to the end of the OHG period in 1050. Middle High German[edit] Main article: Middle High German While there is no complete agreement over the dates of the Middle High German (MHG) period, it is generally seen as lasting from 1050 to 1350.[10] This was a period of significant expansion of the geographical territory occupied by Germanic tribes, and consequently of the number of German speakers. Whereas during the Old High German period the Germanic tribes extended only as far east as the Elbe and Saale rivers, the MHG period saw a number of these tribes expanding beyond this eastern boundary into Slavic territory (known as the Ostsiedlung). With the increasing wealth and geographic spread of the Germanic groups came greater use of German in the courts of nobles as the standard language of official proceedings and literature.[10] A clear example of this is the mittelhochdeutsche Dichtersprache employed in the Hohenstaufen court in Swabia as a standardized supra-dialectal written language. While these efforts were still regionally bound, German began to be used in place of Latin for certain official purposes, leading to a greater need for regularity in written conventions. While the major changes of the MHG period were socio-cultural, German was still undergoing significant linguistic changes in syntax, phonetics, and morphology as well (e.g. diphthongization of certain vowel sounds: hus (OHG "house")→haus (MHG), and weakening of unstressed short vowels to schwa [ə]: taga (OHG "days")→tage (MHG)).[11] A great wealth of texts survives from the MHG period. Significantly, these texts include a number of impressive secular works, such as the Nibelungenlied, an epic poem telling the story of the dragon-slayer Siegfried (c. thirteenth century), and the Iwein, an Arthurian verse poem by Hartmann von Aue (c. 1203), lyric poems, and courtly romances such as Parzival and Tristan. Also noteworthy is the Sachsenspiegel, the first book of laws written in Middle Low German (c. 1220). The abundance and especially the secular character of the literature of the MHG period demonstrate the beginnings of a standardized written form of German, as well as the desire of poets and authors to be understood by individuals on supra-dialectal terms. The Middle High German period is generally seen as ending when the 1346–53 Black Death decimated Europe's population.[12] Early New High German[edit] Main article: Early New High German German-Dutch-Frisian language area before and after the flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950) from much of eastern and central Europe. Areas in the east where German is no longer spoken are marked by lighter shades. Modern German begins with the Early New High German (ENHG) period, which the influential German philologist Wilhelm Scherer dates 1350–1650, terminating with the end of the Thirty Years' War.[12] This period saw the further displacement of Latin by German as the primary language of courtly proceedings and, increasingly, of literature in the German states. While these states were still under the control of the Holy Roman Empire, and far from any form of unification, the desire for a cohesive written language that would be understandable across the many German-speaking principalities and kingdoms was stronger than ever. As a spoken language German remained highly fractured throughout this period, with a vast number of often mutually incomprehensible regional dialects being spoken throughout the German states; the invention of the printing press c. 1440 and the publication of Luther's vernacular translation of the Bible in 1534, however, had an immense effect on standardizing German as a supra-dialectal written language. The ENHG period saw the rise of several important cross-regional forms of chancery German, one being gemeine tiutsch, used in the court of the Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I, and the other being Meißner Deutsch, used in the Electorate of Saxony in the Duchy of Saxe-Wittenberg.[13] Alongside these courtly written standards, the invention of the printing press led to the development of a number of printers' languages (Druckersprachen) aimed at making printed material readable and understandable across as many diverse dialects of German as possible.[14] The greater ease of production and increased availability of written texts brought about increased standardization in the written form of German. The widespread popularity of the Bible translated into German by Martin Luther helped establish modern German. One of the central events in the development of ENHG was the publication of Luther's translation of the Bible into German (the New Testament was published in 1522; the Old Testament was published in parts and completed in 1534). Luther based his translation primarily on the Meißner Deutsch of Saxony, spending much time among the population of Saxony researching the dialect so as to make the work as natural and accessible to German speakers as possible. Copies of Luther's Bible featured a long list of glosses for each region, translating words which were unknown in the region into the regional dialect. Luther said the following concerning his translation method: One who would talk German does not ask the Latin how he shall do it; he must ask the mother in the home, the children on the streets, the common man in the market-place and note carefully how they talk, then translate accordingly. They will then understand what is said to them because it is German. When Christ says 'ex abundantia cordis os loquitur,' I would translate, if I followed the papists, aus dem Überflusz des Herzens redet der Mund. But tell me is this talking German? What German understands such stuff? No, the mother in the home and the plain man would say, Wesz das Herz voll ist, des gehet der Mund über.[15] With Luther's rendering of the Bible in the vernacular, German asserted itself against the dominance of Latin as a legitimate language for courtly, literary, and now ecclesiastical subject-matter. Furthermore, his Bible was ubiquitous in the German states: nearly every household possessed a copy.[16] Nevertheless, even with the influence of Luther's Bible as an unofficial written standard, a widely accepted standard for written German did not appear until the middle of the eighteenth century.[17] Austrian Empire[edit] Ethnolinguistic map of Austria-Hungary, 1910, with German-speaking areas shown in red. German was the language of commerce and government in the Habsburg Empire, which encompassed a large area of Central and Eastern Europe. Until the mid-nineteenth century, it was essentially the language of townspeople throughout most of the Empire. Its use indicated that the speaker was a merchant or someone from an urban area, regardless of nationality. Prague (German: Prag) and Budapest (Buda, German: Ofen), to name two examples, were gradually Germanized in the years after their incorporation into the Habsburg domain, others like Pozsony (German: Pressburg, now Bratislava), were originally settled during the Habsburg period and were primarily German at that time. Prague, Budapest, Bratislava, and cities like Zagreb (German: Agram) or Ljubljana (German: Laibach), contained significant German minorities. In the eastern provinces of Banat, Bukovina, and Transylvania (German: Banat, Buchenland, Siebenbürgen), German was the predominant language not only in the larger towns – like Temeschburg (Timișoara), Hermannstadt (Sibiu) and Kronstadt (Brașov) – but also in many smaller localities in the surrounding areas.[18] Standardisation[edit] The Deutsches Wörterbuch (1854) by the Brothers Grimm helped to standardize German orthography. The most comprehensive guide to the vocabulary of the German language is found within the Deutsches Wörterbuch. This dictionary was created by the Brothers Grimm, and is composed of 16 parts which were issued between 1852 and 1860. In 1872, grammatical and orthographic rules first appeared in the Duden Handbook.[19] In 1901, the 2nd Orthographical Conference ended with a complete standardisation of the German language in its written form, and the Duden Handbook was declared its standard definition.[20] The Deutsche Bühnensprache (lit. 'German stage language') had established conventions for German pronunciation in theatres[21] three years earlier; however, this was an artificial standard that did not correspond to any traditional spoken dialect. Rather, it was based on the pronunciation of Standard German in Northern Germany, although it was subsequently regarded often as a general prescriptive norm, despite differing pronunciation traditions especially in the Upper-German-speaking regions that still characterise the dialect of the area today – especially the pronunciation of the ending -ig as [ɪk] instead of [ɪç]. In Northern Germany, Standard German was a foreign language to most inhabitants, whose native dialects were subsets of Low German. It was usually encountered only in writing or formal speech; in fact, most of Standard German was a written language, not identical to any spoken dialect, throughout the German-speaking area until well into the 19th century. Official revisions of some of the rules from 1901 were not issued until the controversial German orthography reform of 1996 was made the official standard by governments of all German-speaking countries.[22] Media and written works are now almost all produced in Standard German (often called Hochdeutsch, "High German") which is understood in all areas where German is spoken. Geographical distribution[edit] See also: List of territorial entities where German is an official language and Geographical distribution of German speakers Approximate distribution of native German speakers (assuming a rounded total of 95 million) worldwide   Germany (78.3%)   Austria (8.4%)   Switzerland (5.6%)   Italy (South Tyrol) (0.4%)   Other (7.3%) As a result of the German diaspora, as well as the popularity of German taught as a foreign language,[23][24] the geographical distribution of German speakers (or "Germanophones") spans all inhabited continents. A 2020 estimate by Ethnologue places the total number of Standard German speakers at 132 million, of which over 75 million are native speakers.[5] However, an exact, global number of native German speakers is complicated by the existence of several varieties whose status as separate "languages" or "dialects" is disputed for political and/or linguistic reasons, including quantitatively strong varieties like certain forms of Alemannic and Low German.[3] With the inclusion or exclusion of certain varieties, it is estimated that approximately 90–95 million people speak German as a first language,[25][page needed][26] 10–25 million speak it as a second language,[25][page needed] and 75–100 million as a foreign language.[1] This would imply the existence of approximately 175–220 million German speakers worldwide.[27] Europe[edit] Main article: List of territorial entities where German is an official language The German language in Europe:   German Sprachraum: German is the official language (de jure or de facto) and first language of the majority of the population   German is a co-official language but not the first language of the majority of the population   German (or a German dialect) is a legally recognized minority language (squares: geographic distribution too dispersed/small for map scale)   German (or a variety of German) is spoken by a sizeable minority but has no legal recognition   Most of Austria lies in the Bavarian dialect area; only the very west of the country is   Alemannic-speaking.Map shows Austria and South Tyrol, Italy.   (Swiss) German is one of four national languages of Switzerland, and it is spoken in seven of the country's ten largest cities.   Luxembourg lies in the Moselle Franconian dialect area.   In Belgium, German is spoken in the country's German-speaking Community, in the very east of the country. As of 2012[update], about 90 million people, or 16% of the European Union's population spoke German as their mother tongue, making it the second most widely spoken language on the continent after Russian and the second biggest language in terms of overall speakers (after English).[1] German Sprachraum[edit] The area in central Europe where the majority of the population speaks German as a first language and has German as a (co-)official language is called the "German Sprachraum". German is the sole official language of the following countries: Germany Austria Switzerland (sole official language in 17 cantons) Liechtenstein German is a co-official language of the following countries: Belgium (as majority language only in the German-speaking Community, which represents 0.7% of the Belgian population) Luxembourg, along with French and Luxembourgish Switzerland, co-official at the federal level with French, Italian, and Romansh, and at the local level in four cantons: Bern (with French), Fribourg (with French), Grisons (with Italian and Romansh) and Valais (with French) Italian Autonomous Province of South Tyrol (also majority language) Outside the Sprachraum[edit] Although expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World wars greatly diminished them, minority communities of mostly bilingual German native speakers exist in areas both adjacent to and detached from the Sprachraum. Within Europe, German is a recognized minority language in the following countries:[28] Czech Republic (see also: Germans in the Czech Republic) Denmark (see also: North Schleswig Germans) Hungary (see also: Germans of Hungary) Poland (see also German minority in Poland; German is an auxiliary and co-official language in 31 communes)[29] Romania (see also: Germans of Romania) Russia,[30] (see also: Germans in Russia) Slovakia (see also: Carpathian Germans) In France, the High German varieties of Alsatian and Moselle Franconian are identified as "regional languages", but the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages of 1998 has not yet been ratified by the government.[31] Africa[edit] Namibia[edit] Main article: German language in Namibia Bilingual German-English sign at a bakery in Namibia, where German is a national language. Namibia was a colony of the German Empire from 1884 to 1919. About 30,000 people still speak German as a native tongue today, mostly descendants of German colonial settlers.[32] The period of German colonialism in Namibia also led to the evolution of a Standard German-based pidgin language called "Namibian Black German", which became a second language for parts of the indigenous population. Although it is nearly extinct today, some older Namibians still have some knowledge of it.[33] German remained a de facto official language of Namibia after the end of German colonial rule alongside English and Afrikaans, and had de jure co-official status from 1984 until its independence from South Africa in 1990. However, the Namibian government perceived Afrikaans and German as symbols of apartheid and colonialism, and decided English would be the sole official language upon independence, stating that it was a "neutral" language as there were virtually no English native speakers in Namibia at that time.[32] German, Afrikaans, and several indigenous languages thus became "national languages" by law, identifying them as elements of the cultural heritage of the nation and ensuring that the state acknowledged and supported their presence in the country. Today, Namibia is considered to be the only German-speaking country outside of the Sprachraum in Europe.[34] German is used in a wide variety of spheres throughout the country, especially in business, tourism, and public signage, as well as in education, churches (most notably the German-speaking Evangelical Lutheran Church in Namibia (GELK)), other cultural spheres such as music, and media (such as German language radio programs by the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation). The Allgemeine Zeitung is one of the three biggest newspapers in Namibia and the only German-language daily in Africa.[32] South Africa[edit] An estimated 12,000 people speak German or a German variety as a first language in South Africa, mostly originating from different waves of immigration during the 19th and 20th centuries.[35] One of the largest communities consists of the speakers of "Nataler Deutsch",[36] a variety of Low German concentrated in and around Wartburg. The South African constitution identifies German as a "commonly used" language and the Pan South African Language Board is obligated to promote and ensure respect for it.[37] North America[edit] Main articles: German language in the United States, Pennsylvania German language, Plautdietsch, and Hutterite German In the United States, German is the fifth most spoken language in terms of native and second language speakers after English, Spanish, French, and Chinese (with figures for Cantonese and Mandarin combined), with over 1 million total speakers.[38] In the states of North Dakota and South Dakota, German is the most common language spoken at home after English.[39] As a legacy of significant German immigration to the country, German geographical names can be found throughout the Midwest region, such as New Ulm and Bismarck (North Dakota's state capital).[40] A number of German varieties have developed in the country and are still spoken today, such as Pennsylvania German and Texas German. South America[edit] Main articles: Brazilian German and Colonia Tovar dialect In Brazil, the largest concentrations of German speakers are in the states of Rio Grande do Sul (where Riograndenser Hunsrückisch developed), Santa Catarina, and Espírito Santo.[41] German dialects (namely Hunsrik and East Pomeranian) are recognized languages in the following municipalities in Brazil: Espírito Santo (statewide cultural language):[42][43][44] Domingos Martins, Laranja da Terra, Pancas, Santa Maria de Jetibá, Vila Pavão Rio Grande do Sul (Riograndenser Hunsrückisch German is a designated cultural language in the state):[45] Santa Maria do Herval, Canguçu Santa Catarina:[41] Antônio Carlos, Pomerode (standard German recognized) Small concentrations of German-speakers and their descendants are also found in Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, Venezuela, and Bolivia.[35] Oceania[edit] In Australia, the state of South Australia experienced a pronounced wave of Prussian immigration in the 1840s (particularly from Silesia region). With the prolonged isolation from other German speakers and contact with Australian English, a unique dialect known as Barossa German developed, spoken predominantly in the Barossa Valley near Adelaide. Usage of German sharply declined with the advent of World War I, due to the prevailing anti-German sentiment in the population and related government action. It continued to be used as a first language into the 20th century, but its use is now limited to a few older speakers.[46] As of the 2013 census, 36,642 people in New Zealand spoke German, mostly descendants of a small wave of 19th century German immigrants, making it the third most spoken European language after English and French and overall the ninth most spoken language.[47] A German creole named Unserdeutsch was historically spoken in the former German colony of German New Guinea, modern day Papua New Guinea. It is at a high risk of extinction, with only about 100 speakers remaining, and a topic of interest among linguists seeking to revive interest in the language.[48] As a foreign language[edit] Self reported knowledge of German as a foreign language in the EU member states (+Turkey), in per cent of the adult population (+15), 2005 Like English, French, and Spanish, German has become a standard foreign language throughout the world, especially in the Western World.[1][49] German ranks second on par with French among the best known foreign languages in the European Union (EU) after English,[1] as well as in Russia[50] and Turkey.[1] In terms of student numbers across all levels of education, German ranks third in the EU (after English and French)[24] and in the United States (after Spanish and French).[23][51] In 2020, approximately 15.4 million people were enrolled in learning German across all levels of education worldwide. This number has slightly decreased from a peak of 20.1 million in 2000.[52] Within the EU, not counting countries where it is an official language, German as a foreign language is most popular in Eastern and Northern Europe, namely the Czech Republic, Croatia, Denmark, the Netherlands, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Sweden, Poland, and Bosnia and Herzegovina.[1][53] German was once, and to some extent still is, a lingua franca in those parts of Europe.[54] Standard German[edit] Main article: Standard German Knowledge of Standard German within the nations of the European Union The basis of Standard German developed with the Luther Bible and the chancery language spoken by the Saxon court.[55] However, there are places where the traditional regional dialects have been replaced by new vernaculars based on standard German; that is the case in large stretches of Northern Germany but also in major cities in other parts of the country. It is important to note, however, that the colloquial standard German differs greatly from the formal written language, especially in grammar and syntax, in which it has been influenced by dialectal speech. Standard German differs regionally among German-speaking countries in vocabulary and some instances of pronunciation and even grammar and orthography. This variation must not be confused with the variation of local dialects. Even though the regional varieties of standard German are only somewhat influenced by the local dialects, they are very distinct. German is thus considered a pluricentric language. In most regions, the speakers use a continuum from more dialectal varieties to more standard varieties depending on the circumstances. Varieties[edit] The national and regional standard varieties of German.[56] In German linguistics, German dialects are distinguished from varieties of standard German. The varieties of standard German refer to the different local varieties of the pluricentric standard German. They differ only slightly in lexicon and phonology. In certain regions, they have replaced the traditional German dialects, especially in Northern Germany. German Standard German Austrian Standard German Swiss Standard German In the German-speaking parts of Switzerland, mixtures of dialect and standard are very seldom used, and the use of Standard German is largely restricted to the written language. About 11% of the Swiss residents speak High German (Standard German) at home, but this is mainly due to German immigrants.[57] This situation has been called a medial diglossia. Swiss Standard German is used in the Swiss education system, while Austrian German is officially used in the Austrian education system. A mixture of dialect and standard does not normally occur in Northern Germany either. The traditional varieties there are Low German, whereas Standard German is a High German "variety". Because their linguistic distance is greater, they do not mesh with Standard German the way that High German dialects (such as Bavarian, Swabian, and Hessian) can. Dialects[edit] Main article: German dialects The continental West Germanic dialects The German dialects are the traditional local varieties of the language; many of them are not mutually intelligibile with standard German, and they have great differences in lexicon, phonology, and syntax. If a narrow definition of language based on mutual intelligibility is used, many German dialects are considered to be separate languages (for instance in the Ethnologue). However, such a point of view is unusual in German linguistics. The German dialect continuum is traditionally divided most broadly into High German and Low German, also called Low Saxon. However, historically, High German dialects and Low Saxon/Low German dialects do not belong to the same language. Nevertheless, in today's Germany, Low Saxon/Low German is often perceived as a dialectal variation of Standard German on a functional level even by many native speakers. The same phenomenon is found in the eastern Netherlands, as the traditional dialects are not always identified with their Low Saxon/Low German origins, but with Dutch.[citation needed] The variation among the German dialects is considerable, with often only neighbouring dialects being mutually intelligible. Some dialects are not intelligible to people who know only Standard German. However, all German dialects belong to the dialect continuum of High German and Low Saxon. Low German and Low Saxon[edit] Main article: Low German Middle Low German was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League. It was the predominant language in Northern Germany until the 16th century. In 1534, the Luther Bible was published. It aimed to be understandable to a broad audience and was based mainly on Central and Upper German varieties. The Early New High German language gained more prestige than Low German and became the language of science and literature. Around the same time, the Hanseatic League, a confederation of northern ports, lost its importance as new trade routes to Asia and the Americas were established, and the most powerful German states of that period were located in Middle and Southern Germany. The 18th and 19th centuries were marked by mass education in Standard German in schools. Gradually, Low German came to be politically viewed as a mere dialect spoken by the uneducated. Today, Low Saxon can be divided in two groups: Low Saxon varieties with a reasonable level of Standard German influence and varieties of Standard German with a Low Saxon influence known as Missingsch. Sometimes, Low Saxon and Low Franconian varieties are grouped together because both are unaffected by the High German consonant shift. However, the proportion of the population who can understand and speak it has decreased continuously since World War II. The largest cities in the Low German area are Hamburg and Dortmund. Low Franconian[edit] Further information: Low Franconian The Low Franconian dialects In Germany, Low Franconian dialects are spoken in the northwest of North Rhine-Westphalia, along the Lower Rhine. The Low Franconian dialects spoken in Germany are referred to as Low Rhenish. In the north of the German Low Franconian language area, North Low Franconian dialects (also referred to as Cleverlands or as dialects of South Guelderish) are spoken. The South Low Franconian and Bergish dialects, which are spoken in the south of the German Low Franconian language area, are transitional dialects between Low Franconian and Ripuarian dialects. The Low Franconian dialects fall within a linguistic category used to classify a number of historical and contemporary West Germanic varieties most closely related to, and including, the Dutch language. Consequently, the vast majority of the Low Franconian dialects are spoken outside of the German language area, in the Netherlands and Belgium. During the Middle Ages and Early Modern Period, the Low Franconian dialects now spoken in Germany, used Middle Dutch or Early Modern Dutch as their literary language and Dachsprache. Following a 19th-century change in Prussian language policy, use of Dutch as an official and public language was forbidden; resulting in Standard German taking its place as the region's official language.[58][59] As a result, these dialects are now considered German dialects from a socio-linguistic point of view.[60] Nevertheless, topologically these dialects are structurally and phonologically far more similar to Dutch, than to German and form the both the smallest and most divergent dialect cluster within the contemporary German language area.[61] High German[edit] Main article: High German languages The Central German dialects The Franconian dialects (Low Franconian, Central- and Rhine Franconian, and High Franconian) The High German dialects consist of the Central German, High Franconian, and Upper German dialects. The High Franconian dialects are transitional dialects between Central and Upper German. The High German varieties spoken by the Ashkenazi Jews have several unique features and are considered as a separate language, Yiddish, written with the Hebrew alphabet. Central German[edit] The Central German dialects are spoken in Central Germany, from Aachen in the west to Görlitz in the east. They consist of Franconian dialects in the west (West Central German) and non-Franconian dialects in the east (East Central German). Modern Standard German is mostly based on Central German dialects. The Franconian, West Central German dialects are the Central Franconian dialects (Ripuarian and Moselle Franconian) and the Rhine Franconian dialects (Hessian and Palatine). These dialects are considered as German in Germany and Belgium Luxembourgish in Luxembourg Lorraine Franconian (spoken in Moselle) and as a Rhine Franconian variant of Alsatian (spoken in Alsace bossue only) in France Limburgish or Kerkrade dialect in the Netherlands. Luxembourgish as well as the Transylvanian Saxon dialect spoken in Transylvania are based on Moselle Franconian dialects. The largest cities in the Franconian Central German area are Cologne and Frankfurt. Further east, the non-Franconian, East Central German dialects are spoken (Thuringian, Upper Saxon, Ore Mountainian, and Lusatian-New Markish, and earlier, in the then German-speaking parts of Silesia also Silesian, and in then German southern East Prussia also High Prussian). The largest cities in the East Central German area are Berlin and Leipzig. High Franconian[edit] The High Franconian dialects are transitional dialects between Central and Upper German. They consist of the East and South Franconian dialects. The East Franconian dialect branch is one of the most spoken dialect branches in Germany. These dialects are spoken in the region of Franconia and in the central parts of Saxon Vogtland. Franconia consists of the Bavarian districts of Upper, Middle, and Lower Franconia, the region of South Thuringia (Thuringia), and the eastern parts of the region of Heilbronn-Franken (Tauber Franconia and Hohenlohe) in Baden-Württemberg. The largest cities in the East Franconian area are Nuremberg and Würzburg. South Franconian is mainly spoken in northern Baden-Württemberg in Germany, but also in the northeasternmost part of the region of Alsace in France. While these dialects are considered as dialects of German in Baden-Württemberg, they are considered as dialects of Alsatian in Alsace (most Alsatian dialects are Low Alemannic, however). The largest cities in the South Franconian area are Karlsruhe and Heilbronn. Upper German[edit] The Upper German and High Franconian (transitional between Central and Upper German) dialects The Upper German dialects are the Alemannic dialects in the west and the Bavarian dialects in the east. Alemannic[edit] Alemannic dialects are spoken in Switzerland (High Alemannic in the densely populated Swiss Plateau, in the south also Highest Alemannic, and Low Alemannic in Basel), Baden-Württemberg (Swabian and Low Alemannic, in the southwest also High Alemannic), Bavarian Swabia (Swabian, in the southwesternmost part also Low Alemannic), Vorarlberg (Low, High, and Highest Alemannic), Alsace (Low Alemannic, in the southernmost part also High Alemannic), Liechtenstein (High and Highest Alemannic), and in the Tyrolean district of Reutte (Swabian). The Alemannic dialects are considered as Alsatian in Alsace. The largest cities in the Alemannic area are Stuttgart and Zürich. Bavarian[edit] Bavarian dialects are spoken in Austria (Vienna, Lower and Upper Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Salzburg, Burgenland, and in most parts of Tyrol), Bavaria (Upper and Lower Bavaria as well as Upper Palatinate), South Tyrol, southwesternmost Saxony (Southern Vogtlandian), and in the Swiss village of Samnaun. The largest cities in the Bavarian area are Vienna and Munich. Grammar[edit] Main article: German grammar German is a fusional language with a moderate degree of inflection, with three grammatical genders; as such, there can be a large number of words derived from the same root. Noun inflection[edit] Declension of the Standard High German definite articles (all equivalent to English "the") Further information: Grammatical gender in German German nouns inflect by case, gender, and number: four cases: nominative, accusative, genitive, and dative. three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter. Word endings sometimes reveal grammatical gender: for instance, nouns ending in -ung (-ing), -schaft (-ship), -keit or heit (-hood, -ness) are feminine, nouns ending in -chen or -lein (diminutive forms) are neuter and nouns ending in -ismus (-ism) are masculine. Others are more variable, sometimes depending on the region in which the language is spoken. And some endings are not restricted to one gender: for example, -er (-er), such as Feier (feminine), celebration, party, Arbeiter (masculine), labourer, and Gewitter (neuter), thunderstorm. two numbers: singular and plural. This degree of inflection is considerably less than in Old High German and other old Indo-European languages such as Latin, Ancient Greek, and Sanskrit, and it is also somewhat less than, for instance, Old English, modern Icelandic, or Russian. The three genders have collapsed in the plural. With four cases and three genders plus plural, there are 16 permutations of case and gender/number of the article (not the nouns), but there are only six forms of the definite article, which together cover all 16 permutations. In nouns, inflection for case is required in the singular for strong masculine and neuter nouns only in the genitive and in the dative (only in fixed or archaic expressions), and even this is losing ground to substitutes in informal speech.[62] Weak masculine nouns share a common case ending for genitive, dative, and accusative in the singular. Feminine nouns are not declined in the singular. The plural has an inflection for the dative. In total, seven inflectional endings (not counting plural markers) exist in German: -s, -es, -n, -ns, -en, -ens, -e. In German orthography, nouns and most words with the syntactical function of nouns are capitalised to make it easier for readers to determine the function of a word within a sentence (Am Freitag ging ich einkaufen. – "On Friday I went shopping."; Eines Tages kreuzte er endlich auf. – "One day he finally showed up.") This convention is almost unique to German today (shared perhaps only by the closely related Luxembourgish language and several insular dialects of the North Frisian language), but it was historically common in other languages such as Danish (which abolished the capitalization of nouns in 1948) and English. Like the other Germanic languages, German forms noun compounds in which the first noun modifies the category given by the second: Hundehütte ("dog hut"; specifically: "dog kennel"). Unlike English, whose newer compounds or combinations of longer nouns are often written "open" with separating spaces, German (like some other Germanic languages) nearly always uses the "closed" form without spaces, for example: Baumhaus ("tree house"). Like English, German allows arbitrarily long compounds in theory (see also English compounds). The longest German word verified to be actually in (albeit very limited) use is Rindfleischetikettierungsüberwachungsaufgabenübertragungsgesetz, which, literally translated, is "beef labelling supervision duties assignment law" [from Rind (cattle), Fleisch (meat), Etikettierung(s) (labelling), Überwachung(s) (supervision), Aufgaben (duties), Übertragung(s) (assignment), Gesetz (law)]. However, examples like this are perceived by native speakers as excessively bureaucratic, stylistically awkward, or even satirical. Verb inflection[edit] Main article: German verbs The inflection of standard German verbs includes: two main conjugation classes: weak and strong (as in English). Additionally, there is a third class, known as mixed verbs, whose conjugation combines features of both the strong and weak patterns. three persons: first, second and third. two numbers: singular and plural. three moods: indicative, imperative and subjunctive (in addition to infinitive). two voices: active and passive. The passive voice uses auxiliary verbs and is divisible into static and dynamic. Static forms show a constant state and use the verb ’'to be'’ (sein). Dynamic forms show an action and use the verb "to become'’ (werden). two tenses without auxiliary verbs (present and preterite) and four tenses constructed with auxiliary verbs (perfect, pluperfect, future and future perfect). the distinction between grammatical aspects is rendered by combined use of the subjunctive and/or preterite marking so the plain indicative voice uses neither of those two markers; the subjunctive by itself often conveys reported speech; subjunctive plus preterite marks the conditional state; and the preterite alone shows either plain indicative (in the past), or functions as a (literal) alternative for either reported speech or the conditional state of the verb, when necessary for clarity. the distinction between perfect and progressive aspect is and has, at every stage of development, been a productive category of the older language and in nearly all documented dialects, but strangely enough it is now rigorously excluded from written usage in its present normalised form. disambiguation of completed vs. uncompleted forms is widely observed and regularly generated by common prefixes (blicken [to look], erblicken [to see – unrelated form: sehen]). Verb prefixes[edit] The meaning of basic verbs can be expanded and sometimes radically changed through the use of a number of prefixes. Some prefixes have a specific meaning; the prefix zer- refers to destruction, as in zerreißen (to tear apart), zerbrechen (to break apart), zerschneiden (to cut apart). Other prefixes have only the vaguest meaning in themselves; ver- is found in a number of verbs with a large variety of meanings, as in versuchen (to try) from suchen (to seek), vernehmen (to interrogate) from nehmen (to take), verteilen (to distribute) from teilen (to share), verstehen (to understand) from stehen (to stand). Other examples include the following: haften (to stick), verhaften (to detain); kaufen (to buy), verkaufen (to sell); hören (to hear), aufhören (to cease); fahren (to drive), erfahren (to experience). Many German verbs have a separable prefix, often with an adverbial function. In finite verb forms, it is split off and moved to the end of the clause and is hence considered by some to be a "resultative particle". For example, mitgehen, meaning "to go along", would be split, giving Gehen Sie mit? (Literal: "Go you with?"; Idiomatic: "Are you going along?"). Indeed, several parenthetical clauses may occur between the prefix of a finite verb and its complement (ankommen = to arrive, er kam an = he arrived, er ist angekommen = he has arrived): Er kam am Freitagabend nach einem harten Arbeitstag und dem üblichen Ärger, der ihn schon seit Jahren immer wieder an seinem Arbeitsplatz plagt, mit fraglicher Freude auf ein Mahl, das seine Frau ihm, wie er hoffte, bereits aufgetischt hatte, endlich zu Hause an. A selectively literal translation of this example to illustrate the point might look like this: He "came" on Friday evening, after a hard day at work and the usual annoyances that had time and again been troubling him for years now at his workplace, with questionable joy, to a meal which, as he hoped, his wife had already put on the table, finally home "to". Word order[edit] German word order is generally with the V2 word order restriction and also with the SOV word order restriction for main clauses. For polar questions, exclamations, and wishes, the finite verb always has the first position. In subordinate clauses, the verb occurs at the very end. German requires a verbal element (main verb or auxiliary verb) to appear second in the sentence. The verb is preceded by the topic of the sentence. The element in focus appears at the end of the sentence. For a sentence without an auxiliary, these are several possibilities: Der alte Mann gab mir gestern das Buch. (The old man gave me yesterday the book; normal order) Das Buch gab mir gestern der alte Mann. (The book gave [to] me yesterday the old man) Das Buch gab der alte Mann mir gestern. (The book gave the old man [to] me yesterday) Das Buch gab mir der alte Mann gestern. (The book gave [to] me the old man yesterday) Gestern gab mir der alte Mann das Buch. (Yesterday gave [to] me the old man the book, normal order) Mir gab der alte Mann das Buch gestern. ([To] me gave the old man the book yesterday (entailing: as for someone else, it was another date)) The position of a noun in a German sentence has no bearing on its being a subject, an object or another argument. In a declarative sentence in English, if the subject does not occur before the predicate, the sentence could well be misunderstood. However, German's flexible word order allows one to emphasise specific words: Normal word order: Der Direktor betrat gestern um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro. The manager entered yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. Object in front: Sein Büro betrat der Direktor gestern um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand. His office entered the manager yesterday at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand. The object Sein Büro (his office) is thus highlighted; it could be the topic of the next sentence. Adverb of time in front: Gestern betrat der Direktor um 10 Uhr mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro. (aber heute ohne Schirm) Yesterday entered the manager at 10 o'clock with an umbrella in the hand his office. (but today without umbrella) Both time expressions in front: Gestern um 10 Uhr betrat der Direktor mit einem Schirm in der Hand sein Büro. Yesterday at 10 o'clock entered the manager with an umbrella in the hand his office. The full-time specification Gestern um 10 Uhr is highlighted. Another possibility: Gestern um 10 Uhr betrat der Direktor sein Büro mit einem Schirm in der Hand. Yesterday at 10 o'clock the manager entered his office with an umbrella in the hand. Both the time specification and the fact he carried an umbrella are accentuated. Swapped adverbs: Der Direktor betrat mit einem Schirm in der Hand gestern um 10 Uhr sein Büro. The manager entered with an umbrella in the hand yesterday at 10 o'clock his office. The phrase mit einem Schirm in der Hand is highlighted. Swapped object: Der Direktor betrat gestern um 10 Uhr sein Büro mit einem Schirm in der Hand. The manager entered yesterday at 10 o'clock his office with an umbrella in the hand. The time specification and the object sein Büro (his office) are lightly accentuated. The flexible word order also allows one to use language "tools" (such as poetic meter and figures of speech) more freely. Auxiliary verbs[edit] When an auxiliary verb is present, it appears in second position, and the main verb appears at the end. This occurs notably in the creation of the perfect tense. Many word orders are still possible: Der alte Mann hat mir heute das Buch gegeben. (The old man has me today the book given.) Das Buch hat der alte Mann mir heute gegeben. (The book has the old man me today given.) Heute hat der alte Mann mir das Buch gegeben. (Today has the old man me the book given.) The main verb may appear in first position to put stress on the action itself. The auxiliary verb is still in second position. Gegeben hat mir der alte Mann das Buch heute. (Given has me the old man the book today.) The bare fact that the book has been given is emphasized, as well as 'today'. Modal verbs[edit] Sentences using modal verbs place the infinitive at the end. For example, the English sentence "Should he go home?" would be rearranged in German to say "Should he (to) home go?" (Soll er nach Hause gehen?). Thus, in sentences with several subordinate or relative clauses, the infinitives are clustered at the end. Compare the similar clustering of prepositions in the following (highly contrived) English sentence: "What did you bring that book that I do not like to be read to out of up for?" Multiple infinitives[edit] German subordinate clauses have all verbs clustered at the end. Given that auxiliaries encode future, passive, modality, and the perfect, very long chains of verbs at the end of the sentence can occur. In these constructions, the past participle formed with ge- is often replaced by the infinitive. Man nimmt an, dass der Deserteur wohl erschossenV wordenpsv seinperf sollmod One suspects that the deserter probably shot become be should. ("It is suspected that the deserter probably had been shot") Er wusste nicht, dass der Agent einen Nachschlüssel hatte machen lassen He knew not that the agent a picklock had make let Er wusste nicht, dass der Agent einen Nachschlüssel machen lassen hatte He knew not that the agent a picklock make let had ("He did not know that the agent had had a picklock made") The order at the end of such strings is subject to variation, but the second one in the last example is unusual. Vocabulary[edit] Volume 1 "German Orthography" of the 25th edition of the Duden dictionary Most German vocabulary is derived from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family.[63] However, there is a significant amount of loanwords from other languages, in particular Latin, Greek, Italian, French, and most recently English.[64] In the early 19th century, Joachim Heinrich Campe estimated that one fifth of the total German vocabulary was of French or Latin origin.[65] Latin words were already imported into the predecessor of the German language during the Roman Empire and underwent all the characteristic phonetic changes in German. Their origin is thus no longer recognizable for most speakers (e.g. Pforte, Tafel, Mauer, Käse, Köln from Latin porta, tabula, murus, caseus, Colonia). Borrowing from Latin continued after the fall of the Roman Empire during Christianisation, mediated by the church and monasteries. Another important influx of Latin words can be observed during Renaissance humanism. In a scholarly context, the borrowings from Latin have continued until today, in the last few decades often indirectly through borrowings from English. During the 15th to 17th centuries, the influence of Italian was great, leading to many Italian loanwords in the fields of architecture, finance, and music. The influence of the French language in the 17th to 19th centuries resulted in an even greater import of French words. The English influence was already present in the 19th century, but it did not become dominant until the second half of the 20th century. 42nd edition of the Österreichisches Wörterbuch ("Austrian Dictionary") Thus, Notker Labeo was able to translate Aristotelian treatises into pure (Old High) German in the decades after the year 1000.[66] The tradition of loan translation was revitalized in the 18th century with linguists like Joachim Heinrich Campe, who introduced close to 300 words that are still used in modern German. Even today, there are movements that try to promote the Ersatz (substitution) of foreign words that are deemed unnecessary with German alternatives.[67] As in English, there are many pairs of synonyms due to the enrichment of the Germanic vocabulary with loanwords from Latin and Latinized Greek. These words often have different connotations from their Germanic counterparts and are usually perceived as more scholarly. Historie, historisch – "history, historical", (Geschichte, geschichtlich) Humanität, human – "humaneness, humane", (Menschlichkeit, menschlich)[nb 5] Millennium – "millennium", (Jahrtausend) Perzeption – "perception", (Wahrnehmung) Vokabular – "vocabulary", (Wortschatz) Diktionär – "dictionary, wordbook", (Wörterbuch)[nb 6] probieren – "to try", (versuchen) The size of the vocabulary of German is difficult to estimate. The Deutsches Wörterbuch (German Dictionary) initiated by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm already contained over 330,000 headwords in its first edition. The modern German scientific vocabulary is estimated at nine million words and word groups (based on the analysis of 35 million sentences of a corpus in Leipzig, which as of July 2003 included 500 million words in total).[68] The Duden is the de facto official dictionary of the German language, first published by Konrad Duden in 1880. The Duden is updated regularly, with new editions appearing every four or five years. As of August 2017[update], it was in its 27th edition and in 12 volumes, each covering different aspects such as loanwords, etymology, pronunciation, synonyms, and so forth. The first of these volumes, Die deutsche Rechtschreibung (German Orthography), has long been the prescriptive source for the spelling of German. The Duden has become the bible of the German language, being the definitive set of rules regarding grammar, spelling and usage of German.[69] The Österreichisches Wörterbuch ("Austrian Dictionary"), abbreviated ÖWB, is the official dictionary of the German language in the Republic of Austria. It is edited by a group of linguists under the authority of the Austrian Federal Ministry of Education, Arts and Culture (German: Bundesministerium für Unterricht, Kunst und Kultur). It is the Austrian counterpart to the German Duden and contains a number of terms unique to Austrian German or more frequently used or differently pronounced there.[70] A considerable amount of this "Austrian" vocabulary is also common in Southern Germany, especially Bavaria, and some of it is used in Switzerland as well. Since the 39th edition in 2001 the orthography of the ÖWB has been adjusted to the German spelling reform of 1996. The dictionary is also officially used in the Italian province of South Tyrol. English to German cognates[edit] This is a selection of cognates in both English and German. Instead of the usual infinitive ending -en, German verbs are indicated by a hyphen after their stems. Words that are written with capital letters in German are nouns. English German English German English German English German English German English German English German English German and und arm Arm bear Bär beaver Biber bee Biene beer Bier best best better besser blink blink- bloom blüh- blue blau boat Boot book Buch brew brau- brewery Brauerei bridge Brücke brow Braue brown braun church Kirche cold kalt cool kühl dale Tal dam Damm dance tanz- dough Teig dream Traum dream träum- drink Getränk drink trink- ear Ohr earth Erde eat ess- far fern feather Feder fern Farn field Feld finger Finger fish Fisch fisher Fischer flee flieh- flight Flug flood Flut flow fließ- flow Fluss fly Fliege fly flieg- for für ford Furt four vier fox Fuchs glass Glas go geh- gold Gold good gut grass Gras grasshopper Grashüpfer green grün grey grau hag Hexe hail Hagel hand Hand hard hart hate Hass haven Hafen hay Heu hear hör- heart Herz heat Hitze heath Heide high hoch honey Honig hornet Hornisse hundred hundert hunger Hunger hut Hütte ice Eis king König kiss Kuss kiss küss- knee Knie land Land landing Landung laugh lach- lie, lay lieg-, lag lie, lied lüg-, log light (A) leicht light Licht live leb- liver Leber love Liebe man Mann middle Mitte midnight Mitternacht moon Mond moss Moos mouth Mund mouth (river) Mündung night Nacht nose Nase nut Nuss over über plant Pflanze quack quak- rain Regen rainbow Regenbogen red rot ring Ring sand Sand say sag- sea See (f) seam Saum seat Sitz see seh- sheep Schaf shimmer schimmer- shine schein- ship Schiff silver Silber sing sing- sit sitz- snow Schnee soul Seele speak sprech- spring spring- star Stern stitch Stich stork Storch storm Sturm stormy stürmisch strand strand- straw Stroh straw bale Strohballen stream Strom stream ström- stutter stotter- summer Sommer sun Sonne sunny sonnig swan Schwan tell erzähl- that (C) dass the der, die, das, den, dem then dann thirst Durst thistle Distel thorn Dorn thousand tausend thunder Donner twitter zwitscher- upper ober warm warm wasp Wespe water Wasser weather Wetter weave web- well Quelle well wohl which welch white weiß wild wild wind Wind winter Winter wolf Wolf word Wort world Welt yarn Garn year Jahr yellow gelb English German English German English German English German English German English German English German English German Orthography[edit] Main articles: German orthography and German braille Austria's standardized cursive Germany's standardized cursive German is written in the Latin alphabet. In addition to the 26 standard letters, German has three vowels with an umlaut mark, namely ä, ö and ü, as well as the eszett or scharfes s (sharp s): ß. In Switzerland and Liechtenstein, ss is used instead of ß. Since ß can never occur at the beginning of a word, it has no traditional uppercase form. Written texts in German are easily recognisable as such by distinguishing features such as umlauts and certain orthographical features – German is the only major language that capitalizes all nouns, a relic of a widespread practice in Northern Europe in the early modern era (including English for a while, in the 1700s) – and the frequent occurrence of long compounds. Because legibility and convenience set certain boundaries, compounds consisting of more than three or four nouns are almost exclusively found in humorous contexts. (In contrast, although English can also string nouns together, it usually separates the nouns with spaces. For example, "toilet bowl cleaner".) Present[edit] Before the German orthography reform of 1996, ß replaced ss after long vowels and diphthongs and before consonants, word-, or partial-word endings. In reformed spelling, ß replaces ss only after long vowels and diphthongs. Since there is no traditional capital form of ß, it was replaced by SS when capitalization was required. For example, Maßband (tape measure) became MASSBAND in capitals. An exception was the use of ß in legal documents and forms when capitalizing names. To avoid confusion with similar names, lower case ß was maintained (thus "KREßLEIN" instead of "KRESSLEIN"). Capital ß (ẞ) was ultimately adopted into German orthography in 2017, ending a long orthographic debate (thus "KREẞLEIN and KRESSLEIN").[71] Umlaut vowels (ä, ö, ü) are commonly transcribed with ae, oe, and ue if the umlauts are not available on the keyboard or other medium used. In the same manner ß can be transcribed as ss. Some operating systems use key sequences to extend the set of possible characters to include, amongst other things, umlauts; in Microsoft Windows this is done using Alt codes. German readers understand these transcriptions (although they appear unusual), but they are avoided if the regular umlauts are available, because they are a makeshift and not proper spelling. (In Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein, city and family names exist where the extra e has a vowel lengthening effect, e.g. Raesfeld [ˈraːsfɛlt], Coesfeld [ˈkoːsfɛlt] and Itzehoe [ɪtsəˈhoː], but this use of the letter e after a/o/u does not occur in the present-day spelling of words other than proper nouns.) German alphabet (Listen to a German speaker recite the alphabet in German) Problems playing this file? See media help. There is no general agreement on where letters with umlauts occur in the sorting sequence. Telephone directories treat them by replacing them with the base vowel followed by an e. Some dictionaries sort each umlauted vowel as a separate letter after the base vowel, but more commonly words with umlauts are ordered immediately after the same word without umlauts. As an example in a telephone book Ärzte occurs after Adressenverlage but before Anlagenbauer (because Ä is replaced by Ae). In a dictionary Ärzte comes after Arzt, but in some dictionaries Ärzte and all other words starting with Ä may occur after all words starting with A. In some older dictionaries or indexes, initial Sch and St are treated as separate letters and are listed as separate entries after S, but they are usually treated as S+C+H and S+T. Written German also typically uses an alternative opening inverted comma (quotation mark) as in „Guten Morgen!“. Past[edit] A Russian dictionary from 1931, showing the "German alphabet" – the 3rd and 4th columns of each half are Fraktur and Kurrent respectively, with the footnote explaining ligatures used in Fraktur. Further information: 2nd Orthographic Conference (German), Antiqua–Fraktur dispute, and German orthography reform of 1944 Until the early 20th century, German was printed in blackletter typefaces (in Fraktur, and in Schwabacher), and written in corresponding handwriting (for example Kurrent and Sütterlin). These variants of the Latin alphabet are very different from the serif or sans-serif Antiqua typefaces used today, and the handwritten forms in particular are difficult for the untrained to read. The printed forms, however, were claimed by some to be more readable when used for Germanic languages.[citation needed][72] The Nazis initially promoted Fraktur and Schwabacher because they were considered Aryan, but they abolished them in 1941, claiming that these letters were Jewish.[73] It is believed that the Nazi régime had banned this script,[who?] as they realized that Fraktur would inhibit communication in the territories occupied during World War II.[74] The Fraktur script however remains present in everyday life in pub signs, beer brands and other forms of advertisement, where it is used to convey a certain rusticality and antiquity. A proper use of the long s (langes s), ſ, is essential for writing German text in Fraktur typefaces. Many Antiqua typefaces also include the long s. A specific set of rules applies for the use of long s in German text, but nowadays it is rarely used in Antiqua typesetting. Any lower case "s" at the beginning of a syllable would be a long s, as opposed to a terminal s or short s (the more common variation of the letter s), which marks the end of a syllable; for example, in differentiating between the words Wachſtube (guard-house) and Wachstube (tube of polish/wax). One can easily decide which "s" to use by appropriate hyphenation, (Wach-ſtube vs. Wachs-tube). The long s only appears in lower case. Orthography Reform[edit] Main article: German orthography reform of 1996 The orthography reform of 1996 led to public controversy and considerable dispute. The states (Bundesländer) of North Rhine-Westphalia and Bavaria refused to accept it. At one point, the dispute reached the highest court, which quickly dismissed it, claiming that the states had to decide for themselves and that only in schools could the reform be made the official rule – everybody else could continue writing as they had learned it. After 10 years, without any intervention by the federal parliament, a major revision was installed in 2006, just in time for the coming school year. In 2007, some traditional spellings were finally invalidated; however, in 2008, many of the old comma rules were again put in force. The most noticeable change was probably in the use of the letter ß, called scharfes s (Sharp S) or ess-zett (pronounced ess-tsett). Traditionally, this letter was used in three situations: After a long vowel or vowel combination; Before a t; At the end of a syllable. Examples are Füße, paßt, and daß. Currently, only the first rule is in effect, making the correct spellings Füße, passt, and dass. The word Fuß 'foot' has the letter ß because it contains a long vowel, even though that letter occurs at the end of a syllable. The logic of this change is that an 'ß' is a single letter whereas 'ss' are two letters, so the same distinction applies as (for example) between the words den and denn. Phonology[edit] Main article: German phonology Vowels[edit] Spoken German in Goethe's Faust In German, vowels (excluding diphthongs; see below) are either short or long, as follows: A Ä E I O Ö U Ü Short /a/ /ɛ/ /ɛ/, /ə/ /ɪ/ /ɔ/ /œ/ /ʊ/ /ʏ/ Long /aː/ /ɛː/, /eː/ /eː/ /iː/ /oː/ /øː/ /uː/ /yː/ Short /ɛ/ is realized as [ɛ] in stressed syllables (including secondary stress), but as [ə] in unstressed syllables. Note that stressed short /ɛ/ can be spelled either with e or with ä (for instance, hätte 'would have' and Kette 'chain' rhyme). In general, the short vowels are open and the long vowels are close. The one exception is the open /ɛː/ sound of long Ä; in some varieties of standard German, /ɛː/ and /eː/ have merged into [eː], removing this anomaly. In that case, pairs like Bären/Beeren 'bears/berries' or Ähre/Ehre 'spike (of wheat)/honour' become homophonous (see: Captain Bluebear). In many varieties of standard German, an unstressed /ɛr/ is not pronounced [ər] but vocalised to [ɐ]. Whether any particular vowel letter represents the long or short phoneme is not completely predictable, although the following regularities exist: If a vowel (other than i) is at the end of a syllable or followed by a single consonant, it is usually pronounced long (e.g. Hof [hoːf]). If a vowel is followed by h or if an i is followed by an e, it is long. If the vowel is followed by a double consonant (e.g. ff, ss or tt), ck, tz or a consonant cluster (e.g. st or nd), it is nearly always short (e.g. hoffen [ˈhɔfən]). Double consonants are used only for this function of marking preceding vowels as short; the consonant itself is never pronounced lengthened or doubled, in other words this is not a feeding order of gemination and then vowel shortening. Both of these rules have exceptions (e.g. hat [hat] "has" is short despite the first rule; Mond [moːnt] "moon" is long despite the second rule). For an i that is neither in the combination ie (making it long) nor followed by a double consonant or cluster (making it short), there is no general rule. In some cases, there are regional differences. In central Germany (Hesse), the o in the proper name "Hoffmann" is pronounced long, whereas most other Germans would pronounce it short. The same applies to the e in the geographical name "Mecklenburg" for people in that region. The word Städte "cities" is pronounced with a short vowel [ˈʃtɛtə] by some (Jan Hofer, ARD Television) and with a long vowel [ˈʃtɛːtə] by others (Marietta Slomka, ZDF Television). Finally, a vowel followed by ch can be short (Fach [fax] "compartment", Küche [ˈkʏçə] "kitchen") or long (Suche [ˈzuːxə] "search", Bücher [ˈbyːçɐ] "books") almost at random. Thus, Lache is homographous between [laːxə] Lache "puddle" and [laxə] Lache "manner of laughing" (colloquial) or lache! "laugh!" (imperative). German vowels can form the following digraphs (in writing) and diphthongs (in pronunciation); note that the pronunciation of some of them (ei, äu, eu) is very different from what one would expect when considering the component letters: Spelling ai, ei, ay, ey au äu, eu Pronunciation /aɪ̯/ /aʊ̯/ /ɔʏ̯/ Additionally, the digraph ie generally represents the phoneme /iː/, which is not a diphthong. In many varieties, an /r/ at the end of a syllable is vocalised. However, a sequence of a vowel followed by such a vocalised /r/ is not a phonemic diphthong: Bär [bɛːɐ̯] "bear", er [eːɐ̯] "he", wir [viːɐ̯] "we", Tor [toːɐ̯] "gate", kurz [kʊɐ̯ts] "short", Wörter [vœɐ̯tɐ] "words". In most varieties of standard German, syllables that begin with a vowel are preceded by a glottal stop [ʔ]. Consonants[edit] With approximately 26 phonemes, the German consonant system exhibits an average number of consonants in comparison with other languages. One of the more noteworthy ones is the unusual affricate /p͡f/. The consonant inventory of the standard language is shown below. Labial Alveolar Post-alv./ Palatal Velar Uvular Glottal Nasal m n ŋ Stop p3  b t3  d k3  ɡ Affricate pf ts tʃ  (dʒ)4 Fricative f  v s  z ʃ  (ʒ)4 x1 (ʁ)2 h Trill r2 (ʀ)2 Approximant l j 1/x/ has two allophones, [x] and [ç], after back and front vowels, respectively. 2/r/ has three allophones in free variation: [r], [ʁ] and [ʀ]. In the syllable coda, the allophone [ɐ] is found in many varieties. 3 The voiceless stops /p/, /t/, /k/ are aspirated except when preceded by a sibilant, identical to English usage. 4/d͡ʒ/ and /ʒ/ occur only in words of foreign (usually English or French) origin. Where a stressed syllable has an initial vowel, it is preceded by [ʔ]. As its presence is predictable from context, [ʔ] is not considered a phoneme. Consonant spellings[edit] c standing by itself is not a German letter. In borrowed words, it is usually pronounced [t͡s] (before ä, äu, e, i, ö, ü, y) or [k] (before a, o, u, and consonants). The combination ck is, as in English, used to indicate that the preceding vowel is short. ch occurs often and is pronounced either [ç] (after ä, ai, äu, e, ei, eu, i, ö, ü and consonants; in the diminutive suffix -chen; and at the beginning of a word), [x] (after a, au, o, u), or [k] at the beginning of a word before a, o, u and consonants. Ch never occurs at the beginning of an originally German word. In borrowed words with initial Ch before front vowels (Chemie "chemistry" etc.), [ç] is considered standard.[clarification needed] However, Upper Germans and Franconians (in the geographical sense) replace it with [k], as German as a whole does before darker vowels and consonants such as in Charakter, Christentum. Middle Germans (except Franconians) will borrow a [ʃ] from the French model. Both consider the other's variant, and Upper Germans also the standard [ç], to be particularly awkward and unusual. dsch is pronounced [d͡ʒ] (e.g. Dschungel /ˈd͡ʒʊŋəl/ "jungle") but appears in a few loanwords only. f is pronounced [f] as in "father". h is pronounced [h] as in "home" at the beginning of a syllable. After a vowel it is silent and only lengthens the vowel (e.g. Reh [ʁeː] = roe deer). j is pronounced [j] in Germanic words (Jahr [jaːɐ̯]) like "y" in "year". In recent loanwords, it follows more or less the respective languages' pronunciations. l is always pronounced [l], never *[ɫ] (the English "dark L"). q only exists in combination with u and is pronounced [kv]. It appears in both Germanic and Latin words (quer [kveːɐ̯]; Qualität [kvaliˈtɛːt]). But as most words containing q are Latinate, the letter is considerably rarer in German than it is in English. r is usually pronounced in a guttural fashion (a voiced uvular fricative [ʁ] or uvular trill [ʀ]) in front of a vowel or consonant (Rasen [ˈʁaːzən]; Burg [bʊʁk]). In spoken German, however, it is commonly vocalised after a vowel (er being pronounced rather like [ˈɛɐ̯] – Burg [bʊɐ̯k]). In some varieties, the r is pronounced as a "tongue-tip" r (the alveolar trill [r]). s in German is pronounced [z] (as in "zebra") if it forms the syllable onset (e.g. Sohn [zoːn]), otherwise [s] (e.g. Bus [bʊs]). In Austria, Switzerland, and Southern Germany, [s] occurs at syllable onset as well. A ss [s] indicates that the preceding vowel is short. st and sp at the beginning of words of German origin are pronounced [ʃt] and [ʃp], respectively. ß (a letter unique to German called scharfes S or Eszett) is a ligature of a Long S (ſ) and a tailed z (ʒ) and is always pronounced [s]. Originating in Blackletter typeface, it traditionally replaced ss at the end of a syllable (e.g. ich muss → ich muß; ich müsste → ich müßte); within a word it contrasts with ss [s] in indicating that the preceding vowel is long (compare in Maßen [ɪn ˈmaːsən] "with moderation" and in Massen [ɪn ˈmasən] "in loads"). The use of ß has recently been limited by the latest German spelling reform and is no longer used for ss after a short vowel (e.g. ich muß and ich müßte were always pronounced with a short U/Ü); Switzerland and Liechtenstein already abolished it in 1934.[75] sch is pronounced [ʃ] (like "sh" in "shine"). tsch is pronounced [tʃ] (like "ch" in "cherry") tion in Latin loanwords is pronounced [tsi̯oːn]. th is found, rarely, in loanwords and is pronounced [t] if the loanword is from Greek, and usually as in the original if the loanword is from English (though some, mostly older, speakers tend to replace the English th-sound with [s]). v is pronounced [f] in a limited number of words of Germanic origin, such as Vater [ˈfaːtɐ], Vogel "bird", von "from, of", vor "before, in front of", voll "full" and the prefix ver-. It is also used in loanwords, where it is normally pronounced [v]. This pronunciation is common in words like Vase, Vikar, Viktor, Viper, Ventil, vulgär, and English loanwords; however, pronunciation is [f] by some people in the deep south. The only non-German word in which "v" is always pronounced "f" is Eva (Eve). w is pronounced [v] as in "vacation" (e.g. was [vas]). y is pronounced as [y] when long and [ʏ] when short (as in Hygiene [hyɡi̯ˈeːnə] ; Labyrinth [labyˈʁɪnt] or Gymnasium /ɡʏmˈnaːzi̯ʊm/), except in ay and ey which are both pronounced [aɪ̯]. It is also often used in loanwords and pronounced as in the original language, like Style or Recycling. z is always pronounced [t͡s] (e.g. zog [t͡soːk]), except in loanwords. A tz indicates that the preceding vowel is short. Consonant shifts[edit] Further information: High German consonant shift German does not have any dental fricatives (as English th). The th sound, which the English language still has, disappeared on the continent in German with the consonant shifts between the 8th and 10th centuries.[76] It is sometimes possible to find parallels between English and German by replacing the English th with d in German: "Thank" → in German Dank, "this" and "that" → dies and das, "thou" (old 2nd person singular pronoun) → du, "think" → denken, "thirsty" → durstig and many other examples. Likewise, the gh in Germanic English words, pronounced in several different ways in modern English (as an f or not at all), can often be linked to German ch: "to laugh" → lachen, "through" → durch, "high" → hoch, "naught" → nichts, "light" → leicht or Licht, "sight" → Sicht, "daughter" → Tochter, "neighbour" → Nachbar. Literature[edit] Main article: German literature The German language is used in German literature and can be traced back to the Middle Ages, with the most notable authors of the period being Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach. The Nibelungenlied, whose author remains unknown, is also an important work of the epoch. The fairy tales collected and published by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm in the 19th century became famous throughout the world. Reformer and theologian Martin Luther, who was the first to translate the Bible into German, is widely credited for having set the basis for the modern "High German" language. Among the best-known poets and authors in German are Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, Kleist, Hoffmann, Brecht, Heine, and Kafka. Fourteen German-speaking people have won the Nobel Prize in literature: Theodor Mommsen, Rudolf Christoph Eucken, Paul von Heyse, Gerhart Hauptmann, Carl Spitteler, Thomas Mann, Nelly Sachs, Hermann Hesse, Heinrich Böll, Elias Canetti, Günter Grass, Elfriede Jelinek, Herta Müller and Peter Handke, making it the second most awarded linguistic region (together with French) after English. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) Friedrich Schiller (1759–1805) Brothers Grimm (1785–1863) Thomas Mann (1875–1955) Hermann Hesse (1877–1962) Loanwords in the English language[edit] Main article: List of German expressions in English English has taken many loanwords from German, often without any change of spelling (aside from frequently eliminating umlauts and not capitalizing nouns): German word English loanword Meaning of German word abseilen abseil to descend by rope / to fastrope Angst angst fear Ansatz ansatz onset / entry / math / approach Anschluss anschluss[dubious – discuss] connection / access / annexation Automat automat automation / machine Bildungsroman bildungsroman novel concerned with the personal development or education of the protagonist Blitz blitz flash / lightning Blitzkrieg blitzkrieg lit. 'lightning war': military strategy Bratwurst bratwurst fried sausage Delikatessen delicatessen delicious food items Doppelgänger doppelganger lit. "double going / living person alive", look-alike of somebody Dramaturg dramaturge professional position within a theatre or opera company that deals mainly with research and development of plays or operas Edelweiß or Edelweiss (Swiss spelling) edelweiss edelweiss flower Ersatz ersatz lit. "replacement", typically used to refer to an inferior substitute for a desired substance or item Fest fest feast / celebration Flugabwehrkanone flak lit. "flight defence gun": anti-aircraft gun, abbreviated as FlaK Gedankenexperiment gedankenexperiment thought experiment Geländesprung gelandesprung[dubious – discuss] ski jumping for distance on alpine equipment Gemütlichkeit gemütlichkeit snug feeling, cosiness, good nature, geniality Gestalt gestalt form or shape / creature / scheme; a concept of 'wholeness' (etymologically die Gestalt is the past participle of stellen used as an abstract noun, i.e. the same form as contemporary die Gestellte)[77] Gesundheit! Gesundheit! (Amer.) health / bless you! (when someone sneezes) Glockenspiel glockenspiel percussion instrument Hamburger hamburger & other burgers demonym of Hamburg Heiligenschein heiligenschein lit. "saints' light": halo (as a religious term) Hinterland hinterland lit. '(military) area behind the front-line': interior / backwoods kaputt kaput out of order, not working Katzenjammer katzenjammer lit. "cats' lament": hangover, crapulence Kindergarten kindergarten lit. "children's garden" – nursery or preschool Kitsch kitsch fake art, something produced exclusively for sale Kraut kraut[dubious – discuss] herb, cabbage in some dialects Kulturkampf kulturkampf cultural war Leitmotiv leitmotif guiding theme (the verb leiten means "to guide, to lead") Nationalsozialismus nazi national socialism Panzer panzer lit. "armour": tank plündern (v.) to plunder lit. "taking goods by force" (original meaning "to take away furniture" shifted in German and both borrowed by English during the Thirty Years War) Poltergeist poltergeist lit. "rumbling ghost" Realpolitik realpolitik diplomacy based on practical objectives rather than ideals Reich reich[dubious – discuss] empire or realm Rucksack rucksack backpack (Ruck → Rücken which means "back") Sauerkraut sauerkraut shredded and salted cabbage fermented in its own juice Schadenfreude schadenfreude taking pleasure in someone else's misfortune, gloating Spiel spiel lit. "game / play": sales pitch / lengthy speech with the intent to persuade Sprachraum sprachraum lit. "place/area/room of a language": area where a certain language is spoken Unterseeboot U-boat lit. "under sea boat": submarine, abbreviated as U-Boot über uber over, above Übermensch übermensch superhuman, "overhuman" verklemmt verklemmt (Amer.) lit. "jammed": inhibited, uptight Waldsterben waldsterben lit. "forest dieback", dying floral environment Wanderlust wanderlust desire, pleasure, or inclination to travel or walk Weltanschauung weltanschauung lit. "perception of the world": ideology Wunderkind wunderkind lit. "wonder child": child prodigy, whiz kid Zeitgeist zeitgeist lit. "spirit of the times": the spirit of the age; the trend at that time Zeitnot zeitnot chess term, lit. 'time trouble' Zugzwang zugzwang chess term, lit. "compulsion to move" Zwischenzug zwischenzug chess term, lit. "intermediate move" Organisations[edit] Several organisations promote the use and learning of the German language. Goethe Institut[edit] Main article: Goethe-Institut The government-backed Goethe-Institut,[78] (named after Johann Wolfgang von Goethe) aims to enhance the knowledge of German culture and language within Europe and the rest of the world. This is done by holding exhibitions and conferences with German-related themes, and providing training and guidance in the learning and use of the German language. For example, the Goethe-Institut teaches the Goethe-Zertifikat German language qualification. Deutsche Welle[edit] Main article: Deutsche Welle Deutsche Welle logo The German state broadcaster Deutsche Welle provides radio and television broadcasts in German and 30 other languages across the globe.[79] Its German language services are spoken slowly and thus tailored for learners. Deutsche Welle also provides an e-learning website for teaching German. See also[edit] Language portal Germany portal Switzerland portal Austria portal Luxembourg portal Belgium portal Outline of German language Deutsch (disambiguation) German family name etymology German toponymy Germanism (linguistics) List of German exonyms List of German expressions in English List of German words of French origin List of pseudo-German words adapted to English List of terms used for Germans List of territorial entities where German is an official language Names for the German language Notes[edit] ^ The status of Low German as a German variety or separate language is subject to discussion.[3] ^ The status of Luxembourgish as a German variety or separate language is subject to discussion. ^ The status of Plautdietsch as a German variety or separate language is subject to discussion.[3] ^ The word deutsch (together with dutch) is derived from the old thiud, people, nation; deutsche Sprache signifies therefore "national or popular language, in opposition to the official language, which, in ancient times, was by necessity Latin."[4] ^ Note that menschlich, and occasionally human, may also mean "human, pertaining to humans," whereas Menschlichkeit and Humanität never mean "humanity, human race," which translates to Menschheit. ^ in modern German, Diktionär is mostly considered archaic References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i "Special Eurobarometer 386: Europeans and their languages" (PDF) (report). European Commission. June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 24 July 2015. ^ "Über den Rat". Institute for the German Language. Retrieved 11 October 2010. ^ a b c Goossens 1983, p. 27. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGoossens1983 (help) ^ Boltz 1872, p. 2. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBoltz1872 (help) ^ a b "German, Standard". Ethnologue. 2020. Retrieved 2020-01-23. ^ Portugal, Elsen. Ist Deutsch EINE Sprache? (Is German One Single Language?), GIALens Volume 8, No. 2, Dallas International University. August 2014 ^ a b Robinson 1992, p. 16. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRobinson1992 (help) ^ a b c d Robinson 1992, pp. 239–242. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRobinson1992 (help) ^ Thomas 1992, pp. 5–6. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThomas1992 (help) ^ a b Waterman 1976, p. 83. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWaterman1976 (help) ^ Salmons 2012, p. 195. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSalmons2012 (help) ^ a b Scherer & Jankowsky 1995, p. 11. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSchererJankowsky1995 (help) ^ Keller 1978, pp. 365–368. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKeller1978 (help) ^ Bach 1965, p. 254. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBach1965 (help) ^ Super 1893, p. 81. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSuper1893 (help) ^ Dickens 1974, p. 134. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDickens1974 (help) ^ Scherer 1868, p. ?. sfn error: no target: CITEREFScherer1868 (help) ^ Rothaug 1910, p. [page needed]. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRothaug1910 (help) ^ Weiss 1995, pp. 7–12. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWeiss1995 (help) ^ Nerius 2000, pp. 30–54. sfn error: no target: CITEREFNerius2000 (help) ^ Siebs 2000, p. 20. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSiebs2000 (help) ^ Upward 1997, pp. 22–24, 36. sfn error: no target: CITEREFUpward1997 (help) ^ a b Goldberg, David; Looney, Dennis; Lusin, Natalia (1 February 2015). "Enrollments in Languages Other Than English in United States Institutions of Higher Education, Fall 2013" (PDF). www.mla.org. New York City. Retrieved 7 July 2015. ^ a b "Foreign language learning statistics – Statistics Explained". ec.europa.eu. 17 March 2016. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ a b Lewis, Simons & Fennig 2015. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLewisSimonsFennig2015 (help) ^ Marten & Sauer 2005, p. 7. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMartenSauer2005 (help) ^ "The most spoken languages worldwide (speakers and native speaker in millions)". New York City: Statista, The Statistics Portal. Retrieved 11 July 2015. Native speakers=105, total speakers=185 ^ Bureau des Traités. "Recherches sur les traités". Conventions.coe.int. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ "Map on page of Polish Commission on Standardization of Geographical Names" (PDF). Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ Устав азовского районного совета от 21 May 2002 N 5-09 устав муниципального [Charter of the Azov District Council of 05.21.2002 N 5-09 Charter of the municipal]. russia.bestpravo.com (in Russian). Archived from the original on 8 August 2016. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ "Charte européenne des langues régionales : Hollande nourrit la guerre contre le français" [European Charter for Regional Languages: Hollande fuels the war against French]. lefigaro.fr. 5 June 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ a b c Fischer, Stefan (18 August 2007). "Anpacken für Deutsch" [German in Namibia] (PDF). Allgemeine Deutsche Zeitung (in German). Namibia Media Holdings. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. ^ Deumert 2003, pp. 561–613. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDeumert2003 (help) ^ "Deutsch in Namibia" (PDF). Beilage der Allgemeinen Zeitung. 18 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 23 June 2008. ^ a b German L1 speakers outside Europe ^ Schubert, Joachim. "Natal Germans". www.safrika.org. ^ "Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 – Chapter 1: Founding Provisions | South African Government". gov.za. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ "Detailed List of Languages Spoken at Home for the Population 5 Years and Over by State: 2000" (pdf). census.gov. United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 15 March 2010. ^ Blatt, Ben, Tagalog in California, Cherokee in Arkansas: What language does your state speak?, retrieved 2014-05-13 ^ "Germans from Russia Heritage Collection". library.ndsu.edu. Archived from the original on 19 July 2010. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ a b "IPOL realizará formação de recenseadores para o censo linguístico do município de Antônio Carlos-SC" [IPOL will carry out training of enumerators for the linguistic census of the municipality of Antônio Carlos-SC]. e-ipol.org. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ "Legislative Assembly of the state of Espírito Santo (Commissioner for Culture and Social Communication – Addition to the constitutional amendment number 11/2009 establishing the East Pomeranian dialect as well as German as cultural heritage of the state" (PDF). Claudiovereza.files.wordpress.com. February 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ Gippert, Jost. "TITUS Didactica: German Dialects (map)". titus.uni-frankfurt.de. ^ Szczocarz, Roma (2017). "Pommern in Brasilien" [Pomerania in Brazil]. www.lerncafe.de. ViLE-Netzwerk. Retrieved 27 July 2017. ^ "Lei N.º 14.061, de 23 de julho de 2012". Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019. ^ "Keeping SA's Barossa Deutsch alive over kaffee und kuchen". ABC News. 26 March 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2020. ^ "Top 25 Languages in New Zealand". ethniccommunities.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 8 January 2019. Retrieved 18 October 2018. ^ Holm 1989, p. 616. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHolm1989 (help) ^ "Deutsch als Fremdsprache weltweit. Datenerhebung 2015 – Worldwide survey of people learning German; conducted by the German Ministry for Foreign Affairs and the Goethe Institute" (PDF). Goethe.de. Retrieved 18 July 2016. ^ Знание иностранных языков в России [Knowledge of foreign languages in Russia] (in Russian). Levada Centre. 16 September 2008. Archived from the original on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. ^ "Foreign Language Enrollments in K–12 Public Schools" (PDF). American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL). February 2011. Retrieved 17 October 2015. ^ Hamann, Greta. 15.4 million people are learning German as a foreign language, Deutsche Welle, 4 June 2020. ^ "More than 80% of primary school pupils in the EU were studying a foreign language in 2013". Eurostat. 24 September 2015. Retrieved 3 May 2016. ^ von Polenz 1999, pp. 192–194, 196. sfn error: no target: CITEREFvon_Polenz1999 (help) ^ Swadesh 1971, p. 53. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSwadesh1971 (help) ^ Ammon et al. 2004, p. [page needed]. sfn error: no target: CITEREFAmmonBickelEbnerGasser2004 (help) ^ "Die am häufigsten üblicherweise zu Hause gesprochenen Sprachen der ständigen Wohnbevölkerung ab 15 Jahren – 2012–2014, 2013–2015, 2014–2016" (XLS) (official site) (in German, French, and Italian). Neuchâtel, Switzerland: Federal Statistical Office FSO. 28 March 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2018. ^ Werner Besch: Sprachgeschichte: ein Handbuch zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, 3. Teilband. De Gruyter, 2003, p. 2636. ^ Georg Cornelissen: Das Niederländische im preußischen Gelderland und seine Ablösung durch das Deutsche, Rohrscheid, 1986, p. 93. ^ Jan Goossens: Niederdeutsche Sprache – Versuch einer Definition. In: Jan Goossens (Hrsg.): Niederdeutsch – Sprache und Literatur. Karl Wachholtz, Neumünster, 1973, p. 9–27. ^ Niebaum 2011, p. 98. sfn error: no target: CITEREFNiebaum2011 (help) ^ Barbour & Stevenson 1990, pp. 160–3. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBarbourStevenson1990 (help) ^ Leao 2011, p. 25. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLeao2011 (help) ^ "Foreign Words (Fremdwörter)". www.dartmouth.edu. Retrieved 23 February 2020. ^ Uwe Pörksen, German Academy for Language and Literature's Jahrbuch [Yearbook] 2007 (Wallstein Verlag, Göttingen 2008, pp. 121–130) ^ Hattemer 1849, p. 5. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHattemer1849 (help) ^ Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. "Verein Deutsche Sprache e.V. – Der Anglizismen-Index". vds-ev.de. Retrieved 15 March 2010. ^ "Ein Hinweis in eigener Sache". Wortschatz.informatik.uni-leipzig.de. 7 January 2003. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2010. ^ Gerhard Weiss (1995). "Up-to-Date and with a Past: The "Duden" and Its History". Die Unterrichtspraxis / Teaching German. 6 (1: The Publisher as Teacher): 7–21. doi:10.2307/3531328. JSTOR 3531328. ^ Zur Definition und sprachwissenschaftlichen Abgrenzung insbesondere: Rudolf Muhr, Richard Schrodt, Peter Wiesinger (Hrsg.): Österreichisches Deutsch – Linguistische, sozialpsychologische und sprachpolitische Aspekte einer nationalen Variante des Deutschen (PDF, 407 Seiten; 1,3 MB) Archived 14 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Verlag Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, Wien 1995. Anm.: Diese Publikation entstand aus den Beiträgen der Tagung "Österreichisches Deutsch", die mit internationalen Sprachwissenschaftlern an der Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz vom 22. bis 24. Mai 1995 stattfand ^ Ha, Thu-Huong. "Germany has ended a century-long debate over a missing letter in its alphabet". Retrieved 5 December 2017. According to the council’s 2017 spelling manual: When writing the uppercase [of ß], write SS. It's also possible to use the uppercase ẞ. Example: Straße – STRASSE – STRAẞE. ^ Reinecke 1910, p. [page needed]. sfn error: no target: CITEREFReinecke1910 (help) ^ Bormann, Martin (8 January 1941). "Der Bormann-Brief im Original" [The original Bormann letter] (in German). NSDAP. Retrieved 20 November 2020. Facsimile of Bormann's Memorandum The memorandum itself is typed in Antiqua, but the NSDAP letterhead is printed in Fraktur. "For general attention, on behalf of the Führer, I make the following announcement: It is wrong to regard or to describe the so-called Gothic script as a German script. In reality, the so-called Gothic script consists of Schwabach Jew letters. Just as they later took control of the newspapers, upon the introduction of printing the Jews residing in Germany took control of the printing presses and thus in Germany the Schwabach Jew letters were forcefully introduced. Today the Führer, talking with Herr Reichsleiter Amann and Herr Book Publisher Adolf Müller, has decided that in the future the Antiqua script is to be described as normal script. All printed materials are to be gradually converted to this normal script. As soon as is feasible in terms of textbooks, only the normal script will be taught in village and state schools. The use of the Schwabach Jew letters by officials will in future cease; appointment certifications for functionaries, street signs, and so forth will in future be produced only in normal script. On behalf of the Führer, Herr Reichsleiter Amann will in future convert those newspapers and periodicals that already have foreign distribution, or whose foreign distribution is desired, to normal script. ^ Kapr 1993, p. 81. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKapr1993 (help) ^ "Mittelschulvorbereitung Deutsch". Mittelschulvorbereitung.ch. Retrieved 15 March 2010. ^ For a history of the German consonants see Cercignani (1979) harvp error: no target: CITEREFCercignani1979 (help). ^ "Gestalt". Duden / Bibliographisches Institut GmbH. 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2017. mittelhochdeutsch gestalt = Aussehen, Beschaffenheit; Person, Substantivierung von: gestalt, althochdeutsch gistalt, 2. Partizip von stellen. ^ "Learning German, Experiencing Culture – Goethe-Institut". Goethe.de. Retrieved 24 January 2012. ^ "Who we are". DW.DE. 31 December 2011. Retrieved 14 June 2013. Bibliography[edit] Ammon, Ulrich; Bickel, Hans; Ebner, Jakob; Gasser, Markus; Esterhammer, Ruth (2004). Variantenwörterbuch des Deutschen: Die Standardsprache in Österreich, der Schweiz und Deutschland sowie in Liechtenstein, Luxemburg, Ostbelgien und Südtirol [German variant dictionary: The standard language in Austria, Switzerland and Germany as well as in Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, East Belgium and South Tyrol] (in German). Berlin: W. de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-016575-3. Bach, Adolf (1965). Geschichte der deutschen Sprache. Heidelberg: Quelle & Meyer. Barbour, Stephen; Stevenson, Patrick (1990). Variation in German. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35704-3. Boltz, Andreas (1872). A New Conversation Grammar of the German Language. London: Asher & Co. Cercignani, Fausto (1979). The Consonants of German: Synchrony and Diachrony. Milano: Cisalpino. Clyne, Michael (1995). The German Language in a Changing Europe. ISBN 978-0-521-49970-5. Curme, George O. (1922) [1904]. A Grammar of the German Language– the most complete and authoritative work in English.CS1 maint: postscript (link) Deumert, Ama (2003). Markedness and salience in language contact and second-language acquisition: evidence from a non-canonical contact language. Language Sciences. 25. Elsevier Ltd. pp. 561–613. doi:10.1016/S0388-0001(03)00033-0. Dickens, A. G. (1974). The German Nation and Martin Luther. New York: Harper & Row. Durrell, M (2006). "Germanic Languages". In Brown, Keith (ed.). Encyclopedia of language & linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 53–55. doi:10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/02189-1. ISBN 978-0-08-044299-0. Lay summary (6 February 2015). – via ScienceDirect (Subscription may be required or content may be available in libraries.) Fox, Anthony (2005). The Structure of German. ISBN 978-0-19-927399-7. Goossens, Jan (1983). Niederdeutsch: Sprache und Literatur; Eine Einführung [Low German: language and literature; An introduction]. 1 (2., rev. and by a bibliogr. supplement expd. ed.). Neumünster: Karl Wachholtz. ISBN 3-529-04510-1. Harbert, Wayne (2007). The Germanic Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511755071. ISBN 978-0-521-01511-0. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Hattemer, Heinrich (1849). Denkmahle des Mittelalters: St. Gallen's altteutsche Sprachschætze [Monuments of the Middle Ages: St. Gallen's Old German vocabulary]. Vol. 3. Scheitlin und Zollikofer. |volume= has extra text (help) Holm, John A. (1989). Pidgins and Creoles: Volume 2, Reference Survey (1st ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-35940-5. Kapr, Albert (1993). Fraktur: Form und Geschichte der gebrochenen Schriften (in German). Mainz: H. Schmidt. ISBN 978-3-87439-260-0. Keller, R. E. (1978). The German language. London: Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-11159-6. König, Ekkehard; van der Auwera, Johan, eds. (1994). The Germanic Languages. Routledge Language Family Descriptions. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28079-2. Leao, Pedro Macedo (2011). Germany : Keys to understanding German Business Culture (1st ed.). USA: Lulupress. ISBN 9781447862956. Lewis, M. Paul; Simons, Gary F.; Fennig, Charles D. (2015). Ethnologue: Languages of Africa and Europe, Eighteenth Edition (18th ed.). Dallas: SIL International. ISBN 978-1-55671-391-0. Sum of Standard German, Swiss German, and all German dialects not listed under "Standard German". Lockwood, W. B. (1987). German Today: The Advanced Learner's Guide. ISBN 978-0-19-815850-9. Marten, Thomas; Sauer, Fritz Joachim, eds. (2005). Länderkunde – Deutschland, Österreich, Schweiz und Liechtenstein im Querschnitt [Regional Geography – An Overview of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein] (in German). Berlin: Inform-Verlag. ISBN 978-3-9805843-1-9. Nerius, Dieter (2000). "Die Rolle der II. Orthographischen Konferenz (1901) in der Geschichte der deutschen Rechtschreibung". Zeitschrift für deutsche Philologie. 119 (1). ISSN 0044-2496. Niebaum, Hermann (2011). "Wege und Schwerpunkte der deutschen Dialektologie" [Ways and focuses of German dialectology]. Einführung in die Dialektologie des Deutschen [Introduction to the dialectology of German] (in German) (2nd ed.). Tübingen: Niemeyer. ISBN 978-3-11-091654-6. Reinecke, Adolf (1910). Die deutsche Buchstabenschrift: Ihre Entstehung und Entwicklung, ihre Zweckmäßigkeit und völkische Bedeutung [The German letter font: Its origin and development, its advisability and folkish meaning] (in German). A. Hasert und C. Robinson, Orrin W. (1992). Old English and its closest relatives : a survey of the earliest Germanic languages. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-2221-6. Rothaug, Rudolf (1910). Geographischer Atlas zur Vaterlandskunde an den österreichischen Mittelschulen [Geographical atlas on the homeland lore at the Austrian secondary schools] (in German). Vienna: G. Freytag & Berndt. Salmons, Joe (2012). A history of German : what the past reveals about today's language (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969793-9. Sanders, Ruth H. (2010). German: Biography of a Language. Oxford University Press. Sanders, Willy (1982). Sachsensprache, Hansesprache, Plattdeutsch: Sprachgeschichtliche Grundzüge des Niederdeutschen [Saxon language, Hanseatic language, Low German: Linguistic-historical basics of Low German] (in German). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. ISBN 3-525-01213-6. Sanhueza, Carlos (2011). "El debate sobre "el embrujamiento alemnán" y el papel de la ciencia alemana hacia fines del siglo XIX en Chile" (PDF). Ideas viajeras y sus objetos. El intercambio científico entre Alemania y América austral [Traveling ideas and their objects. The scientific exchange between Germany and southern America] (in Spanish). Madrid. ISBN 978-84-8489-638-8. Scherer, Wilhelm (1868). Zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache [On the history of the German language] (in German). Berlin: Franz Duncker. Scherer, Wilhelm; Jankowsky, Kurt R. (1995). Zur Geschichte der Deutschen Sprache. Oxford University. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: J. Benjamins. Skottsberg, Carl (1911). The Wilds of Patagonia: A Narrative of the Swedish Expedition to Patagonia Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Island in 1907– 1909. London, England: Edward Arnold. Siebs, Theodor (2000). Deutsche Aussprache. Hochsprache Bühnensprache – Alltagssprache [German pronunciation: Pure and moderate high accent with pronunciation dictionary] (in German) (19., umgearbeitete Auflage ed.). Wiesbaden. ISBN 3-928127-66-7. Steinicke, Ernst; Walder, Judith; Löffler, Roland; Beismann, Michael (20 December 1999). "Autochthonous Linguistic Minorities in the Italian Alps". Revue de Géographie Alpine (99–2). doi:10.4000/rga.1454. Retrieved 18 July 2016. Stellmacher, Dieter (2000). Niederdeutsche Sprache [Low German language] (in German) (2nd ed.). Berlin. ISBN 978-3-89693-326-3. Super, Charles (1893). A history of the German language William. University of California Libraries. Columbus, Ohio: Hann & Adair. Thomas, Calvin (1992). An Anthology of German Literature. D. C. Heath and Company. ASIN 1010180266. Swadesh, Morris (1971). The Origin and Diversification of Language. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-20-236982-2. Upward, Chris (1997). "Spelling Reform in German". Journal of the Simplified Spelling Society. J21. Archived from the original on 23 September 2014. von Polenz, Peter (1999). "6.5. Inter- und übernationale Beziehungen". Deutsche Sprachgeschichte vom Spätmittelalter bis zur Gegenwart [German language history from the late Middle Ages to the present]. de Gruyter Studienbuch (in German). Band III: 19. und 20. Jahrhundert. Berlin; New York: de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-016426-8. Wagner, Claudio (2000). "Las áreas de "bocha", "polca" y "murra". Contacto de lenguas en el sur de Chile" [The "bocha", "polka" and "murra" areas. Language contact in southern Chile]. Revista de Dialectología y Tradiciones Populares (in Spanish). 55 (1): 185–196. doi:10.3989/rdtp.2000.v55.i1.432. Waterman, John (1976). A history of the German language: with special reference to the cultural and social forces that shaped the standard literary language (Rev. ed.). Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-73807-9. Weiss, Gerhard (1995). "Up-to-Date and with a Past: The "Duden" and its History". Die Unterrichtspraxis / Teaching German. 28 (1): 7–12. doi:10.2307/3531328. JSTOR 3531328. External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guide from Wikivoyage Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Texts on Wikisource: "German Language". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911. Mark Twain, The Awful German Language, 1880 Carl Schurz, The German Mothertongue, 1897 "Germany, Language and Literature of". The American Cyclopædia. 1879. Dissemination of the German language in Europe around 1913 (map, 300 dpi) v t e Description of the German language Grammar Phonology Stress and reduced vowels Orthography Spelling reform Alphabet Braille Dialects Language history Phonological history v t e Languages of Germany Official language Standard German Regional/Minority languages Recognized Danish Frisian North Saterland Low German Romani Sorbian Upper Lower Unrecognized Alemannic Bavarian German Sign Language Limburgish Low Rhenish Luxembourgish Ripuarian v t e Languages of Switzerland Official languages French German Italian Romansh Major dialect groups Lombard (Ticinese) Romand Sinte Swiss German Sign languages Swiss-German Sign French Sign Italian Sign v t e Languages of Austria Official language Austrian German (see also German) Viennese German Walser German Regional languages Burgenland Croatian Czech Hungarian Romani Slovak Slovene Unofficial dialects Alemannic Austro-Bavarian Minority Languages Serbian Turkish Sign languages Austrian Sign Language See Also: Minority languages of Austria v t e Languages of Belgium Official languages Dutch French German Germanic Brabantian East Flemish Limburgish Low Dietsch West Flemish Yiddish Romance Champenois Lorrain Picard Walloon Francosign Flemish Sign Language French Belgian Sign Language Germanosign German Sign Language Indo-Aryan Sinte Romani v t e Languages of Namibia Official language English Recognized regional Oshiwambo Kwanyama Ndonga Afrikaans German Other Bantu languages Otjiherero Rukwangali Setswana Zemba Gciriku Fwe Kuhane Thimbukushu Shiyeyi Khoisan Nama/Damara Naro ǃXóõ Kung-Ekoka ǂKxʼauǁʼein Kxoe Sign languages Namibian Sign Language v t e Germanic languages According to contemporary philology West Germanic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English* dialects Yola Fingallian Old English Middle English Scots Early Scots Middle Scots Frisian East Frisian Ems Saterland Frisian Weser Wangerooge Frisian Wursten Frisian North Frisian Insular Eiderstedt Föhr–Amrum Föhr Amrum Heligolandic Sylt Mainland Bökingharde Mooring Halligen Goesharde Northern Central Southern Karrharde Strand Wiedingharde West Frisian Hindeloopen Schiermonnikoog Westlauwers–Terschellings Mainland West Frisian Clay Frisian Wood Frisian Westereendersk Terschelling Old Frisian Middle Frisian Low German Historical forms Old Saxon Middle Low German West Low German Dutch Low Saxon Stellingwarfs Tweants Gronings Drèents Gelders-Overijssels Achterhooks Sallaans Urkers Veluws Northern Low Saxon East Frisian Low Saxon Schleswigsch Holsteinisch Hamburgisch Ollnborger North Hanoveranian Dithmarsch Emsländisch Westphalian Eastphalian East Low German Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Mecklenburgish Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian West Central Pomeranian Low Prussian Mennonite Low German Low Franconian Standard variants Dutch* Frankish Old Dutch Middle Dutch Afrikaans* West Low Franconian Hollandic West Flemish French Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Surinamese Dutch Jersey Dutch Mohawk Dutch Stadsfries Bildts Yiddish Dutch East Low Franconian Meuse-Rhenish Limburgish Southeast Limburgish South Guelderish Transitional Low Dietsch High German Standard variants German* Namibian German Namibian Black German Brazilian German Unserdeutsch Barossa German Belgranodeutsch Parana Volga German Kiautschou Pidgin German Old High German Middle High German Early New High German Yiddish Eastern Western Litvish Poylish Ukrainish Galitzish Scots Yiddish Alsatian Yiddish Klezmer-loshn Ganovim Balagole Katsoves Lachoudisch Yenish Rotwelsch Lotegorisch Standard German German Standard German Austrian Standard German Swiss Standard German Central German West Central German Central Franconian Ripuarian Colognian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Transylvanian Saxon Hunsrückisch Hunsrik Rhine Franconian Lorraine Franconian Palatine Volga German Pennsylvania German Hessian Amana East Central German Thuringian Upper Saxon Ore Mountainian Lusatian-Neumarkish Berlinerisch Silesian German High Prussian Wymysorys Halcnovian Prague German High Franconian South Franconian East Franconian Main Franconian Vogtlandian Upper German Alemannic Low Alemannic Alsatian Coloniero High Alemannic Swiss German Highest Alemannic Walser German Swabian Bavarian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Viennese German Southern Bavarian South Tyrolean Cimbrian Mòcheno Hutterite German Langobardic North Germanic and East Germanic North Germanic Historical forms Proto-Norse Old Norse Old West Norse Old East Norse Old Gutnish West Scandinavian Norwegian* Spoken Bergensk Kebabnorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk Written Bokmål Nynorsk Old Norwegian Middle Norwegian Insular Scandinavian Faroese Icelandic Old Icelandic Middle Icelandic Gronlandsk Norn East Scandinavian Swedish* Åland Estonian Finlandic Gotlandic/Gutnish Jämtlandic Kalix Kiruna Luleå Norrland Ostrobothnian Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Old Swedish Danish* Bornholmsk Gøtudanskt Insular Danish Jutlandic South Jutlandic Perkerdansk Old Danish Middle Danish Dalecarlian Elfdalian East Germanic Gothic Crimean Gothic Burgundian Vandalic Philology Language subgroups North East West Elbe (Irminonic) Weser-Rhine (Istvaeonic) North Sea (Ingvaeonic) Northwest Gotho-Nordic South Reconstructed Proto-Germanic Proto-Germanic grammar Germanic parent language Ancient Belgian language Diachronic features Grimm's law Verner's law Holtzmann's law Sievers's law Kluge's law Germanic substrate hypothesis West Germanic gemination High German consonant shift Germanic a-mutation Germanic umlaut Germanic spirant law Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law Great Vowel Shift Synchronic features Germanic verb Germanic strong verb Germanic weak verb Preterite-present verb Grammatischer Wechsel Indo-European ablaut Italics indicate extinct languages * (asterisks) indicates languages with more than 3 million speakers Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left. v t e Germany articles History Timeline Historiography Military history Germanic peoples Migration Period Frankish Empire Holy Roman Empire Ostsiedlung (East Colonisation) 1500–1800 18th-century Confederation of the Rhine German Confederation Frankfurt Constitution North German Confederation Unification of Germany German Empire World War I War guilt question Revolution of 1918 Weimar Republic Nazi Germany World War II Allied occupation Flight and expulsions Denazification Divided Germany East Germany West Germany Reunification Reunified Germany Geography Administrative divisions States Districts Cities and towns Earthquakes Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Rivers Politics Bundestag Bundesrat Bundeswehr (military) Cabinet Chancellor Constitution Court system Elections Foreign relations Human rights Intersex LGBT Transgender Law Law enforcement Nationalism Political parties President Economy Agriculture Automobile industry Banking Central bank Chemical Triangle Economic history Energy Exports German model German states by GDP Mittelstand companies Science and technology Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Welfare Society Crime Corruption Demographics Drug policy Education Germans Ethnic groups Healthcare Immigration Pensions Racism Religion Social issues Culture Anthem Architecture Art Arts Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Cultural icons Dance Fashion Festivals Folklore Flag Language Libraries Literature Internet Media Music Names Philosophy Prussian virtues Sport Television World Heritage Sites Outline Index Category Portal v t e Languages of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Artsakh Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Sovereign Military Order of Malta Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125