This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (October 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article contains weasel words: vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or removed. (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The depiction of a Rakkhoshi queen at the king's palace. An illustration from the classic Bengali folk-lore collection Thakurmar Jhuli (1907) by Dakshinaranjan Mitra Majumder Ghosts are an important part of folklore, integral to the socio-cultural fabric of the geographical and ethno-linguistic region of Bengal, which today consists of the independent nation of Bangladesh, and the Indian state of West Bengal. Fairy tales, both old and new, often use the concept of ghosts. In modern-day Bengali literature, cinema and also in radio & television media, the references to ghosts are often found. There are also many alleged haunted sites in this region. It is believed that the spirits of those who cannot find peace in the afterlife or die unnatural deaths remain on Earth but many people reject this belief (mostly the Muslim majority and the scientific theorists). The common word for ghosts in Bengali is bhoot or bhut (Bengali: ভূত). This word has an alternative meaning: 'past' in Bengali. Also, the word Pret (derived from Sanskrit 'Preta') is used in Bengali to mean ghost. In Bengal, ghosts are believed to be the spirit after death of an unsatisfied human being or a soul of a person who dies in unnatural or abnormal circumstances (like murder, suicide or accident). Even it is believed that other animals and creatures can also be turned into ghost after their death. That is why many Bengalis, regardless of their faith, have phasmophobia. The Bengali Muslims believe that ghosts are nothing but manifestations of jinn. Contents 1 Types of ghosts and other supernatural entities 2 Alleged haunted places 2.1 Bangladesh 2.2 West Bengal, India 3 In popular culture 3.1 Literature 3.2 Cinema 3.3 Radio and television 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Types of ghosts and other supernatural entities[edit] This section describes a work or element of fiction in a primarily in-universe style. Please help rewrite it to explain the fiction more clearly and provide non-fictional perspective. (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This section includes a list of general references, but it remains largely unverified because it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this section by introducing more precise citations. (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There are many kinds of ghosts and similar supernatural entities that frequently come up in Bengali culture, its folklores and form an important part in Bengali peoples' socio-cultural beliefs and superstitions. Few of such supernatural entities are mentioned here:[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8] Jinn / Djinn: The Muslim majority community of Bengal strongly believe that any supernatural/ghostly/demonic/paranormal occurrence, phenomenon and manifestation is the work of Jinn. Jinns can be both benevolent or malevolent. Malevolent Jinns (Demon) can be really evil, and can cause haunting in human residences, empty houses, toilets, lakes, graveyards, morgues, hospitals, and in the wilderness. Some people are also believed to conjure Jinns, and use them to fulfil their evil purposes. When a Jinn is in the vicinity, a person might experience a strange perfume/flowery smell or terrible odour of rotten flesh, or burning odour even though no possible source of those smell/odour can be found. Jinns have no physical body of their own, and are creatures from an unseen dimension/realm. Jinns are shape-shifters, and often take the form of a human or animal (commonly snake, dog, cat, crow, or bull). When Jinn attaches itself to a living person, people call it jinn/demonic possession. Jinns are exorcised by pious people like Imam or Mawlana by reciting chapters from the Quran. Professional village exorcists/ witch-doctors called Kabiraj / Ojha commands/forces the Jinn to leave the possessed person by exorcism rituals which includes the use of talismans/ Ta'wiz/Tabiz, or by conjuring a good Jinn to counteract the forces of the possessing evil Jinn. Jinns have the ability to predict the future, can read people's thoughts, have extraordinary strength and powers; a person possessed by a Jinn can also demonstrate such abilities. However, Jinns are dimwitted, foolhardy, aggressive, angry, and deceive humans with their lies. There are also good and wise jinns who are believed to be pious and save/help human from dangerous/fatal situations. Jinns are believed to eat raw fish/meat/bones and are fond of traditional Bengali sweets. The sweet salespeople in Bangladesh strongly affirm the idea that Jinns come to the sweet shops at late night in human form to buy sweets. Jinns live in clans, and every clan is headed by a King Jinn. There are several distinct classes of Jinn, such as Marid, Ifreet and Ghul (Ghoul) and Qareen. Jinn usually live either on rural lands or in water.[9][10][11] Petni / Shakchunni: Petni are basically female ghosts who died unmarried or have some unsatisfied desires. The word Petni originated from the Sanskrit word Pretni (feminine gender of Preta). The word Shakchunni comes from the Sanskrit word Shankhachurni. It is a ghost of a married woman who usually wears a special kind of traditional bangles made of shell (called ‘Shankha’ in Bengali) in their hands, which is a sign of married Hindu women in Bengal. Depiction of a Shakchunni spreading cow dung mixed with water Damori: Tantric practices and black magic have been very popular in rural Bengal in the past for many centuries. Some rural people from Bengal, obsessed with the occult, used to travel to Kamrup-Kamakhya in Assam in order to learn Tantric ways and black magic.[12][13] Many Sadhu (Ascetic Yogis), Tantric, Aghori, Kapalik and Kabiraj devoted their lives in pursuit of occult practices. Such people are said to have the power to invoke lower-level demonic/ ghostly entities such as Hakini, Shakhini (same as Shakchunni) and Dakini. Tantriks use these demonic spirits for soothsaying purposes, and also for causing harm to people. When superstitious rural people wanted to cause harm to an enemy, they went to the Tantriks to seek their help. A common practice was called "Baan Mara", a ritual by which the Tantriks used demonic forces to kill a person. In such cases, the victim is said to die by vomiting blood up their throat.[14][15] The two most higher-level tantric mantra are Kularnob and Moha Damor. A tantrik mantra called Bhoot Damor (a lower-level branch of Moha Damor) works with different demi-goddesses called Jogini, Jokkhini, Kinnori, Apshori, Bhutini, etc.[16] Altogether these bunch of supernatural entities are called Damori. In Tantrik philosophy, it is believed If someone can engulf himself into ascetic pursuit and worship through Bhoot Damor, the invoked Damori will appear to that person, will associate with him, and becomes somewhat under his control. These beings are neither human nor incorporeal, but somewhere in-between. They are from some unseen realm, and can materialise in our perceived physical dimension. Their concept is similar to the western concept of Fairies or Elves; or the Islamic/Persian concept of Pori / Pari.[17][18] Besho Bhoot: The word Besho comes from the word Baash which means 'Bamboo' in Bengali. Besho Bhoot are ghosts that live in bamboo gardens. People from rural Bengal believe that harmful ghosts live in bamboo gardens, and one should not walk pass these areas after dusk. It is said that when a bamboo leans or lays in the ground, no one should cross over it and should go around it. This is because when someone makes an attempt to cross the bamboo, the bamboo is pulled back straight up by an unseen force, and the person can die as a result. It is also reported that a gusty wind blows inside the bamboo garden while the weather is calm on the outside.[19][20] Penchapechi: An unusual form of ghost. The Penchapechi take the form of an owl and haunt in the forests of Bengal. It follows helpless travelers through the woods until they are completely alone, and then it strikes. Unlike other ghosts, the Penchapechi actually consumes its victims, feeding on their body in an almost vampiric way. Mechho Bhoot: This is a kind of ghost who likes to eat fish. The word Mechho comes from Machh that means 'fish' in Bengali. Mechho Bhoot usually lives near to the village ponds or lakes which are full of fish. These kinds of ghosts urges the late night fishermen or a lone person who carries fish with him to give them their fish by saying in a nasal tone - "Machh Diye Ja" (meaning "give me the fish"). If the person refuses to leave the fish for the Mechho Bhoot, it threatens to harm them. Sometimes they steal fish from kitchens in village households or from the boats of fishermen. Mamdo Bhoot: According to the beliefs of Bengali Hindu community, these are believed to be the ghosts of Muslims. Ghosts of such kind are believed to kill people by twisting their necks. Gechho Bhoot: It is a kind of ghost that lives in trees. The word Gechho comes from the word Gaachh, which means tree in Bengali. Aleya / Atoshi Bhoot: Atoshi (or marsh ghost-light) is the name given to an unexplained strange light phenomena occurring over the marshes as observed by Bengalis, especially the fishermen of Bangladesh and West Bengal. This marsh light (Will-o'-the-wisp) often look like a flying, glowing orb of fire. These confuse the fishermen, and is said to lure them out and then drown them into the very depths of water, never to rise again. Like Nishi, their voice is also said to be irresistible. Local communities in the region believe that these are the ghosts of fisherman who died fishing. The fishermen of Sundarban delta region, especially the Khasti and Manna fishermen communities, strongly believe in these and always do an 'Atoshi-taron ritual before they go out for fishing.[21] Begho Bhoot: The word Begho comes from the Bengali word Baagh meaning 'tiger'. Begho Bhoot are ghosts of the people who were killed or eaten by the tigers in Sundarbans, which is known to be the Royal Bengal Tiger Sanctuary of the Bengal region. The villagers living in the area believe in these kinds of ghosts. These entities are said to frighten people who enters the jungle in search of honey or woods, and try to bring them to face tigers. Sometimes they do the mimicry of tigers to terrify the villagers. Skondhokata / Kondhokata: It is a headless ghost. These are believed to be the spirit of those people who died by having their heads cut-off by train accident or by some other way. This kind of ghost always searches their missing heads, and pleads others to help them to find it. Sometimes they attack the humans and make them slaves to search for their lost heads. Kanabhulo: This is a ghost which hypnotises a person, and takes him to some unknown location. The victim, instead of going into his destination, goes to another place which is silent and eerie. After that the victim loses his sense. These types of ghosts strike at night. Lone travellers, or a person separated from his group becomes the victim of such ghosts. Prapti: The word Prapti is a Sanskrit one meaning 'to get something'. These are said to be ghosts of girls who had more than one lover, and suffered from indecision. These girls therefore committed suicide, thus 'getting freedom' from all the conflict. It is said that after the girl dies, her lovers also commit suicide to be with her, or the Prapti haunts them and drives them to insanity until they do so. But the irony is that after the lovers die, they still do not get the girl, who escapes after taking her revenge. Therefore, the ghosts of the lovers get stuck forever, searching for their love. Dainee: Dainee means "Witch". Dainee is not actually soul or spirit, rather is a living being. Usually in villages of Bengal, old suspicious women who know mumbo-jumbo and other witchcrafts or black magic are considered as Dainee. It is believed that the Dainee kidnaps children, kills them and suck their blood to survive a hundred years. A benevolent Brahmadaitya saving a poor Brahmin man from a group of Bhoot (ghosts), while the man was cutting a branch from the yonder banyan tree or Ashwattha tree. An illustration by Warwick Goble (1912). Taken from the 1912 illustrated edition of Folk-Tales of Bengal by Lal Behari Dey. Brahmodaittyo: These are one of the most popular kind of ghost in Bengal who are believed to be benevolent. It is believed to be the ghost of holy Brahmin. Usually, they appear wearing a traditional Dhoti (Bengali dress for Hindu men) and the holy thread on their body. They are very kind and helpful to human being as depicted in many Bengali stories, folk-lores and movies. Boba: This is the Bengali version of the "Old Hag Syndrome" which is believed to be caused by a supernatural entity called "Boba" (meaning "dumb"/unable to speak). Boba attacks a person by strangling him when the person sleeps in a Supine position/ sleep on back. However, the scientific explanation is believed to be Sleep Paralysis. While a person is having sleep paralysis, he hallucinates in his REM sleep while the brain is functioning but the body is asleep. This actually causes the person to completely unable to move or speak, and results in to hallucinate weird entities such as an old hag (a witch-like demonic being). In Bangladesh, the phenomenon is called "Bobaay Dhora" (meaning "Struck by Boba").[22] Sheekol Buri / Jol-Pishach: They are believed to dwell in the rivers, ponds, and lakes. They are called by different names in different localities of Bengal. Young women, who either committed suicide by drowning due to an unhappy marriage (they might have been jilted by their lovers or abused and harassed by their much older husbands), or who were violently drowned against their will (especially after becoming pregnant with unwanted children), must live out their designated time on earth and come back as such beings. Her main purpose is, however, to lure young men and take them into the depths of said waterways where she would entangle their feet with her long hair and submerge them. Their hair is very long and always wet, and their eyes are without any iris. Like many fairies, they sometimes do take human lovers. Unfortunately, most of such unions end tragically for the human. As is usually the case, they extract a promise from her mortal lover and when such promise is broken, she reveals herself to be the supernatural creature she is, often taking the life of the human in the process. Their general habitat is water bodies even though they roam around the land/wilderness around the water and are also often seen sitting over trees at the dead of night. The concept of such supernatural beings is similar to that of Rusalka from Slavic mythology. Nishi: The Nishi (Night Spirit) lures its victim to a secluded area by calling to the person with the voice of a loved one. The Nishi only strikes at night, and once the victim responds to the call of Nishi, s/he becomes hypnotised, follow the voice, and are never seen again. So, it is unknown what happens to them. Some tantrics are said to nurture and conjure the Nishi, in order to use them to harm someone out of spite or revenge. The voice of Nishi (means 'Night') is known as "Nishir Daak" (Call of the Night Spirit). Bengali age old superstition suggests that Sleepwalking phenomenon is also caused by Nishi. According to folklore, the Nishi cannot call out more than twice, and so no one should answer a voice at night until being called at least three times. Gudro Bonga: Even though these as worshipped as demigods by the Santhal community (an indigenous tribe in Bengal), many Santhal families are said to nurture and look after these small dwarf-like (2–3 feet tall) creatures who look like small children. The word Gudro means 'small' and Bonga means 'demigod' in Santhal language. Santhals believe that these beings are keepers of hidden treasures on earth and can make them rich. These beings are believed to steal newborn infants from people's houses. Gudro Bongas are believed to live in clans. They are similar to the concept of Dwarfs or Goblins.[23] Dhan Kudra: Experiences with such of entities are found in the myths of Bengal(specially south Bengal). They usually are short in height. It is a belief that they stay in somebody's house and they help the house-owner to make money. They are believed to bring luck. They are possibly similar to Domovoi's of Russian folklores. Rakkhosh: A race of beings often depicted with thick pointed fangs, sharp claws, and superhuman strength, and magical abilities. They feature in the Hindu epics of Ramayana and Mahabharata. Many fairy-tale of Bengal also speak of this race, typically as vicious beings who feed on humans and large animals. A common threatening call of the rakkhosh in traditional Bengali folk-tales is this couplet: Hnau, Mnau, Khnau,... manusher gondho pnau(Bengali:হাঁউ মাঁউ খাঁউ,... মানুষের গন্ধ পাঁউ) The first three are half-nonsensical words suggesting an opening of the mouth and an intention to devour), and the second phrase means "I smell humans". This is comparable to "fi fie foe...", the catchphrase associated with giants in some folklore. Sometimes used as a translation of dragon. Khokkosh: They are smaller monstrous beings, similar to the rakkhosh, but not found in Hindu myths. They feature in "Lalkamal Neelkamal", a story in the Thakurmar Jhuli. Daittyo: They have human appearance, but of prodigious size and extraordinary strength. Same as Giants. Pishach / Adomkhor: Pishach are flesh-eating demonic entity who mainly feed from cadavers. They like darkness and traditionally depicted to haunt cremation grounds and graveyards. They have the power to assume different forms at will, and may also become invisible. Sometimes, they possess human beings and alter their thoughts, and the victims are afflicted with a variety of maladies and abnormalities like insanity. The female version of Pishach is called "Pishachini", which is described to have a hideous and terrible appearance, however she sometimes appears in the devious disguise of a youthful, beautiful maiden to lure young men. She drains their blood, semen, and virility. She dwells and prowls in places associated with death and filth. They are similar to the western concept of ghouls. Betaal: Betaal are defined as spirits inhabiting cadavers and charnel grounds. These evil spirits may use corpses as vehicles for movement (as they no longer decay while so inhabited); but a Betaal may also leave the corpse at will. Jokkho / Jokkh: A supernatural warrior-type entity who are the guardians and protectors of hidden treasures/wealth on earth. They are usually considered to be benevolent, and said to bestow fertility and wealth upon their devotees. There is a commonly used Bengali idiom - Jokkher Dhon (literal meaning: Jokkho's Wealth) which actually implies "protecting a beloved person" or "safeguarding precious wealth". Alleged haunted places[edit] Bangladesh[edit] Lalbagh Fort in 2016. According to legend, Lalbagh Fort, Golf Heights Banani, Airport Road, Uttara Sector-3 in Dhaka; Chalan Beel in Sirajganj, Foy's Lake, Pakri Beach, Mirsarai Highway Crossing in Chittagong and many other places in Bangladesh is claimed to be haunted.[24][25] Dhaka Airport Road is associated with the legend of a White Lady ghost supposedly seen by drivers.[26] Dhaka Golf Heights, Banani, Dhaka: Claims include feelings of fear while walking past grave sites at night.[27] Under-construction apartment in Old DOHS, Banani, Dhaka: One group of ghost hunters claim to have seen devil-worshipping signs written on walls at construction sites in Old DOHS Banani.[24] Shahidullah Hall Pond, Dhaka: According to campus rumor, the pond adjoining Shahidullah Hall at Dhaka University campus is believed to be haunted.[28] Farmhouse in Narsingdi: According to one local ghost hunting group, the house is haunted by the figure of a woman with climbing a tree.[29] Farmhouse in Comilla: According to one ghost hunting group, a farmhouse in Comilla is reported to be haunted.[30] West Bengal, India[edit] Nimtala Burning Ghat, Calcutta, 1945 Mullick Ghat and Zanana Bathing Ghat under Howrah Bridge, Nimtala crematorium, Rabindra Sarobar metro station, Royal Calcutta Turf Club, and National Library of Kolkata are claimed to be haunted.[31][32] Nimtala crematorium, Kolkata: According to legend, this site in central Kolkata is haunted by the ghosts of those who were cremated there.[32] Putulbari or the House of Dolls, Kolkata: According to believers, the site is haunted by the souls of the dead.[33] Hastings House, Alipore, Kolkata: According to legend, students have seen ghosts on the grounds.[34] Writers' Building, Kolkata: According to legend, this residence of junior servants and administrative staff is haunted.[34] Ghats on The Ganges - Under Howrah Bridge, Kolkata: Believers claim that many spirits wander the sacred river.[34] In popular culture[edit] Ghosts, other similar supernatural entities, as well as tales of paranormal powers (such as clairvoyance, psychic phenomenon etc.) are plots for many short stories and novels in modern-day Bengali literature. Some classic literature and folk-lore are also based on such plot. The number of Bengali films of this genre are small in number compared to the western world. Some radio and TV programs also feature stories of people's paranormal experiences. Common people of both Bangladesh and West Bengal love the supernatural thrills, and the personal stories of people's paranormal experiences are hot topics for gossip, rumours and hangout discussions among friends and family. Literature[edit] Literary works involving ghostly/demonic beings is one of the most popular genres in Bengali literature. In the early days, ghosts were the only ingredients of Bengali folk-tales and fairy-tales. Lal Behari Dey has collected many folk-tales of Bengal, and translated them in English. His book called Folk-Tales of Bengal, first published in 1883, features many amazing folk-tales associated with ghostly and supernatural beings.[35] Thakurmar Jhuli is the most classic collection of Bengali children's folk-tales and fairy-tales, which was compiled by Dakshinaranjan Mitra Majumder in 1907.[36] There we can find many different categories of supernatural entities (such as Rakkhosh) featuring in different stories. Other such story collection from the same author are Thakurdadar Jhuli (1909), Thandidir Tholay (1909) and, Dadamoshayer Tholay (1913). Many Bengali writers have practiced the genre of supernatural/horror in their short stories, novels, and others forms of literary works. Some are mentioned below: Depiction of Betaal hanging by a tree and King Vikramaditya in the background. (from Betaal Panchabinsati) Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar: This famous writer wrote the free adopted Bengali translation of 11th century Sanskrit horror stories/tales collection within one frame story called Betaal Panchabinsati (meaning "Twenty-five [Tales] of the Phantom") in 1847. The hero of this series is King Vikramaditya, the legendary emperor of Ujjain, India. King faces many difficulties in bringing the Betaal (a demonic being) to the tantric. Each time the king tries to capture the Betaal, it tells a story that ends with a riddle. If the king cannot answer the question correctly, the phantom consents to remain in captivity. If the king knows the answer but still keeps quiet, then his head shall burst into thousand pieces. And if King Vikram answers the question correctly, the phantom would escape and return to his tree. He knows the answer to every question; therefore the cycle of catching and releasing the phantom continues twenty-four times till the last question puzzles the king.[37] Rabindranath Tagore: Nobel Laureate poet and writer Rabindranath also authored some short ghost stories like Konkal, Monihara, Mastermoshay, Nishithe, Khudhito Pashan etc., which are considered classics of this genre. Troilokyanath Mukhopadhyay: He used ghosts in a humorous and satirical way in his novels and stories; and created a new genre in Bengali literature, which was pioneering, and is still followed today by many Bengali writers. Bhoot O Manush, Nayanchandrer Bebsha, Lullu, Damru Charit, Kankaboti are few of his classics. Upendra Kishore Roychowdhury: He is one of the most talented author of children's literature of his time, and also noted for his ghost stories where the ghosts are harmless, fun-loving, and benevolent entities. Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne, Jola O Saat Bhoot, etc. are his famous stories involving ghosts. Sukumar Ray: This acclaimed writer has written some humorous literary pieces (e.g. short stories, humorous poetry) for children featuring weird and fictitious paranormal/hybrid animals, and even ghosts.[38] Satyajit Ray: Satyajit Ray, the famous Indian film maker, was quite popular in Bengal for his short stories. His favorite genres were fantasy and supernatural stories.[39] His stories featuring Tarini Khuro, who is an aged bachelor, tells interesting stories based on his weird experiences, and many of these stories border on being horror or spooky, while some of the stories depict the smartness and quick wit of Tarini Khuro.[40] Satyajit Ray's one of the most famous character is Professor Shonku, and some stories featuring Professor Shonku are also based on paranormal or supernatural mysteries such as Professor Shonku o Bhoot. Sailajananda Mukhopadhyay: This noted Bengali novelist wrote a few horror short-stories such as Namaskar, Ke Tumi, etc. Manoj Basu: Well known for his novel Nishikutumbo, prolific writer and poet Manoj Basu also wrote several classic ghost stories such as Jamai, Paatal-konna, Lal Chul, etc.[41][42][43] Parashuram (Rajshekhar Basu) is the writer of the ghost story Bhushundir Mathe which is a comedy in the mould of horror. Parashuram wrote many other ghost stories like Mahesher Mahajatra which also impart an undertone of humor. Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay: Another notable writer, predominantly famous for his detective series featuring Byomkesh Bakshi, has also authored a series called Baroda series. Baroda is a Bengali guy who is very much interested in the paranormal and likes to share his adventures and experiences of supernatural incidents with his friends. Sharadindu has also written some ghost stories such as Kamini, Dehantor, Bhoot Bhabishyat etc. Manik Bandopadhyay: This literary legend of classic Bengali novels has also written many short-stories among which a few are horror stories, such as Holudpora, Chobir Bhoot etc. Tarasankar Bandyopadhyay: Leading novelist Tarasankar also wrote a few horror short-stories such as Daaini, Bhuler Chholona, etc. Leela Majumdar: Leela Majumdar wrote many ghost stories for children. Her ghost story collection features in her book Sob Bhuture. Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay: Although known for his social novels set in rural Bengal, such as Pather Panchali, Adarsha Hindu Hotel, and Aranyak, this acclaimed writer also wrote some excellent short-stories involving the supernatural, such as Medal, Rankini Devir Khorgo, Maya, Obhisapto, Chele-dhora, Kashi kobirajer Golpo, Bhoitik Palonko, Kobirajer Bipod, Ashoriri, and the first two short stories featuring Taranath Tantrik, etc. Taranath Tantrik is a classic character in Bengali literature when it comes to supernatural and paranormal stories. Taranath Tantrik is a mystic figure and practitioner of the occult. He is an astrologer by profession, and had many encounters with the supernatural in his extensive travels throughout the towns and villages of Bengal. He shares these experiences with a few friends in his Mott lane house over cups of tea and cigarettes.[44] Taradas Bandyopadhyay: Taradas Bandyopadhyay's father, the legendary literati Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay created the character 'Taranath Tantrik', but he wrote only two short stories featuring this character.[44] Rest of the stories featuring Taranath Tantrik is written by Taradas Bandyopadhyay in two acclaimed books called - Taranath Tantrik (1985),[45] and Olatchokro (2003).[46] Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay: This exceedingly famous writer has also authored some humorous ghost stories. The specialty of his ghost stories is that his ghosts are innocent, kind and funny characters who always help the poor and needy, and punish the wicked person. Goshaibaganer Bhoot (The Ghost of Gosain Bagan) is one of his famous children's fiction, which was later adopted as a film in 2011.[47] Popular Bengali film Goynar Baksho (2013) and Chhayamoy (2013) was also adapted from his novels. His ghostly short-story collection is featured in his book, Bhoutik Golposhomogro.[48] Sunil Gangopadhyay: Famous for his modern-day classic novels, this famous writer has also written some ghost stories for children. His book Rahashamaya Bhuter Galpa features some of his ghostly short stories.[49] Syed Mustafa Siraj: Basically known for his famous detective series featuring Colonel Niladri Sarkar. Siraj is also the creator of a series involving paranormal, featuring Murari Babu. Murari Babu is depicted as an innocent and nervous person living in Kolkata city, and his hobby is to collect old furniture from antique shops. Yet, his hobby always finds a way to get him into troubles relating to the paranormal. Siraj's horror short stories collection is featured in his book Bhoutik Golposhomogro.[50] Syed Mujtaba Ali: This acclaimed writer brought ghostly flavour in his novel Abishwasyo. Humayun Ahmed: Humayun Ahmed, arguably the most popular writer in post-liberation Bangladesh, wrote many stories and novels involving ghosts and the paranormal. His famous character Misir Ali is depicted as a part-time professor of Parapsychology, who also solve baffling cases associated with the paranormal. Some of Humayun Ahmed's novels feature Himu, who is depicted to have supernatural abilities, is haunted by post-mortal presence of his father who guides him to follow the way to become a modern-day saint. Humayun has also written many ghost stories, both for adult and children.[51] Muhammed Zafar Iqbal: Although well known for his science fiction novels, he has also written a few novels of the supernatural/horror genre, such as Pret (1983),[52] Pishachini (1992), Nishikonna (2003), Chayalin (2006), O (2008), and Danob (2009).[53] Sasthipada Chattopadhyay: He wrote many detective fiction, adventure stories, and horror stories for children and young adults. His ghost story collection features in his books - Ponchasti Bhuter Golpo (2001),[54] and Aro Ponchasti Bhuter Golpo (2015). Other than the writers mentioned above, many other prominent writers of Bengal have also written short-stories involving ghosts and the supernatural, such as Provatkumar Mukhopadhyay,[55] Achintya Kumar Sengupta, Satinath Bhaduri, Buddhadeb Bosu and so on. However, at the present day, some young Bengali horror story writers are being somewhat influenced by the western horror literature, and their writings thus lack the originality of the classic Bengali horror literature and ghost stories. Cinema[edit] Classic Bengali films with horror/supernatural plot are only a handful. Kankal (1950),[56] Hanabari (1952),[57] Monihara of the Teen Kanya movie anthology (1961)[58] Kuheli (1971),[59] were quite popular horror/supernatural thriller flick in the era of Bengali black and white movies. In many Bengali films, ghosts are depicted in a lightly comical mood and sometimes in a friendly way. One of the examples is Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne (1969) as mentioned earlier is adopted from the story of Upendra Kishore Roychowdhury and directed by Satyajit Ray. In this film the King of Ghosts gives three boons to 'Goopy' and 'Bagha', the two poor village boys who aspired to become a singer and drummer respectively. With the help of those boons they did many amazing adventures. The film is the first film of the Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne series, followed by a couple of sequels - Hirak Rajar Deshe was released in 1980; and Goopy Bagha Phire Elo, written by Ray, but directed by his son Sandip Ray, was released in 1992. Nishi Trishna (1989), directed by Parimal Bhattacharya was the first Bengali vampire movie, starring Shekhar Chatterjee, Prasenjit Chatterjee and Moon Moon Sen.[60] In this movie, some friends plan to visit the infamous Garchampa Palace which had a bad reputation for demonic blood-sucking beings that were terrorising the locality. They ultimately solve the mystery, and kill the vampire and his mentor. Putuler Protisodh (1998), directed by Rabi Kinagi, was also based on the supernatural. The movie's story revolves around a girl named Bini who was married to Avinash. She falls prey in the hands of her in-laws who ultimately murdered her. The soul of Bini enters her doll to take revenge. She kills her mother-in-law, father-in-law and her maternal uncle one by one, and finally wants to kill her husband. But Avinash's second wife Laxmi was able to free Bini's soul from the doll. Jekhane Bhooter Bhoy (2012), directed by Sandip Ray, is a movie based on three classic Bengali ghost stories. The stories are Satyajit Ray's Anath Babur Bhoy, Brown Saheber Bari and, Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay's Bhoot Bhabishyat.[61] Probably the most well-known film of horror genre in recent times is Bhooter Bhabishyat (2012), directed by Anik Dutta. It tells the story of a haunted mansion 'Choudhury Palace', where ghosts from different ethnic backgrounds and eras reside (a Bengali zamindar of 18th century, an actress of the 1930s, a modern rockstar, a soldier of Indian Army who died in Kargil, etc.). The film with its simple but humorous story went on to become a massive blockbuster of 2012. Goynar Baksho (2013) is another popular film involving the supernatural. The film, directed by Aparna Sen, is an adaptation of Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay's famous tale of 3 generations of women & their changing position in society as seen in relation to a box of jewels, handed down from one generation to the next. Chhayamoy (2013) is another notable horror movie based on Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay's novel of the same name. The story is about Indrajit, a UK based scholar. While working to preserve historical documents he find a parchment from which he learns about treasures hidden in an old palace in Simulgarh, a village of West Bengal. Indrajit comes to the village, finds out the treasure, but, a local goon Gagan Sapui accuses him of robbery, beats him up and expels him out of the village. Sapui wants to melt those coins to make new jewellery. After being beaten up, Indrajit goes to forest near the village where he meets Chhayamoy, a benevolent ghost. After listening the incidence from Indrajit, Chhayamoy decides to teach Gagan a lesson. The number of horror movies from Bangladeshi film industry are only a few, and most of these movies can be typically categorized as low-budget horror-comedy. Few such examples are Rokto Pipasha (2007),[62][63] Daini Buri (2008)[64] and, Sedin Brishti Chilo (2014).[65] Some Bangladeshi movies involving supernatural theme are stories about shapeshifting snakes or Ichchhadhari Nag that can take human form. Examples of such movies are Kal Naginir Prem,[66] Bishakto Nagin,[67] Bishe Bhora Nagin (1999),[68] Sathi Hara Nagin (2011) etc. Radio and television[edit] A live radio program called Bhoot FM is being aired by Bangladeshi radio channel Radio Foorti 88.0 FM at 12:00 am, every Friday night.[6] The program is being aired since 13 August 2010; and is hosted by RJ Russell. In this program, people from all over Bangladesh come and share their real-life experiences associated with ghosts, demons, jinns and the paranormal/supernatural. The Bengali community from all over the world also share their supernatural experiences by sending audio clips and email that is played/read in this program. Other such radio program was Dor, aired by ABC Radio 89.2 FM. Dor was recorded from different haunted places of Bangladesh, and is hosted by RJ Kebria along with RJ Suman and tarot card reader Radbi Reza. Similar kind of programs were also aired on TV channels, such as Moddhorater Train (meaning 'Midnight Train') by Maasranga Television. There are some radio programs which feature recitation of horror stories written by acclaimed writers. Such radio program is Sunday Suspense by Radio Mirchi, aired from Kolkata, which features recitation of horror stories, as well as stories of other genres such as detective fiction, fantasy, and Sci-fi, etc. Similar such radio program is Kuasha, aired by ABC Radio 89.2 FM from Bangladesh, which features horror stories written by famous writers, and also stories sent by listeners of the program. See also[edit] Culture of Bengal References[edit] ^ Bhattacharyya, Narendra Nath (2000). N. N. Bhattacharyya, Indian Demonology: The Inverted Pantheon. ISBN 9788173043093. ^ "Thakumar Jhuli" (PDF). bdnews24.com. Retrieved 2016-03-04. ^ Maiti, Anwesha. "11 Different kinds Of Ghosts We Find In Bengali Culture". StoryPick. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "David Gordon White, Ḍākinī, Yoginī, Pairikā, Strix: Adventures in Comparative Demonology" (PDF). ^ Saletore, Rajaram Narayan (November 1981). R. N. Saletore, Indian Witchcraft. ISBN 9780391024809. ^ a b "Bhoot FM - Download Bhoot FM Recorded Episodes". Bhoot FM - Download Bhoot FM Recorded Episodes. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Lal Behari Day, Folk-tales of Bengal". ^ তিথি ভট্টাচার্য, ভূতপূর্ব: ঊনবিংশ শতাব্দীর ভূত ও আমাদের ভবিষ্যৎ ^ Lebling, Robert (2010-07-30). Legends of the Fire Spirits: Jinn and Genies from Arabia to Zanzibar. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 9780857730633. ^ Guiley, Rosemary Ellen; Imbrogno, Philip J. (2011-07-08). The Vengeful Djinn: Unveiling the Hidden Agenda of Genies. Llewellyn Worldwide. ISBN 9780738728810. ^ জিন মিষ্টি খায়!. The Daily Ittefaq (in Bengali). Retrieved 2016-03-04. ^ "Kamakhya: The seat of black magic". Sify. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "About Kamakhya Temple". Lal Baba- The Spiritual Guide. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Yogini Shrines and Saktipithas (Set of 2 Volumes)". Exotic India. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Damara Tantra". Exotic India. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ শ্রীরসিকমোহন চট্টোপাধ্যায়, ভূতডামরতন্ত্র ^ "Bhuta Damara Tantra (An Authoritative Tantra of Sri Krodha Bhairava Along with His Mantras, Mandal Worship Rituals and Accomplishment Rituals of Bhutinis, Yakshinis, Snake-Girls etc.)". Exotic India. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Cult of Occult Science: Mantra-Tantra-Yantra (Tone Totke and Keelam Method)". Exotic India. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ Abdul Gaffar Ronnie, বাঁশবাগানে কি ভূত থাকে?, Bangla Mail 24 (in Bengali), archived from the original on 27 April 2016, retrieved 19 July 2016 ^ shishu kishor (Bengali). বেঁশো ভূত - নজরুল ইসলাম. story.shishukishor.org. Retrieved 2017-03-20. ^ "Blog post by the author Saundra Mitchel of the novel "Shadowed Summer" at Books Obsession". Booksobsession.blogspot.com. ^ health.banglablog24.com, রাতের বেলায় ‘বোবা ভূত ধরা’ এর প্রতিকার জানুন! ^ নাফিজ মুনতাসির, বাংলাদেশের কিছু জায়গার জানা-অজানা সব ভৌতিক ঘটনা, archived from the original on 7 August 2016, retrieved 23 July 2016 ^ a b "HAUNTED TALES: IN CONVERSATION WITH 'DHAKA PARANORMAL SOCIETY'". daily-sun.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ Sami Tahsin, The Clandestine Adversary: Bangladeshi Hauntings 101 ^ "Urban legends: Where they roam restless". dhakatribune.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Urban legends: Where they roam restless". www.dhakatribune.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ শহীদুল্লাহ হলের রহস্যময় পুকুর. Bangladesh Pratidin (in Bengali). Retrieved 2016-10-22. ^ "Paranormal activity". dhakatribune.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Brush with the paranormal". The Daily Star. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ Shah, Priyanka. "7 Haunted Places In Kolkata You Should Better Avoid Visiting Alone". TopYaps. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ a b "Maa Mati Manush :: M3 Leads - Haunted places in West Bengal". www.maamatimanush.tv. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "12 Most Haunted Places In Kolkata" TopPost.com ^ a b c "Top 5 Most Haunted and Spookiest Places in Kolkata". Indiamarks. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Folk-tales of Bengal". archive.org. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ দক্ষিনারঞ্জন মিত্র মজুমদার, ঠাকুরমার ঝুলি (PDF), bdnews24.com (in Bengali) ^ ঈশ্বর চন্দ্র বিদ্যাসাগর, বেতাল পঞ্চবিংশতি Download Link (PDF) ^ ভুতুড়ে খেলা. sukumarray.freehostia.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ Rokomari.com, Review: সত্যজিৎ রায়ের লেখা অন্যতম সেরা দশটি গল্পের এক অনবদ্য সংকলন ^ সত্যজিৎ রায়, তারিণী খুঁড়োর কীর্তিকলাপ (PDF) ^ মনোজ বসু / Manoj Basu (1901-1987) - Jessore, Jhenaidah, Magura, Narail. www.jessore.info. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ গল্পঘর (Story Room): লালচুল - মনোজ বসু. galpoghar.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Sisirbindu: ছেলেবেলার ভাললাগা ভূতের গল্প : জামাই (মনোজ বসু)". sisirbiswas.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ a b গল্পঘর (Story Room): তারানাথ তান্ত্রিকের প্রথম, দ্বিতীয় ও শেষ গল্প. galpoghar.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ তারাদাস বন্দোপাধ্যায়, তারানাথ তান্ত্রিক ^ গল্পঘর (Story Room): অলাতচক্র - তারাদাস বন্দোপাধ্যায়. galpoghar.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Magic and Realism in Sirshendu Mukhopadhyay's The Ghost of Gosain Bagan Book review by Sanjukta Dasgupta". parabaas.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ Shirshendu Mukhopadhyay, Bhoutik Golposhomogro (PDF) ^ "Rahasyamoy Bhooter Golpo (allbanglaboi.blogspot.com ).pdf" (PDF). MediaFire. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ Syed Mustafa Siraj, Bhoutik Golposhomogro (PDF) ^ ই -গ্রন্থাগার: নির্বাচিত ভূতের গল্প : হুমায়ুন আহমেদ. egronthagar.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "pdf ফ্রী বইয়ের ছোট্ট সংগ্রহশালা।: প্রেত। মুহম্মদ জাফর ইকবাল।". pdfstall.blogspot.co.uk. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "Rokomari.com: ভূত সমগ্র by মুহম্মদ জাফর ইকবাল". rokomari.com. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ "50ti Vuter Golpo.pdf". Google Docs. Retrieved 2016-04-03. ^ প্রভাতকুমার মুখোপাধ্যায়, একটি ভৌতিক কাহিনী ^ Naresh Mitra, Kankal Full Movie ^ Movies24 (2015-06-17), Hanabari 1952 Bengali Full Movie, retrieved 2016-04-03 ^ Satyajit Ray, Teen Kanya Bengali Full Movie ^ Anupam Das (2013-09-19), kuheli full movie, retrieved 2016-04-03 ^ Bengali Movies - Angel Digital (2015-11-07), Nishi Trishna, retrieved 2016-04-03 ^ Sandip Ray, Jekhane Bhooter Bhoy (2012) Full Movie ^ Tarkasa, Tars (2009), Rokto Pipasha (Review) ^ Sohel Rana, Rokto Pipasha: Intro ^ Daini Buri full movie ^ Sedin Brishti Chilo (2014) Full Movie ^ Kal Naginir Prem Full Movie – via YouTube ^ Bishakto Nagin Full Movie – via YouTube ^ Bishe Bhora Nagin Full Movie – via YouTube External links[edit] Bhoot FM Recorded Episodes: Real life paranormal experiences of Bangali people Thakurmar Jhuli (1907) by Dakshinaranjan Mitra Majumder Folk-Tales of Bengal (1883) by Rev. Lal Behari Dey Amar Priyo Bhoutik Golpo (1997) by Humayun Ahmed Odbhut Joto Bhooter Golpo by Gaurango Proshad Basu v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category v t e State of West Bengal Capital: Kolkata State symbols Emblem: Emblem of West Bengal Animal: Fishing cat Bird: White-throated kingfisher Flower: Night-flowering jasmine (Shiuli) Tree: Devil's tree (Saptaparni) Fish: Ilish History Gauda Kingdom Shashanka Pala Empire Sena dynasty Mallabhum Cooch Behar State Sher Shah Suri Mughal Empire Nawabs of Bengal and Murshidabad British East India Company Battle of Plassey Bengal Presidency Bengal famine of 1770 Indian rebellion of 1857 Bengal Renaissance Bardhaman Raj Nadia Raj Jhargram Raj Sovabazar Raj Panchkot Raj Partition of Bengal (1905) Revolutionary movement for Indian independence Anushilan Samiti Jugantar Bengal famine of 1943 Direct Action Day Noakhali riots Partition of Bengal (1947) Bangladesh Liberation War Naxalite movement Geography Darjeeling Himalayan hill region Terai North Bengal plains Dooars Rarh region Sundarbans Reserve Forest Western plateau and high lands Ganges Delta Climate Sandakphu (Highest point) Protected areas Rivers Khoai Tiger Hill, Darjeeling Siliguri Corridor Governance Chief Ministers Governor Legislative Assembly Human Rights Commission Political parties (All India Trinamool Congress Communist Party (Marxist) Indian National Congress Bharatiya Janata Party) Parliamentary constituencies Assembly constituencies CID West Bengal Kolkata Police Rights groups Matua Mahasangha Bangla Pokkho Jatiyo Bangla Sammelan Division and Districts Burdwan division Birbhum Hooghly Paschim Bardhaman Purba Bardhaman Jalpaiguri division Alipurduar Cooch Behar Darjeeling Jalpaiguri Kalimpong Malda division Dakshin Dinajpur Maldah Murshidabad Uttar Dinajpur Medinipur division Bankura Jhargram Paschim Medinipur Purba Medinipur Purulia Presidency division Howrah Kolkata Nadia North 24 Parganas South 24 Parganas Cities and towns Alipore Asansol Baharampur Balurghat Bankura Barasat Bardhaman Bishnupur Chinsurah Cooch Behar Darjeeling Durgapur English Bazar Haldia Howrah Jalpaiguri Jaynagar Majilpur Kalimpong Kharagpur Kolkata Krishnanagar Kurseong Malda Midnapore Murshidabad Purulia Raiganj Siliguri Siuri Tamluk List of cities in West Bengal Cities and towns by district Culture Bengali Renaissance Bônggabdô (calendar) Patachitra Chalchitra Arts of West Bengal Baul Bhadu Gombhira Chau dance Cuisine Rabindra Sangeet Rabindra Nritya Natya Dolyatra Pohela Baishakh Durgapuja Architecture Bengal temple Language Literature Cinema Jatra Ghosts in Bengali culture GI product Patachitra Chhau Mask Roshogolla Darjeeling tea Baluchari Sari Dhaniakhali Sari Dhokra Fazli Himsagar Jaynagarer Moa Mihidana Nakshi Kantha Santiniketan Leather Goods Tulaipanji Demographics Bengali people Bihari people Economy of West Bengal Gurkha Adivasi Anglo-Indian Ethnic communities in Kolkata List of West Bengal districts ranked by literacy rate People Rabindranath Tagore Satyajit Ray Kazi Nazrul Islam Anil Kumar Gain Ritwik Ghatak Subhas Chandra Bose Jamini Roy Nandalal Bose Jagdish Chandra Bose Meghnad Saha Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay Image gallery at Wikimedia Commons v t e Kolkata topics History Bengali Renaissance Black Hole of Calcutta Bhurshut Calcutta flag Dihi Panchannagram Direct Action Day Dutch Bengal Gobindapur History of Kolkata Presidency division Job Charnock Kalighat–Falta Railway Kalikata Maratha Ditch Robert Clive Sabarna Roy Choudhury Siege of Calcutta Sutanuti State Archaeological Museum Warren Hastings Battle of Biderra/Chinsurah Nabakrishna Deb Rabindranath Tagore Localities and streets Kolkata metropolitan area Neighbourhoods list Streets (list) Buildings Belvedere Estate Indian Museum Jorasanko Thakur Bari Calcutta High Court Currency Building Bankshall Court Marble Palace National Library of India Netaji Bhawan Raj Bhavan, Kolkata Sabarna Sangrahashala Shaheed Minar Victoria Memorial St. Paul's Cathedral Metcalfe Hall Writers' Building Metropolitan Building Grand Hotel Shobhabazar Rajbari High rises Chatterjee International Center South City Tata Centre Industry House Everest House Jeevan Sudha Government of India Building Hiland Park The 42 Urbana Uniworld City Education Secondary Armenian College and Philanthropic Academy Calcutta Boys' School Calcutta Girls' High School Don Bosco School, Park Circus Hare School Hindu School, Kolkata La Martiniere Calcutta Loreto Schools Baranagore Ramakrishna Mission Ashrama High School Ramakrishna, Narendrapur Scottish Church Collegiate School South Point School St. Xavier's Collegiate School B. T. Road Government Sponsored H. S. School St. James' School (Kolkata) Higher Aliah University Asiatic Society Asutosh College Marine Engineering and Research Institute Bethune College Government College of Engineering and Ceramic Technology Medical College and Hospital Calcutta National Medical College Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur IIM IISER Indian Institute of Social Welfare and Business Management Indian Statistical Institute Jadavpur University Maulana Azad College Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Institute of Asian Studies Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology Netaji Subhas Open University National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases Presidency University Rabindra Bharati University Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics School of Tropical Medicine Scottish Church College St. Xavier's College University of Calcutta West Bengal University of Health Sciences West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences Calcutta School of Music Narula Institute of Technology Industry and economy ABP Group Allahabad Bank AMRI Hospitals Andrew Yule and Company Baidyanath Group Balmer Lawrie Batanagar Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Berger Paints Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam Biecco Lawrie Birds Jute and Export Birla Corporation Braithwaite & Co. Braithwaite, Burn & Jessop Construction Company Bridge and Roof Company Britannia Industries Burn & Company Burnpur Burn Standard Company Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation (CESC) Calcutta Stock Exchange Chandras' Chemical Factory Coal India Damodar Valley Corporation Emami Exide Industries Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers GKB Opticals Hawkers Hind Motor Hindustan Ambassador IISCO Steel Plant India Government Mint, Kolkata ITC Limited Jai Balaji group Jessop & Company Kolkata Port Trust Lexulous Limtex Lux Industries Magma Fincorp National Insurance Company Peerless Group Saregama Sinclairs Hotels Limited Tata Global Beverages The Park Hotels UCO Bank United Bank of India VISA Steel Transportation Road Calcutta Tramways Company Calcutta State Transport Corporation Kalyani Expressway Kolkata Bus Rapid Transit System West Bengal Transport Corporation South Bengal State Transport Corporation Howrah Bridge (Rabindra Setu) Belghoria Expressway Vidyasagar Setu Vivekananda Setu Nivedita Setu Golden Quadrilateral Rickshaw Hand-pulled rickshaw Rail Kolkata Metro Kolkata Suburban Railway Eastern Railway South Eastern Railway Trams in Kolkata Kolkata LRTS Howrah railway station Kolkata railway station Sealdah railway station Shalimar railway station Kolkata Monorail Sea Port of Kolkata Air Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International Airport List of airports Culture Kolkata Book Fair Kolkata Rainbow Pride Walk Calcutta Youth Choir Coffee House Dwarkin Festivals Kolkata International Film Festival Dover Lane Music Conference Kolkata in the media Music of Bengal Nandan Priya Rabindra Nritya Natya Rabindra Sangeet Ritwik Ghatak Satyajit Ray Feluda Byomkesh Bakshi Ghanada Tenida Tollywood Ghosts in Bengali culture Adda Football Kolkata derby Group theatre of Kolkata Ethnic enclaves Bow Barracks (Anglo-Indian) Chinatown, Kolkata (Chinese) Tangra, Kolkata (Chinese) Armani-para (Armenian) Places of worship Hindu Belur Math Birla Mandir, Kolkata Dakshineswar Kali Temple Kalighat Kripamayee Kali Temple Baranagar Math Alambazar Math Christian St. Paul's Cathedral Holy Rosary Cathedral (Portuguese Church) St. John's Church Parasnath Temple Others Nakhoda Mosque Tipu Sultan Mosque Chinese temples in Kolkata Magen David Synagogue Sports ATK ATK Mohun Bagan Barasat Stadium B.C. Roy Trophy Beighton Cup Bengal cricket team Calcutta Cricket and Football Club Calcutta Polo Club Calcutta South Club Bengal Tigers Bhawanipore FC Calcutta Cricket and Football Club Calcutta Football League Dalhousie AC East Bengal Club East Bengal Ground Eastern Railway FC Eden Gardens Indian Football Association IFA Shield Kalighat FC Kishore Bharati Krirangan Kolkata derby Kolkata Knight Riders No Dada No KKR Kolkata Police Friendship Cup Football Tournament Kolkata Vipers Mohammedan Sporting Club Mohammedan Sporting Ground Mohun Bagan Athletic Club Mohun Bagan Ground Netaji Indoor Stadium Indian Arrows United SC Rabindra Sarobar Stadium Royal Bengal Tigers Salt Lake Stadium Sunfeast Open Southern Samity Subroto Cup Aryan FC Tollygunge Agragami FC West Bengal football team Other topics Princeton Club Calcutta Club Adwaita Zoological Garden, Alipore Bengal Club Central Forensic Science Laboratory Calcutta Rowing Club Electoral constituencies List of people from Kolkata Fort William Hooghly River Acharya Jagadish Chandra Bose Indian Botanic Garden Chinese of Calcutta Early phase of printing in Calcutta Legendary personalities in Bengal Maidan Missionaries of Charity Rabindra Sarobar Royal Calcutta Golf Club South Park Street Cemetery Sundarbans National Park Tolly Category v t e Superstition Main topics Amulet Evil eye Luck Omen Talismans Myth and ritual Lists List of superstitions List of lucky symbols List of bad luck signs Sailors' superstitions Theatrical superstitions Africa Buda Gris-gris Sampy Sleeping child Americas Ascalapha odorata Carranca Cooties Curupira Djucu Fortune cookie Groundhog Day I'noGo tied Oscar love curse Susto White lighter myth Witch window Asia Superstition in India Superstition in Pakistan Japanese superstitions Bhoot (ghost) Chhaupadi Churel Ghosts in Bengali culture Jackal's horn Kuai Kuai culture Muhurta Navaratna Nazar battu Pichal Peri Puppy pregnancy syndrome Akabeko Kanai Anzen Maneki-neko Okiagari-koboshi Omamori Fan death Agimat Arbularyo Barang Kulam Lihi Pagtatawas Pasma Usog Kuman Thong Palad khik Takrut Nang Kwak White elephant Curse of 39 Jin Chan Numbers in Chinese culture Superstitions of Malaysian Chinese Europe August curse Barbary macaques in Gibraltar Bayern-luck Blarney Stone Cimaruta Cornicello The Goodman's Croft Himmelsbrief Icelandic magical staves In bocca al lupo Kitchen witch Klabautermann Mooncalf Nazar Need-fire Painted pebbles Powder of sympathy Rabbit rabbit rabbit Ravens of the Tower of London Russian traditions and superstitions Spilling water for luck The Scottish Play Troll cross Tycho Brahe days Witch post Wolfssegen General 11:11 4 (Four-leaf clover, Tetraphobia) 7 (Seventh son of a seventh son) 8 9 13 (Friday the 13th, The Thirteen Club, Thirteenth floor, Triskaidekaphobia) 108 111 666 (Number of the Beast) Ace of spades Auspicious wedding dates Baseball superstition Beginner's luck Black cat Bread and butter Break a leg Chain letter Cramp-ring Curse Davy Jones' Locker Dead man's hand End-of-the-day betting effect Fear of frogs Fear of ghosts First-foot Flying Dutchman Four Eleven Forty Four Gambler's conceit Good luck charm Human sacrifice Jinx Knocking on wood Law of contagion Literomancy Lock of hair Maternal impression Miasma theory Nelson Numismatic charm Penny Rabbit's foot Rainmaking Ship sponsor Shoes on a table Sign of the horns Something old Spilling salt Statue rubbing Three on a match Threshold Toi toi toi 27 Club Wishing well Witch ball Witching hour Related Apotropaic magic Astrology and science Coincidence Debunker Divination Folk religion Fortune-telling Magic and religion Magical thinking Numerology Perceptions of religious imagery in natural phenomena Post hoc ergo propter hoc Traditional medicine Urban legend Jew Muslim v t e Dakshinaranjan Mitra Majumder's Thakurmar Jhuli Tales "Saat Bhai Champa" Universe "Bhoot" "Byangoma-Byangomi" Film Arun Barun O Kiranmala (1979) TV series Kiranmala (2014–2016) Saat Bhai Champa (2017–2019) Related Ghosts in Bengali culture