This article is about the Chinese festival and its related traditions. For the festival in the Thai province of Loei, see Phi Ta Khon. For the heavy metal/hardcore punk festival in Leeds, England, see Ghostfest. Traditional Buddhist and Taoist festival This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Ghost Festival A paper effigy of the Ghost King in Shatin, Hong Kong Official name Buddhism: Ullambana (simplified Chinese: 盂兰盆; traditional Chinese: 盂蘭盆; pinyin: Yúlánpén) Taoism and Folk Belief: Zhōngyuán Jié (中元节; 中元節) Also called Ghost Month Observed by Buddhists, Taoists, Chinese folk religion believers primarily in China, Vietnam, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia with related traditions and festivals observed in Cambodia, Laos, Sri Lanka and Thailand Significance The opening of the gates of Hell, permitting all ghosts to receive food and drink Observances Ancestor worship, offering food (to monks as well as deceased), burning joss paper, chanting of scriptures Date 15th night of the 7th Chinese month 2020 date September 2 2021 date August 22 Related to Obon (in Japan) Baekjung (in Korea) Tết Trung Nguyên (in Vietnam) Pchum Ben (in Cambodia) Boun Khao Padap Din (in Laos) Mataka dānēs (in Sri Lanka) Sat Thai (in Thailand) API Food offerings for the Ghost Festival Traditional Chinese 盂蘭盆節 Simplified Chinese 盂兰盆节 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Yúlánpénjié Wade–Giles Yü-lan-p‘ên Chieh Wu Suzhounese Yu le ben Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Yùh làahn pùhn jit Jyutping Jyu4-laan4-pun4 zit3 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Chhit-goe̍h-poàⁿ Alternative Chinese name Chinese 鬼節 Literal meaning Ghost Festival Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Guǐjié Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization gwái zit Jyutping gwai2 zit3 Southern Min Hokkien POJ Kúi-chiat The Ghost Festival, also known as the Hungry Ghost Festival, Zhongyuan Jie (中元節), Gui Jie (鬼節) or Yulan Festival (traditional Chinese: 盂蘭盆節; simplified Chinese: 盂兰盆节; pinyin: Yúlánpénjié) is a traditional Buddhist and Taoist festival held in certain East Asian countries. According to the Chinese calendar (a lunisolar calendar), the Ghost Festival is on the 15th night of the seventh month (14th in parts of southern China).[1][2]:4,6 [note 1] In Chinese culture, the fifteenth day of the seventh month in the lunar calendar is called Ghost Day and the seventh month in general is regarded as the Ghost Month (鬼月), in which ghosts and spirits, including those of deceased ancestors, come out from the lower realm. Distinct from both the Qingming Festival (or Tomb Sweeping Day, in spring) and Double Ninth Festival (in autumn) in which living descendants pay homage to their deceased ancestors, during Ghost Festival, the deceased are believed to visit the living.[3] On the fifteenth day the realms of Heaven and Hell and the realm of the living are open and both Taoists and Buddhists would perform rituals to transmute and absolve the sufferings of the deceased. Intrinsic to the Ghost Month is veneration of the dead, where traditionally the filial piety of descendants extends to their ancestors even after their deaths. Activities during the month would include preparing ritualistic food offerings, burning incense, and burning joss paper, a papier-mâché form of material items such as clothes, gold and other fine goods for the visiting spirits of the ancestors. Elaborate meals (often vegetarian meals) would be served with empty seats for each of the deceased in the family treating the deceased as if they are still living. Ancestor worship is what distinguishes Qingming Festival from Ghost Festival because the latter includes paying respects to all deceased, including the same and younger generations, while the former only includes older generations. Other festivities may include buying and releasing miniature paper boats and lanterns on water, which signifies giving directions to the lost ghosts and spirits of the ancestors and other deities.[4] Contents 1 Origins 2 Observance 3 Celebrations in other parts of Asia 3.1 Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia 3.2 Taiwan 3.3 Japan 3.3.1 Chūgen 3.3.2 Bon 3.4 Vietnam 3.5 Related Buddhist traditions in other parts of Asia 3.5.1 Cambodia 3.5.2 Laos 3.5.3 Sri Lanka 3.5.4 Thailand 3.6 Related Hindu traditions in other parts of Asia 3.6.1 India 3.6.2 Indonesia 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Origins[edit] Main articles: Petavatthu, Yulanpen Sutra, and Mulian Rescues His Mother The timing and origin story of the modern Ghost Festival, however, ultimately originated from ancient India, deriving from the Mahayana scripture known as the Yulanpen or Ullambana Sutra.[5]:301,302 [note 2] The sutra records the time when Maudgalyayana achieves abhijñā and uses his new found powers to search for his deceased parents. Maudgalyayana discovers that his deceased mother was reborn into the preta or hungry ghost realm. She was in a wasted condition and Maudgalyayana tried to help her by giving her a bowl of rice. Unfortunately as a preta, she was unable to eat the rice as it was transformed into burning coal. Maudgalyayana then asks the Buddha to help him; whereupon Buddha explains how one is able to assist one's current parents and deceased parents in this life and in one's past seven lives by willingly offering food, etc., to the sangha or monastic community during Pravarana (the end of the monsoon season or vassa), which usually occurs on the 15th day of the seventh month whereby the monastic community transfers the merits to the deceased parents, etc.,[6]:185 [note 3] [5]:293 [note 4] [7]:286 [note 5] The Theravadan forms of the festival in South and Southeast Asia (including Cambodia's Pchum Ben) are much older, deriving from the Petavatthu, a scripture in the Pali Canon that probably dates to the 3rd century BC.[8] The Petavatthu account is broadly similar to that later recorded in the Yulanpen Sutra, although it concerns the disciple Sāriputta and his family rather than Moggallāna. Observance[edit] A young girl performing during Ghost Festival in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The red seats in front are reserved for ghosts. Chinese lotus lanterns floating in a river. The Ghost Festival is held during the seventh month of the Chinese calendar. It also falls at the same time as a full moon, the new season, the fall harvest, the peak of Buddhist monastic asceticism, the rebirth of ancestors, and the assembly of the local community.[9] During this month, the gates of hell are opened up and ghosts are free to roam the earth where they seek food and entertainment. These ghosts are believed to be ancestors of those who forgot to pay tribute to them after they died, or those who were never given a proper ritual send-off. They have long needle-thin necks because they have not been fed by their family, or as a punishment so that they are unable to swallow. Family members offer prayers to their deceased relatives, offer food and drink and burn hell bank notes and other forms of joss paper. Joss paper items are believed to have value in the afterlife, considered to be very similar in some aspects to the material world, People burn paper houses, cars, servants and televisions to please the ghosts.[10] Families also pay tribute to other unknown wandering ghosts so that these homeless souls do not intrude on their lives and bring misfortune. A large feast is held for the ghosts on the fourteenth day of the seventh month, when people bring samples of food and place them on an offering table to please the ghosts and ward off bad luck. Lotus-shaped lanterns are lit and set afloat in rivers and out onto seas to symbolicly guide the lost souls of forgotten ancestors to the afterlife. In some East Asian countries today, live performances are held and everyone is invited to attend. The first row of seats are always empty as this is where the ghosts sit. The shows are always put on at night and at high volumes as the sound is believed to attract and please the ghosts. Some shows include Chinese opera, dramas, and in some areas, even burlesque shows. Traditionally Chinese opera was the main source of entertainment but the newer shows, concerts, dramas, wars and so forth are referred to as Getai.[11] These acts are better known as "Merry-making".[12] For rituals, Buddhists and Taoists hold ceremonies to relieve ghosts from suffering, many of them holding ceremonies in the afternoon or at night (as it is believed that the ghosts are released from hell when the sun sets). Altars are built for the deceased and priests and monks alike perform rituals for the benefit of ghosts. Monks and priests often throw rice or other small foods into the air in all directions to distribute them to the ghosts.[12] During the evening, incense is burnt in front of the doors households. Incense stands for prosperity in Chinese culture, so families believe that there is more prosperity in burning more incense.[12] During the festival, some shops are closed as they want to leave the streets open for the ghosts. In the middle of each street stands an altar of incense with fresh fruit and sacrifices displayed on it.[12] Fourteen days after the festival, to make sure all the hungry ghosts find their way back to hell, people float water lanterns and set them outside their houses. These lanterns are made by setting a lotus flower-shaped lantern on a paper boat. The lanterns are used to direct the ghosts back to the underworld, and when they go out, it symbolizes that they have found their way back.[12] Celebrations in other parts of Asia[edit] Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia[edit] Concert-like performances are a prominent feature of the Ghost Festival in Singapore and Malaysia. Those live concerts are popularly known as Getai in Mandarin or Koh-tai in Hokkien Chinese.[13] They are performed by groups of singers, dancers, entertainers and opera troops or puppet shows on a temporary stage that is set up within a residential district. The festival is funded by the residents of each individual district. During these Getai the front row is left empty for the special guests—the ghosts.[14] It is known to be bad luck to sit on the front row of red seats, if anyone were to sit on them, they would become sick or similarly ailed. In Singapore, people would pray to ghosts/spirits or ancestors with offerings outside their homes for the start of the 7th month. Most patriotic events were held on 7th Month for Singapore, which includes general and presidential elections, the Olympics and the National Day Parade. This is where the number of outings were minimised. In Indonesia, the festival popularly known as Cioko, or Sembahyang Rebutan in Indonesian, (Scrambling prayer). People gather around temples and bring an offering to a spirit who died in an unlucky way, and after that, they distribute it to the poor. The way people scramble the offerings is the origin of the festival name. Taiwan[edit] Traditionally, it is believed that ghosts haunt the island of Taiwan for the entire seventh lunar month, when the mid-summer Ghost Festival is held.[15] The month is known as Ghost Month.[16] The first day of the month is marked by opening the gate of a temple, symbolizing the gates of hell. On the twelfth day, lamps on the main altar are lit. On the thirteenth day, a procession of lanterns is held. On the fourteenth day, a parade is held for releasing water lanterns. Incense and food are offered to the spirits to deter them from visiting homes and spirit paper money is also burnt as an offering.[17] During the month, people avoid surgery, buying cars, swimming, moving house, marrying, whistling and going out or taking pictures after dark. It is also important that addresses are not revealed to the ghosts.[citation needed] Japan[edit] For an explanation of the beautifying honorific o- used in this section, see Honorific speech in Japanese § Honorific prefixes. Chūgen[edit] Chūgen [ja] (中元), also Ochūgen (お中元), is an annual event in Japan on the 15th day of the 7th lunar month, when people give gifts to their superiors and acquaintances. Originally it was an annual event for giving gifts to the ancestral spirits. One of the three days that form the sangen (三元) of Daoism, it is sometimes considered a zassetsu, a type of seasonal day in the Japanese calendar. Bon[edit] Japanese volunteers perform tōrō nagashi: placing candle-lit lanterns for the dead into flowing water during Obon, in this case into the Sasebo River. Main article: Bon Festival See also: Segaki Obon (sometimes transliterated O-bon), or simply Bon, is the Japanese version of the Ghost Festival. It has since been transformed over time into a family reunion holiday during which people from the big cities return to their home towns and visit and clean the resting places of their ancestors. Traditionally including a dance festival called Bon Odori, Obon has existed in Japan for more than 500 years. In modern Japan, it is held on July 15 in the eastern part (Kantō), on August 15 in the western part (Kansai), and in Okinawa and the Amami Islands it is celebrated as in China on the 15th day of the 7th lunar month. In 2019, Obon was held on the same date in Kansai, Okinawa and the Amami Islands as August 15 that year was also the 15th day of the 7th lunar month. Vietnam[edit] A white and red rose issued to guests at a Tết Trung Nguyên service This festival is known as Tết Trung Nguyên and is viewed as a time for the pardoning of condemned souls who are released from hell. The "homeless" should be "fed" and appeased with offerings of food. Merits for the living are also earned by the release of birds and fish. The lunar month in which the festival takes place is colloquially known as Tháng Cô Hồn - the month of lonely spirits, and believed to be haunted and particularly unlucky. Influenced by Buddhism, this holiday coincides with Vu Lan, the Vietnamese transliteration for Ullambana. In modern times, Vu Lan is also seen as Mother's Day. People with living mothers would bear a red rose and would give thanks while those without can choose to bear a white rose; and attend services to pray for the deceased. Related Buddhist traditions in other parts of Asia[edit] In Asian Theravadin Buddhist countries, related traditions, ceremonies and festivals also occur. Like its Ullambana Sutra-origins in Mahayana Buddhist countries, the Theravada scripture, the Petavatthu gave rise to the idea of offering food to the hungry ghosts in the Theravada tradition as a form of merit-making. In stories published in the Petavatthu Maudgalyayana, who also plays the central role in the rise of the concept in the Mahayana tradition, along with Sariputta also play a role in the rise of the concept in the Theravada tradition.[18][19][20] Similarly to the rise of the concept in Mahayana Buddhism, a version of Maudgalyayana Rescues His Mother, where Maudgalyayana is replaced by Sariputta is recorded in the Petavatthu and is in part the basis behind the practice of the concept in Theravadin societies.[21] The concept of offering food to the hungry ghosts is also found in early Buddhist literature, in the Tirokudda Kanda.[22] Cambodia[edit] Main article: Pchum Ben In Cambodia, a fifteen-day-long annual festival known as Pchum Ben occurs generally in September or October. Cambodians pay their respects to deceased relatives up to seven generations. The gates of hell are believed to open during this period and many people make offerings to these hungry ghosts.[23] Laos[edit] In Laos, a festival known as, Boun khao padap din usually occurs in September each year and goes on for two weeks. During this period, it is believed that hungry ghosts are freed from hell and enter the world of the living. A second festival known as Boun khao salak occurs directly after the conclusion of Boun khay padab din. During this period, food offerings are made to the hungry ghosts.[24] Sri Lanka[edit] See also: Segaki In Sri Lanka, food offerings are made to the hungry ghosts on the seventh day, three months and one year after the death day of a deceased person. It is a ceremony conducted after death as part of traditional Sri Lankan Buddhist funeral rites and is known as mataka dānēs or matakadānaya.[25][26][27] The offerings that are made acquire merit which are then transformed back into the equivalent goods in the world of the hungry ghosts.[25] The offering that is offered on the seventh day, comes a day after personalized food offerings are given in the garden to the spirit of the deceased relative, which occurs on the sixth day.[28][29] The deceased who do not reach the proper afterworld, the Hungry Ghost realm, are feared by the living as they are believed to cause various sicknesses and disasters to the living. Buddhist monks are called upon to perform pirit to ward off the floating spirits. The rite is also practiced in Thailand and Myanmar and is also practiced during the Ghost Festival that is observed in other Asian countries.[30] Thailand[edit] Main article: Sat Thai In Thailand, a fifteen-day-long annual festival known as Sat Thai is celebrated between September and October in Thailand especially in southern Thailand, particularly in the province of Nakhon Si Thammarat.[31] Like related festivals and traditions in other parts of Asia, the deceased are believed to come back to earth for fifteen days and people make offerings to them. The festival is known as Sat Thai to differentiate it from the Chinese Ghost Festival which is known as Sat Chin in the Thai language.[32] Related Hindu traditions in other parts of Asia[edit] India[edit] Main article: Pitru Paksha The performance of Shraddha by a son during Pitru Paksha is regarded as compulsory by Hindus, to ensure that the soul of the ancestor goes to heaven. In this context, the scripture Garuda Purana says, "there is no salvation for a man without a son". The scriptures preach that a householder should propitiate ancestors (Pitris), along with the gods (devas), ghosts (bhutas) and guests. The scripture Markandeya Purana says that if the ancestors are content with the shraddhas, they will bestow health, wealth, knowledge and longevity, and ultimately heaven and salvation (moksha) upon the performer.[33] Indonesia[edit] In Bali and some parts of Indonesia, particularly among the indigenous Hindus of Indonesia, ancestors who have died and cremated are said to return to visit their former homes. This day is known as Hari Raya Galungan and celebrations typically last over two weeks, often in the form of specific food and religious offerings along with festivities.[34][35] The festival date is often calculated according to the Balinese pawukon calendar and typically occurs every 210 days.[36] See also[edit] Chinese ghosts Buddhist art Nine Emperor God / Festival of Nine Emperor God (Chinese: 九皇, Hokkien: Kow Ong Yah, Cantonese: Kow Wong Yeh) Phi Ta Khon Tōrō nagashi Notes[edit] ^ Chow, page 4, quoting 1783 Qianlong era "Annals of Guishan County" (歸善縣志) Scroll 15 - Customs: '鬼節原是農曆七月十五，但元末明初之際，有言客家為了躲避元兵，提前一日過節，以便南下走難，自此鬼節就變成七月十四，流傳至今。' English translation: 'The Ghost Festival originally was on the 15th day of the 7th month in the lunar calendar, but during the late Yuan to early Ming period, it's said that the Hakkas in order to escape the Yuan troops, celebrated the Ghost Festival one day earlier, in order to escape disaster they fled southward. Since that time and continuing today, the date of the Ghost Festival changed to the 14th day of the 7th [lunar] month' [in parts of Southern China]. ^ Karashima: On p. 302 'Although this sutra has often been regarded as apocryphal [Japanese version has in recent times], the contents and ideas in it are well rooted in India as we have seen above. In addition to that, the vocabulary and usage of Chinese words are more archaic, compared with Kumārajīva's corpus (401-413 CE), while they resemble greatly the translations by Dharmarakṣa (fl. 265?-311 CE). Moreover, the transliteration 鉢和羅 (EH pat γwa la > MC pwât γwâ lâ} of Skt. pravāra (ṇā), which only occurs in this sutra and its adaptation, i.e. the Baoen Fengpen jing 報恩奉盆經 (T. 16, no. 686, 780a20), indicates clearly that this sutra is not apocryphal but a genuine translation, because only somebody who knew the original Indian form was able to transliterate it thus correctly into Chinese. In conclusion, I assume that [<-preceding 3 words missing in Japanese version] this sutra is not apocryphal, but a translation from an Indian text translated by Dharmarakṣa or somebody else in pre-Kumārajīva times [Japanese version has 3rd to 4th century CE]. [c.f. p 189 for equivalent in Japanese version] c.f. p 301 for derivation of Yulan from Middle Indic (Gandhari) *olana. ^ Karashima: '東アジアの盂蘭盆と東南アジアのワン・オ一クパンサーなどは、いずれも、釈尊の時代に規定された様に七月十五日の自恣の日を祝っているのだが（日本ではこのことはすでに意識されていない）、東南アジアでは古代インドの暦に基づいて行われるのに対し、東アジアでは、中国の太陰暦に従っているので、ニケ月の差があり、これらが同一の行事ということに気付く人は少ない。' English Translation: 'Both the East Asian Urabon [Yulanpen] and Southeast Asian Wan Ok Phansa [Thai name for Pravāraṇā] are celebrated on the 15th day of the seventh month, the day of Pravāraṇā just as it was promulgated in Lord Buddha's time (in Japan, this matter is not known to people). In Southeast Asian countries, they use the ancient Indian calendar [or Buddhist calendar] as opposed to East Asian countries where they use the Chinese calendar. As there is a two month difference between the two calendars, few people realized that the two are [in fact] the same event.' ^ Karashima: Pravāraṇā (Pāli Pavāraṇā) zizi 自恣 and suiyi 隨意 in Chinese, is a ceremony held at the end of the three-month rainy season retreat [also called vassa] by Buddhist monks. In Theravada Buddhism and in Nepal, it was and is still held on the full moon day of the seventh or eight month. i.e. Āśvina (September–October) or Kārttika (October–November) respectively. ^ Karashima: '對佛教徒來說，自古印度年曆（元旦相當於公曆三月中至四月中）四月十五日（公曆六至七月）或五月十五日（公曆七至八月）開始的三個月是雨安居。直至今天，西藏、尼泊爾、東南亞地區的僧人依然在此期間行雨安居。這一習俗也傳到沒有雨季的中國大陸中原地域，年曆和數字被原封不動地保留下來，但由印度年曆變為中國太陰曆。在中國、日本、朝鮮半島等東亞地區，雨安居從陰曆四月（公曆五月）開始，持續三個月。' English Translation: 'From the Buddhist viewpoint, based on the Ancient Indian calendar [or Buddhist calendar] (New Years is in the middle of March to the middle of April [in the Gregorian calendar]) the 15th day of the fourth month [Āṣāḍha] (June to July [in the Gregorian calendar]) or the 15th day of the fifth month [Śrāvaṇa] (July to August [in Gregorian calendar]) is the start of three month period called vassa. From ancient times to even today, the monastic community of Tibet, Nepal and Southeast Asia still follow this schedule to observe vassa. This custom was also transmitted to China which does not have a rainy season, the calendar and dates preserved unchanged from the original but instead of using the ancient Indian calendar, the lunar Chinese calendar is used. In China, Japan, the Korean peninsula and other East Asian regions, vassa starts on the fourth month of the lunar Chinese calendar (May (in the Gregorian calendar) and lasts 3 months.' [n.b. Since the start of vassa is fixed in East Asia in the fourth month, Pravāraṇā is also fixed to the 15th day of the seventh month]. References[edit] ^ "Zhongyuan festival". China.org.cn. China Internet Information Center. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. ^ Chow 2015 ^ "Culture insider - China's ghost festival". China Daily. 8 August 2014. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. ^ "Chinese Ghost Festival - "the Chinese Halloween"". Peoples Daily (English). 30 October 2009. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. ^ a b Karashima 2013a ^ Karashima 2013b ^ Karashima 2014 ^ Langer (2007), p. 276 harvp error: no target: CITEREFLanger2007 (help). ^ Teiser (1988) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTeiser1988 (help). ^ "Hungry Ghost Festival". Essortment, 2002. Retrieved 20 October 2008. Essortment Articles. Archived February 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Chinese Culture: Hungry Ghost Festival" Modern China Archived February 3, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e "Ghost Festival" ChinaVoc 2001–2007, Online Store. Archived 8 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Hungry Ghost Festival". Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018. ^ "Hungry Ghost Festival". Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018. ^ Mid-Summer Ghost Festival Archived January 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Chine Town Connection Archived September 19, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. ^ Ghost Month Archived 3 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Ghost Festival Archived 29 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Government Information Office Archived 3 April 2005 at the Wayback Machine, Taiwan. ^ Taiwan's Ghost Festival and Other Religious Events Archived October 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Go2Taiwan.net Archived August 31, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. ^ Pearce, Callum (2013). "Buddhist funeral cultures of Southeast Asia and China". Mortality. 18 (4): 388–389. doi:10.1080/13576275.2013.843512. S2CID 144383079. ^ Schober, Juliane (2002). Sacred Biography in the Buddhist Traditions of South and Southeast Asia. ISBN 9788120818125. Archived from the original on February 12, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2017. ^ Hecker, Hellmuth, Maha-Moggallana, archived from the original on February 18, 2006, retrieved February 11, 2017 ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2017.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Gouin, Margaret (2012-09-10). Tibetan Rituals of Death: Buddhist Funerary Practices. ISBN 9781136959172. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. ^ Holt, John Cli ord (April 2012). "Caring for the Dead Ritually in Cambodia" (PDF). Southeast Asian Studies. 1 (1): 3–75. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2018. ^ Ladwig, Patrice (2012). "Visitors from hell: transformative hospitality to ghosts in a Lao Buddhist festival". Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute. 18: S90–S102. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9655.2012.01765.x. ISSN 1359-0987. ^ a b Langer, Rita (2007). Buddhist Rituals of Death and Rebirth: Contemporary Sri Lankan Practice and Its Origins. Routledge. pp. 153, 155, 173, 187, 191. ISBN 9780710304445. ^ Buswell, Robert E (2004). Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Macmillan Reference USA. p. 21. ISBN 978-0028659107. ^ Williams, Paul (2005). Buddhism: Buddhism in South and Southeast Asia. ISBN 9780415332330. ^ Harding, John S (2013-06-17). Studying Buddhism in Practice. ISBN 9781136501883. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 27, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Sastri, S. M. Natesa (1988). Hindu feasts, fasts and ceremonies. Asian Educational Services. pp. 15–17. ISBN 978-81-206-0402-5. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Bibliography[edit] Bandō, Shōjun, ed. (2005), "The Ullambana Sutra (Taishō Vol. 16, No. 685)", Apocryphal Scriptures (PDF), Bukkyō Dendō Kyōkai English Tripitaka Series, Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, pp. 17–44, ISBN 978-1-886439-29-0, archived from the original (PDF) on February 10, 2013. Chow, Shu Kai (周樹佳) (2015), 鬼月鉤沉-中元、盂蘭、餓鬼節 [Investigation of Ghost Month - Zhong Yuan, Ullambana and Hungry Ghost Festivals] (in Chinese), Hong Kong: Chung Hwa Books (Hong Kong), ISBN 9789888366392 Langer, Rita (2007), Buddhist Rituals of Death and Rebirth: Contemporary Sri Lankan Practice and Its Origins, Abingdon: Routledge, ISBN 9781134158720. Karashima, Seishi (2013a), "The Meaning of Yulanpen 盂蘭盆 "Rice Bowl" On Pravāraṇā Day", Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advance Buddhology at Soka University for the Academic Year 2012, XVI: 289–305 Karashima, Seishi (辛嶋静志) (2013b), 「盂蘭盆」の本当の意味 ―千四百間の誤解を解く [The Real Meaning of Urabon [Yulanpen] –The Solution to a 1400 Year Misunderstanding], 大法輪 (The Great Wheel of the Dharma) (in Japanese): 182–189 Karashima, Seishi (辛嶋静志)(in Chinese as 辛島靜志) (2014), translated by Qiu, Yun Qing (裘雲青), 盂蘭盆之意-自恣日的“飯鉢” [The Meaning of Yulanpen 盂蘭盆 "Rice Bowl" On Pravāraṇā Day], 中華文史論叢 (Journal of Chinese Literature and History) (in Chinese) (114): 279–301 Mair, Victor H. (1989), T'ang Transformation Texts, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, ISBN 9780674868151. Teiser, Stephen F. (1988), The Ghost Festival in Medieval China, Princeton: Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-02677-0. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ghost Festival. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) The Bristol University Buddhist Death Ritual Project Images and a documentary film by Ingmar Heise and Han Zhang "The Spirit's Happy Days: Buddhist Festivals for the Dead in Southeast China" can be downloaded there. Zhongyuan Festival Chinese Ghost Culture Hong Kong University Library Digital Archives Oral History Project of Hong Kong Waters, Dan (2004). "The Hungry Ghosts Festival in Aberdeen Street, Hong Kong" (PDF). Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Hong Kong Branch. 44: 41–55. v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category v t e Culture of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Burma (Myanmar) Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor (Timor-Leste) Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North South Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Observer states Palestine States with limited recognition Abkhazia Artsakh Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau v t e Halloween Main topics History Samhain Allhallowtide Symbols Activities Geography Christian observances Traditions Apple bobbing Cards Costumes Food Ghost tours Jack-o'-lantern Lighting candles on graves Prayer for the dead Soul cake Trick-or-treating Pangangaluluwa Events Bonfire Great Pumpkin Haunted attraction Hell house Pumpkin queen Media Books Films Music albums songs Television Related events Festival of the Dead Bon Festival Chuseok Día de Muertos Gai Jatra Pitri Paksha Qingming Festival Totensonntag Zhōng yuán jié Veneration of the dead Death anniversary Death customs Kaddish Yizkor Other events Allantide Beggars Night Devil's Night Dziady Eid il-Burbara Hop-tu-Naa Korochun Krampus Mischief Night Namahage Old Halloween Saci Day Superstition Will-o'-the-wisp Hobgoblins  Category: Halloween Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125