Genre of folklore concerning ghosts Ghostlore or ghost-lore is a genre of folklore concerning ghosts. Ghostlore occurs throughout recorded history, including contemporary contexts. For example, American folklorist Louis C. Jones observes the following in 1944: Ghostlore is still widespread and popular. While most of the actions thought to be common among ghosts (chain clanking, cemetery haunting, and so forth) can be found, they are by no means so widespread in the popular ghostlore as we have been led to expect. The ghost who is very like the living is far more common than any other. ... It might be expected that a rational age of science would destroy belief in the ability of the dead to return. I think it works the other way: in an age of scientific miracles anything seems possible.[1] Notes[edit] ^ Jones 1944: 253. References[edit] Jones, Louis C. (1944). "The Ghosts of New York: An Analytical Study". The Journal of American Folklore. 57 (226): 237–254. doi:10.2307/535356. JSTOR 535356. v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category v t e Folklore genres and types Narrative Animal tale Fable Fairytale Legend Myth Parable Personal narrative Urban legend Oral tradition Folk etymology Joke Nursery rhyme Proverb Riddle Saying Word game Folk belief Folk religion Ghostlore Legend tripping Mythology Old wives' tale Ritual Folk arts Folk art Folk dance Folk instrument Folk music Folk wrestling Foodways See also Folklore studies Morphology (folkloristics) Aarne–Thompson–Uther Index Motif-Index of Folk-Literature Storytelling Tradition This folklore-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e