Gifford Pinchot National Forest Old Snowy Mountain in Goat Rocks Wilderness Show map of Washington (state) Show map of the United States Location Washington, USA Nearest city Amboy, WA Coordinates 46°10′N 121°49′W﻿ / ﻿46.167°N 121.817°W﻿ / 46.167; -121.817Coordinates: 46°10′N 121°49′W﻿ / ﻿46.167°N 121.817°W﻿ / 46.167; -121.817[1] Area 1,321,506 acres (5,347.95 km2)[2] Established July 1, 1908[3] Visitors 1,800,000 (in 2005) Governing body U.S. Forest Service Website Gifford Pinchot National Forest Gifford Pinchot National Forest is a National Forest located in southern Washington, USA, managed by the United States Forest Service. With an area of 1.32 million acres (5300 km2), it extends 116 km along the western slopes of Cascade Range from Mount Rainier National Park to the Columbia River. The forest straddles the crest of the South Cascades of Washington State, spread out over broad, old growth forests, high mountain meadows, several glaciers, and numerous volcanic peaks. The forest's highest point is at 12,276 ft. at the top of Mount Adams, the second tallest volcano in the state after Rainier. Often found abbreviated GPNF on maps and in texts, it includes the 110,000-acre (450 km2) Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument, established by Congress in 1982. Contents 1 History 2 Geography 2.1 Major rivers 2.2 Major lakes 3 Congressional action 3.1 National Monuments 3.2 Wilderness Areas 3.3 Points of interest 4 Forest Service management 5 Ecology 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] A U.S. Forest Service ranger and cattle grazer permittee on a hillside with cattle in Gifford Pinchot National Forest, Washington in 1949 Gifford Pinchot National Forest is one of the older national forests in the United States. Included as part of the Mount Rainier Forest Reserve in 1897, 941,440 acres (3,809.9 km2) was set aside as the Columbia National Forest on July 1, 1908. In 1855, the US government commissioned Washington Territory to negotiate land cession treaties with tribes around the forest. The Yakama tribe signed a treaty agreement that stipulated their moving to a reservation while maintaining off-reservation resource rights; however, the original treaty was then broken in 1916 when the Washington State Supreme Court ruled that Yakamas' hunting off the reservation had to subscribe to state fish and game laws. Many tribes in the area have continued to use the area's resources while encountering non-Native hunters, fishers, and recreation users.[4] It was later renamed the Gifford Pinchot National Forest on June 15, 1949 in honor of Gifford Pinchot, one of the leading figures in the creation of the national forest system of the United States.[5] In 1985 the non-profit Gifford Pinchot Task Force formed to promote conservation of the forest. Geography[edit] Map of Gifford Pinchot National Forest Lower Falls of the Lewis River Mount Adams early morning reflection at Takhlakh Lake Mount Adams above Olallie Lake Horseshoe Lake Gifford Pinchot National Forest is located in a mountainous region approximately between Mount St. Helens to the west, Mount Adams to the east, Mount Rainier National Park to the north, and the Columbia River to the south. This region of Southwest Washington is noted for its complex topography and volcanic geology. About 65 percent of the forest acreage is located in Skamania County. In descending order of land area the others are Lewis, Yakima, Cowlitz, and Klickitat. counties.[6] Major rivers[edit] The Pacific Northwest brings abundant rainfall to the Gifford Pinchot National Forest, feeding an extensive network of rivers. The forest has only one river currently designated as Wild and Scenic, the White Salmon River, fed from glaciers high on Mount Adams. The Gifford Pinchot National Forest recommends four rivers to be added to the Wild and Scenic System. They are the Lewis River, the Cispus River, the Clear Fork and the Muddy Fork of the Cowlitz River. There are an additional thirteen rivers in the forest being studied for consideration into the national Wild and Scenic River System.[7] The following listed are the major streams and rivers of the Gifford Pinchot National Forest. Many of these provide excellent fishing.[8] Cispus River Cowlitz River White Salmon River Little White Salmon River Wind River Lewis River Muddy River East Canyon Creek Skate Creek Iron Creek Trout Lake Creek Cultus Creek Quartz Creek Butter Creek Clear Creek Siouxon Creek Canyon Creek Johnson Creek Major lakes[edit] The Gifford Pinchot National Forest includes many popular and secluded backcountry lakes. Most of the lakes offers excellent fishing. Goose Lake is known for the best fishing in the State of Washington. The following table lists the major lakes of the Gifford Pinchot National Forest:[9] Lake Area 1 Spirit Lake Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument 2 Blue Lake Cispus River Valley 3 Walupt Lake Base of Goat Rocks 4 Takhlakh Lake Midway High Lakes Area, below Mount Adams 5 Forlorn Lakes Indian Heaven Volcanic Field Area 6 Steamboat Lake Between Indian Heaven Wilderness to the south and Lewis River to the north 7 Goose Lake Indian Heaven Volcanic Field 8 Indian Heaven Wilderness Lakes Indian Heaven Wilderness 9 Soda Peaks Lake Trapper Creek Wilderness 10 Mt. Margaret Backcountry Lakes Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument 11 Mosquito Lakes North of Indian Heaven Wilderness and Indian Heaven Volcanic Field 12 Lake Scanewa 5 miles (east) from Taidnapam Park (at west end of Riffe Lake) 13 Riffe Reservoir Cowlitz River 14 Swift Reservoir Lewis River 15 Mayfield Reservoir Cowlitz River 16 Olallie Lake Midway High Lakes Area, below Mount Adams 17 Horseshoe Lake Midway High Lakes Area, below Mount Adams 18 Council Lake Midway High Lakes Area, below Mount Adams 19 Tatoosh lakes Tatoosh Wilderness, south of Mount Rainier National Park 20 Goat Lake Goat Rocks Wilderness 21 Packwood Lake large lake at the edge of Goat Rocks Wilderness Congressional action[edit] Congressional action since 1964 has established one national monument and seven wilderness areas in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest. National Monuments[edit] 3,000 ft (1 km) steam plume on May 19, 1982, two years after its major eruption On August 26, 1982, congressional action established the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument, after the cataclysmic eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980. Wilderness Areas[edit] Congressional action since 1964 has established the following wilderness areas: Glacier View Wilderness – 3,073 acres (12.4 km2)[10] Goat Rocks – 108,096 acres (437.4 km2), part of which lies in neighboring Wenatchee NF[11] Indian Heaven – 20,782 acres (84.1 km2) Mount Adams – 47,078 acres (190.5 km2) Tatoosh – 15,725 acres (63.6 km2) Trapper Creek – 5,969 acres (24.2 km2) William O. Douglas – 169,061 acres (684.2 km2), most of which lies in neighboring Wenatchee NF[12] The Shark Rock Wilderness was proposed in the mid-1970s by E.M. Sterling for the 75,000 acre Dark Divide Roadless Area in his book, The South Cascades. It is the largest unprotected roadless area (allowing motorized access) in the Washington Cascades, featuring sharp peaks and deep canyons, old growth forests, and delicate subalpine meadows.[13] Points of interest[edit] Summit of Silver Star with Mount St. Helens in the background The forest also offers the following special areas and points of interest:[14] Dark Divide Roadless Area Silver Star Scenic Area Lava Tubes, Caves, and Casts (notably the Ice Caves) Ape Caves Midway High Lakes Area Big Lava Bed Packwood Lake Berry Fields, (notably the world-renowned Sawtooth Berry Fields)[15] Lone Butte Wildlife Emphasis Area Forest Service management[edit] The forest supervisor's office is located in Vancouver, Washington. There are local ranger district offices in Randle, Amboy, and Trout Lake.[16] The forest is named after the first chief of the United States Forest Service, Gifford Pinchot. Washington towns near entrances of the forest include Cougar, Randle, Packwood, Trout Lake and Carson. The Rugged Tatoosh Range from Paradise. Ecology[edit] A 1993 Forest Service study estimated that the extent of old growth in the Forest was 198,000 acres (80,000 ha), some of which is contained within its wilderness areas.[17] Northern Spotted Owl, found in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest The Gifford Pinchot National Forest is the native habitat for several threatened species which include the spotted owl (threatened 2012)[18] as well as multiple species of Northwest fish like the bull trout (threatened 1998),[19] chinook salmon (threatened 2011), coho salmon (threatened 2011) and steelhead (threatened 2011).[20] People for over 6,000 years have made an impact in the ecology of the Gifford Pinchot National Forest.[14] Native Americans hunted in high meadows below receding glaciers. The natives then began to manage the forest to meet their own needs. One method they used was to burn specific areas to help in the huckleberry production. About 338 spots more than 6,000 culturally modified trees were identified, of which 3,000 are protected now. Archaeological investigations on the forest continually find new information to this day about the past lifestyles of the Native Americans.[14] The forest is home to the Big Tree at the southern flank of Mt Adams, one of the world's largest Ponderosa Trees. See also[edit] Wind River Arboretum References[edit] ^ "Gifford Pinchot National Forest". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey. ^ "Land Areas of the National Forest System" (PDF). U.S. Forest Service. January 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2012. ^ "The National Forests of the United States" (PDF). ForestHistory.org. Retrieved November 3, 2017. ^ Catton, Theodore (2017). American Indians and National Forests. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press. ISBN 9780816536511. ^ Davis, Richard C. (September 29, 2005), National Forests of the United States (PDF), The Forest History Society, archived from the original (PDF) on October 28, 2012 ^ http://www.fs.fed.us/land/staff/lar/2007/TABLE_6.htm ^ "Gifford Pinchot National Forest – Wild and Scenic Rivers". Retrieved 20 April 2013. ^ "Gifford Pinchot National Forest – Streams and Rivers". Retrieved 20 April 2013. ^ "Gifford Pinchot National Forest – Lakes". ^ Wilderness Data Search Archived 2009-08-20 at the Wayback Machine Wilderness.net website, data as of 2011 ^ Goat Rocks Wilderness acreage breakdown, Wilderness.net ^ William O. Douglas Wilderness acreage breakdown, Wilderness.net ^ "Dark Divide". Washington Trails Association. Retrieved 10 May 2013. ^ a b c "About the Forest". Retrieved 18 April 2013. ^ "Indian Heaven Wilderness – Subsection: Northwest Tribes". Retrieved 18 April 2013. ^ USFS Ranger Districts by State ^ Bolsinger, Charles L.; Waddell, Karen L. (1993), Area of old-growth forests in California, Oregon, and Washington (PDF), United States Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Resource Bulletin PNW-RB-197 ^ "Species Profile-Northern Spotted owl (Strix occidentalis caurina)". U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Retrieved 2014-04-29. ^ "Species Profile-Bull Trout (Salvelinus confluentus)". U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Archived from the original on 2013-12-11. Retrieved 2014-04-29. ^ "5-Year Review: Summary & Evaluation of Lower Columbia River Chinook, Columbia River Chum, Lower Columbia River Coho, Lower Columbia River Steelhead" (PDF). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2011. Retrieved 2013-12-03. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Official website Gifford Pinchot Task Force v t e Protected areas of Washington Federal National Parks Mount Rainier North Cascades Olympic National Monuments Hanford Reach (USFWS) Mount St. Helens Volcanic (USFS) San Juan Islands (BLM) National Historical Parks & Sites Fort Vancouver NHS Klondike Gold Rush NHP Lewis and Clark NHP Manhattan Project NHP Nez Perce NHP San Juan Island NHP Whitman Mission NHS National Historical Reserves Ebey's Landing National Trails Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail Pacific Crest Trail Pacific Northwest National Scenic Trail NPS National Recreation Areas Lake Chelan Lake Roosevelt Ross Lake National Wildlife Refuges Billy Frank Jr. Nisqually Columbia Conboy Lake Copalis Dungeness Flattery Rocks Franz Lake Grays Harbor Julia Butler Hansen Refuge for the Columbian White-Tailed Deer Little Pend Oreille McNary Pierce Protection Island Quillayute Needles Ridgefield Saddle Mountain San Juan Islands Steigerwald Lake Toppenish Turnbull Umatilla Willapa National Forests Colville Gifford Pinchot Idaho Panhandle Kaniksu Mount Baker-Snoqualmie Okanogan Olympic Umatilla Wenatchee USFS National Recreation Areas Mount Baker National Wilderness Alpine Lakes Boulder River Brothers Buckhorn Clearwater Colonel Bob Daniel J. Evans Glacier Peak Glacier View Goat Rocks Henry M. Jackson Indian Heaven Juniper Dunes Lake Chelan-Sawtooth Ridge Mount Adams Mount Baker Mount Rainier Mount Skokomish Noisy-Diobsud Norse Peak Pasayten Salmo-Priest San Juan Stephen Mather Tatoosh Trapper Creek Washington Islands Wenaha–Tucannon Wild Sky William O. Douglas Wonder Mountain National Marine Sanctuary & Estuarine Research Reserve Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary Padilla Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve National Wild and Scenic Rivers Illabot Klickitat Pratt Snoqualmie Skagit White Salmon State State Parks Alta Lake Anderson Lake Battle Ground Lake Bay View Beacon Rock Belfair Birch Bay Blake Island Blind Island Bogachiel Bottle Beach Bridgeport Bridle Trails Brooks Memorial Cama Beach Camano Island Camp Wooten Retreat Center Cape Disappointment Centennial Trail Clark Island Columbia Hills Columbia Plateau Trail Conconully Crawford Curlew Lake Cutts Island Daroga Dash Point Deception Pass Doe Island Dosewallips Doug's Beach Eagle Island Federation Forest Fields Spring Flaming Geyser Forks of the Sky Fort Casey Fort Columbia Fort Ebey Fort Flagler Fort Simcoe Fort Townsend Fort Worden Ginkgo Petrified Forest Goldendale Observatory Grayland Beach Griffiths-Priday Ocean Harstine Island Hope Island (Mason County) Hope Island (Skagit County) Ike Kinswa Illahee Iron Horse James Island Jarrell Cove Joemma Beach Jones Island Joseph Whidbey Kanaskat-Palmer Kinney Point Kitsap Memorial Kopachuck Lake Chelan Lake Easton Lake Lenore Caves Lake Sammamish Lake Sylvia Lake Wenatchee Larrabee Leadbetter Point Lewis and Clark Lewis and Clark Trail Lime Kiln Point Lincoln Rock Manchester Maryhill Matia Island McMicken Island Millersylvania Moran Mount Pilchuck Mount Spokane Mystery Bay Nine Mile Recreation Area Nolte Obstruction Pass Ocean City Olallie Olmstead Place Pacific Beach Pacific Pines Palouse Falls Paradise Point Patos Island Peace Arch Pearrygin Lake Penrose Point Peshastin Pinnacles Pleasant Harbor Posey Island Potholes Potlatch Rainbow Falls Rasar Reed Island Riverside Rockport Sacajawea Saddlebag Island Saint Edward Saltwater Scenic Beach Schafer Seaquest Sequim Bay Shine Tidelands Skagit Island Skull Island South Whidbey Island Spencer Spit Spring Creek Hatchery Squak Mountain Squilchuck Steamboat Rock Steptoe Battlefield Steptoe Butte Stretch Point Stuart Island Sucia Island Sun Lakes-Dry Falls Tolmie Triton Cove Turn Island Twanoh Twenty-Five Mile Creek Twin Harbors Wallace Falls Wanapum Recreational Area Wenatchee Confluence Westport Light Yakima Sportsman State Forests Ahtanum Capitol Elbe Hills Green Mountain Loomis Loup Loup Tahuya Tiger Mountain Yacolt Burn Natural Area Preserves Admiralty Inlet Badger Gulch Bald Hill Barker Mountain Bone River Camas Meadows Carlisle Bog Castle Rock Charley Creek Chehalis River Surge Plain Chopaka Mountain Clearwater Bogs Cleveland Shrub Steppe Columbia Falls Columbia Hills Cypress Highlands Dabob Bay Dailey Prairie Davis Canyon Entiat Slopes Goose Island Gunpowder Island Hamma Hamma Balds Ink Blot Kahlotus Ridgetop Kennedy Creek Kings Lake Bog Kitsap Forest Lacamas Prairie Natural Area Little Pend Oreille River Marcellus Shrub Steppe Methow Rapids Mima Mounds Monte Cristo Niawiakum River North Bay Oak Patch Olivine Bridge Pinecroft Point Doughty Riverside Breaks Rocky Prairie Sand Island Schumacher Creek Selah Cliffs Skagit Bald Eagle Skookum Inlet Snoqualmie Bog Spring Creek Canyon Trout Lake The Two-Steppe Upper Dry Gulch Washougal Oaks Natural Area Whitcomb Flats Willapa Divide Natural Resources Conservation Areas Cattle Point Clearwater Corridor Cypress Island Devils Lake Dishman Hills Elk River Ellsworth Creek Granite Lakes Hat Island Hendrickson Canyon Klickitat Canyon Lake Louise Loomis Lummi Island Merrill Lake Middle Fork Snoqualmie Morning Star Mount Si Rattlesnake Mountain Scenic Area Shipwreck Point South Nemah South Nolan Stavis Table Mountain Tahoma Forest Teal Slough Washougal Oaks Natural Area West Tiger Mountain White Salmon Oak Woodard Bay Aquatic Reserves Cherry Point Cypress Island Fidalgo Bay Maury Island Nisqually Reach Protection Island Smith and Minor Islands Other Former state parks Damon Point Fay Bainbridge Fort Okanogan Fort Ward Park Griffin Bay Lyons Ferry Park Mukilteo Lighthouse Park Osoyoos Lake Veteran's Memorial Park Upright Channel Wenberg Westhaven Blanchard Forest Cascadia Marine Trail The Enchantments Goose Island Les Hilde Trail & Trailheads Little Pend Oreille Mount Adams Recreation Area Sehome Hill Arboretum Walker Valley ORV Riding Area Withrow Moraine Yellow Island Category Seattle Washington State Parks and Recreation Commission Commons v t e National Forests of the United States Allegheny Angeles Angelina Apache–Sitgreaves Apalachicola Arapaho Ashley Beaverhead–Deerlodge Bienville Bighorn Bitterroot Black Hills Boise Bridger–Teton Caribou–Targhee Carson Chattahoochee–Oconee Chequamegon–Nicolet Cherokee Chippewa Choctawhatchee Chugach Cibola Clearwater Cleveland Coeur d'Alene Coconino Colville Conecuh Coronado Croatan Custer Daniel Boone Davy Crockett De Soto Delta Deschutes Dixie Eldorado Finger Lakes Fishlake Flathead Francis Marion Fremont–Winema Gallatin George Washington and Jefferson Gifford Pinchot Gila Grand Mesa Green Mountain Gunnison Helena Hiawatha Holly Springs Homochitto Hoosier Humboldt–Toiyabe Huron–Manistee Idaho Panhandle Inyo Kaibab Kaniksu Kisatchie Klamath Kootenai Lake Tahoe Basin Lassen Lewis and Clark Lincoln Lolo Los Padres Malheur Manti–La Sal Mark Twain Medicine Bow–Routt Mendocino Modoc Monongahela Mount Baker–Snoqualmie Mount Hood Nantahala Nebraska Nez Perce Ocala Osceola Ochoco Okanogan Olympic Ottawa Ouachita Ozark–St. Francis Payette Pike Pisgah Plumas Prescott Rio Grande Rogue River–Siskiyou Roosevelt San Bernardino San Isabel San Juan Sabine Salmon–Challis Sam Houston Samuel R. McKelvie Santa Fe Sawtooth Sequoia Shasta–Trinity Shawnee Shoshone Sierra Siuslaw Six Rivers St. Joe Stanislaus Sumter Superior Tahoe Tombigbee Tongass Tonto Talladega Tuskegee Uinta Umatilla Umpqua Uncompahgre Uwharrie Wallowa–Whitman Wasatch–Cache Wayne Wenatchee White Mountain White River Willamette William B. Bankhead Full Detailed List former list