Belt, esp. as a liturgical vestment For other uses, see API (disambiguation). A Christian (Anglican) priest wearing a white girdle around his waist to hold his alb and stole in place. A belt, especially if a cord or rope, is called a girdle if it is worn as part of Christian liturgical vestments, or in certain historical, literary or sports contexts. Girdles are used to close a cassock in Christian denominations, including the Anglican Communion, Catholic Church, Methodist Church and Lutheran Church.[1] The girdle, in the 8th or 9th century, was said to resemble an ancient Levitical Jewish vestment, and in that era, was not visible. In 800 AD, the girdle began to be worn by Christian deacons in the Eastern Church.[2] The girdle, for men, symbolizes preparation and readiness to serve, and for women, represents chastity and protection;[3] it was also worn by laypersons in the Middle Ages, as attested in literature. For example, the hagiographical account of Saint George and the Dragon mentions the evildoer being tamed with the sign of the cross and a girdle handed to Saint George by a virgin.[4] Contents 1 History 2 Vestment and iconography 2.1 Christian usage 2.2 In Judaism 2.3 Indian religions 3 Girdle in literature 4 Sports 5 See also 6 References History[edit] Grecian style tunic wrapped with a taenia (ribbon) girdle. The men among the Greeks and Romans wore the girdle upon the loins, and it served them to confine the tunic, and hold the purse, instead of pockets, which were unknown; girls and women wore it under the bosom. The Strophium, Taenia, or Mitra occurs in many figures. In the small bronze Pallas of the Villa Albani, and in figures on the Hamilton Vases, are three cordons with a knot, detached from two ends of the girdle, which is fixed under the bosom. This girdle forms under the breast a knot of ribbon, sometimes in the form of a rose, as occur on the two handsomest daughters of Niobe. Upon the youngest the ends of the girdle pass over the shoulders, and upon the back, as they do upon four Caryatides found at Monte Portio. This part of the dress the ancients called, at least in the time of Isidore, Succinctorium or Bracile. The girdle was omitted by both sexes in mourning. Often when the tunic was very long, and would otherwise be entangled by the feet, it was drawn over the girdle in such a way as to conceal the latter entirely underneath its folds. It is not uncommon to see two girdles of different widths worn together, one very high up, the other very low down, so as to form between the two in the tunic, a puckered interval; but this fashion was mostly applied to short tunics. The tunic of the Greek males was almost always confined by a girdle. Girdles of iron, to prevent obesity, were worn by some of the Britons. From the Druidical eras the cure of diseases, especially those of difficult parturition, were ascribed to wearing certain girdles. Among the Anglo-Saxons, it was used by both sexes; by the men to confine their tunic, and support the sword. We find it richly embroidered, and of white leather. The leather strap was chiefly worn by monks.[5] Vestment and iconography[edit] Christian usage[edit] In Catholic belief, the Girdle of Thomas is said to be handed down by the Virgin Mary during her Assumption Further information: Cincture and Zone (vestment) As a Christian liturgical vestment, the girdle is a long, rope-like cord tied around the waist over the alb or cassock. The Parson's Handbook describes the girdle as being made "generally of white linen rope, and may have a tassel at each end. About 12 ft. 6 in. long is a very convenient size if it is used double, one end being then turned into a noose and the tasselled ends slipped through. The girdle, however, may be coloured."[6] Christian monastics would often hang religious texts, such as the Bible or Breviary, from their girdles and these became known as girdle books. In addition, they would often knot the ends of the girdle thrice, in order to represent the "vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience."[3] As such, within the Christian Church, the girdle, in some contexts, represents chastity and within the Hebrew Bible, "Proverbs 31 provides biblical reference to the ancient practice of girdle making by virtuous chaste women".[7] In the New Testament, "Christ referred to the girdle as a symbol of preparation and readiness for service (Luke 12:35–38)":[3] Be dressed ready for service and keep your lamps burning, like servants waiting for their master to return from a wedding banquet, so that when he comes and knocks they can immediately open the door for him. It will be good for those servants whose master finds them watching when he comes. Truly I tell you, he will dress himself to serve, will have them recline at the table and will come and wait on them. It will be good for those servants whose master finds them ready, even if he comes in the middle of the night or toward daybreak. Saint Paul, in Ephesians 6:14 also references the term, stating "Stand therefore, first fastening round you the girdle of truth and putting on the breastplate of uprightness", further buttressing the concept of the girdle as a symbol of readiness.[8] Many Christian clergy, such as Anglican priests and Methodist ministers, use the following prayer when wearing the girdle: Gird me, O Lord, with the girdle of purity, and quench in me the fire of concupiscence that the grace of temperance and chastity may abide in me.[3] By the 8th century AD, the girdle became established as a liturgical vestment "in the strict sense of the word."[9] Although the general word "cincture" is sometimes used as a synonym for the girdle, liturgical manuals distinguish between the two, as the "girdle is a long cord or rope while the cincture is a wide sash. Generally an alb is closed with a girdle, an Anglican-style double-breasted cassock is closed with a cincture, and a Roman cassock is closed with either one."[1] In Judaism[edit] A gartel is a belt worn by Jewish males, predominantly (but not exclusively) Hasidim, during prayer. "Gartel" is Yiddish for "belt" and is cognate with the English word "girdle". Gartels are generally very modest in appearance. Most are black, but some gartels are white. Hasidic custom requires that there be a physical divide between the heart and the genitalia during any mention of God's name. It is commonly explained that separating the upper and lower parts of the body manifests a control of the animal instincts of the person by the distinctly human intellect. Indian religions[edit] In the Vajrayana iconography of the Hevajra Tantra, the 'girdle' (Tib.: ske rags), one of the 'Five Bone Ornaments' (aṣṭhiamudrā) symbolizes Amoghasiddhi and the 'accomplishing pristine awareness' (Kṛty-anuṣṭhāna-jñāna), one of the 'Five Wisdoms' (pañca-jñāna).[10] The iconography of the girdle (or bone apron and belt [11]) in Vajrayana iconography developed from one of the items of vestment adorning the Mahasiddha of the charnel grounds. Beer (1999: p. 318) describes the bone girdle as the 'netted bone apron and belt' as vesture of the Dakinis and Heruka of the Cham Dance and Gar Dance of Tibetan Buddhism sacred ritual dance performances: The bone ornaments worn in these ritual dances are exquisitely carved – especially the netted bone apron and belt, which are commonly adorned with intricately carved images of dakinis.[11] Girdle in literature[edit] The Lady of Shalott, with a medieval girdle around her waist (John William Waterhouse, 1888) In literature, girdles are often portrayed as magical, giving power and strength if worn by men, and protection if worn by women. Several scriptures in the Bible make use of the girdle as a symbol for readiness and preparation. Ishtar, a Babylonian goddess, wore a fertility girdle, which, when it was removed, rendered the universe barren. Hercules wrestled with the Amazon queen for her girdle in his Greek myth. Aphrodite, or Venus in Roman mythology, also wore girdles associated with lechery in later poetry.[12] For men a girdle was often used to hold weapons. It also gave them freedom to move in a fight, unlike other types of clothing. Both of these are thought to carry the connection of power to the man's girdle in literature. For example, Odysseus wears a girdle which allows him to swim for three days straight, and a girdle worn by Thor doubles his strength.[12] Later, for women, the girdle became a sign of virginity, and was often considered to have magical properties. Monsters and all types of evil are recorded as being subdued by girdles in literature, a famous one being the dragon slain by Saint George. Marriage ceremonies continued this tradition of girdles symbolizing virginity by having the husband take the wife's girdle, and prostitutes were forbidden to wear them by law in historic France. Often in literature, women are portrayed as safe from sexual or other attack when wearing a girdle, but suddenly vulnerable if it is missing or stolen.[12] Non-clothing uses in literature include Tolkien's "Girdle of Melian", a magical, protective "wall" surrounding an elven kingdom. The 20th century women's girdle attracts various references in literature, often in a disparaging way. For example, Marilyn French in her classic book, The Women's Room, is very critical not only of the girdle itself, but also of the virtual compulsion to wear one, a compulsion which existed until the late 1960s. In John Masters's Bhowani Junction, once the mixed-race Victoria Jones decides to opt for an Indian rather than British persona, she rejects her girdle as a "western garment". For information on the girdle as a modern undergarment, see Girdle (undergarment) Sports[edit] In American football, a girdle is worn under the football player's pants to keep the hip, thigh, and tailbone pads in place, making the process of putting on the tight football pants easier. Older girdles resembled chaps, in that they covered only the front of the leg with pads, that snapped on. Modern girdles are essentially a tight pair of compression shorts with pockets for the pads. The girdle was also used in the Mesoamerican ballgame and is used in hockey (National Hockey League). See also[edit] Christianity portal Catholicism portal Methodism portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Girdle. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Confraternities of the Cord Girdle of Thomas Girdle book List of animals referred to as girdled References[edit] ^ a b Moore, Stephen E. (1996). Church Words: Origins and Meanings. Forward Movement Publications. p. 53. ISBN 9780880281720. Generally an alb is closed with a girdle, an Anglican-style double-breasted cassock is closed with a cincture, and a Roman cassock is closed with either one. ^ Marriot, Wharton Booth (1868). Vestiarium Christianum; the Origin and Gradual Development of the Dress of Holy Ministry in the Church. Rivingtons. p. 213. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Till, in the eighth or ninth century, the idea of an intended resemblance in detail between the Christian and Levitical vestments was first broached, the Girdle, naturally was either not worn at all (with the tunica talaris it was not necessary), or, when worn, was not visible, and was thought of only as a matter of convenience. In none of the early monuments of the West before A.D. 800, is any trace of it to be seen. But in the East we have mention of a Girdle as worn by deacons, early in the eighth century. ^ a b c d Moore, Stephen E. (1996). Church Words: Origins and Meanings. Forward Movement Publications. p. 54. ISBN 9780880281720. Christ referred to the girdle as a symbol of preparation and readiness for service (Luke 12:35-38). St. Paul referred to it as a symbol of truth (Ephesians 6:14). The girdle of the monastic habit, knotted three times at the ends, symbolizes the three vows of poverty, chastity and obedience. The girdle became a Christian symbol of chastity, possibly derived from the ancient Jewish custom of women wearing ornate girdles symbolic of their virtue (Proverbs 31). Some traditional clergy still use an old vesting prayer when putting on the girdle which says, "Gird me, O Lord, with the girdle of purity, and quench in me the fire of concupiscence that the grace of temperance and chastity may abide in me." ^ Indick, William (18 May 2012). Ancient Symbology in Fantasy Literature: A Psychological Study. McFarland. p. 124. ISBN 9780786492336. The hero uses the power of Christianity, the Sign of the Cross, to wound the dragon. Then, in an interesting twist, he calls to the virgin to toss her girdle round the dragon's neck. Upon being leashed by the virgin's girdle, the once impressible dragon is tamed. It follows the princess like a meek puppy-dog. St. George and the princess lead the dragon back to the village where it terrifies the townspeople. St. George promises to slay the beast, but only if the townspeople convert to Christianity, which they quickly do. ^ Rev. Thomas D. Fosbroke (1843). Encyclopaedia of Antiquities and Elements of Archaeology, Volume 2. London: M. A. Nattali. p. 942. ^ Dearmer, Percy (1907). The Parson's Handbook. Oxford University Press. p. 141. Retrieved 17 June 2015. ^ Bershad, David; Mangone, Caroline (27 December 2011). The Christian Travelers Guide to Italy. Zondervan. ISBN 9780310315759. ^ Pink, Arthur W. (1 January 2013). Practical Christianity. Prisbrary. p. 281. ISBN 9788997762446. ^ Smith, Sir William; Cheetham, Samuel (1880). Dictionary of Christian Antiquitics. J.B. Burr Publishing Company. p. 728. Retrieved 17 June 2015. It has been said that it was not till the 8th century that we meet with the girdle as an ecclesiastical vestment in the strict sense of the word. ^ Kongtrul, Jamgön (author); (English translators: Guarisco, Elio; McLeod, Ingrid) (2005). The Treasury of Knowledge (shes bya kun la khyab pa’i mdzod). Book Six, Part Four: Systems of Buddhist Tantra, The Indestructibe Way of Secret Mantra. Bolder, Colorado, USA: Snow Lion Publications. ISBN 1-55939-210-X (alk.paper) p.493 ^ a b Beer, Robert (1999). The Encyclopedia of Tibetan Symbols and Motifs. Shambhala. ISBN 1-57062-416-X. Source: [1] (accessed: December 28, 2008) p.318 ^ a b c Friedman, Albert B., and Richard H. Osberg. "Gawain's Girdle as Traditional Symbol." The Journal of American Folklore 90.357 (1977): 301-15. v t e Order of the Divine Service in Lutheranism Preparatory Service Entrance hymn and Trinitarian formula (known as the Invocation) Penitential Act including the Confiteor and Declaration of Grace (or Asperges on Easter) The Service of the Word Introit Gloria Patri Kýrie Gloria Dominus vobiscum Oremus Collect Old Testament reading gradual (or Responsorial Psalm) Epistle Alleluia (tract during Lent) Gospel Hymn of the day Homily or Postil (Sermon) Nicene Creed (Athanasian Creed on Trinity Sunday) Offertory Prayers of the Faithful The Service of the Eucharist Preface (Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna) Eucharistic Prayer (Epiclesis / Words of Institution / Memorial Acclamation) Lord's Prayer Sign of peace / pax (elevation) Agnus Dei Distribution Nunc dimittis Postcommunion Benedicamus Domino Benediction Dismissal Ite, missa est Participants Acolyte bishop cantor choir crucifer deacon elder laity lector Pastor (or Priest) usher Parts of the Sanctuary altar altar bell altar crucifix altar rails kneeler piscina processional cross tabernacle Candles altar candle paschal candle sanctuary lamp votive candle Liturgical vessels ciborium chalice cruet Liturgical objects collection basket holy water incense (use) paten sacramental bread (wafer) sacramental wine thurible Vestments alb chasuble dalmatic geneva gown humeral veil stole surplice tunicle Liturgical books and hymnals Christian Worship (1993) Common Service Book (1917) Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book (1912) Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary (1996) Evangelical Lutheran Worship (2006) Lutheran Book of Worship (1978) The Lutheran Hymnal (1941) Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement (1989) Lutheran Service Book (2006) Lutheran Worship (1982) ReClaim Hymnal (2006) Service Book and Hymnal (1958) v t e Mass of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church Forms Pre-Tridentine Mass Tridentine Mass Extraordinary Form Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary Form) Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Types Low Mass Missa Cantata Solemn Mass Pontifical High Mass Papal Mass sine populo Votive Mass Ritual Masses Blue Mass Chapter and Conventual Mass Coronation Mass Gold Mass Nuptial Mass Red Mass Rose Mass Requiem Mass Month's mind White Mass Order of Mass Pre-Mass Vesting prayers Asperges me Vidi aquam in Eastertide Processional hymn Liturgy of the Word Sign of the Cross Psalm 43 Entrance Antiphon Penitential Act Confiteor / Kyrie Gloria Dominus vobiscum Collect Oremus Responsorial Psalm or Gradual Epistle Alleluia Tract / sequence Gospel Homily Credo Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed or Apostles' Creed Universal Prayer Liturgy of the Eucharist Offertory Orate fratres / prayer over the gifts Preface Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna Eucharistic Prayer/Canon of the Mass oblation / epiclesis / Words of Institution / elevation / anamnesis texts and rubrics Roman Canon history Memorial Acclamation Lord's Prayer embolism / doxology Pax Sign of peace Agnus Dei Dona nobis pacem Fraction Holy Communion Communion antiphon Ablutions Postcommunion Dismissal Ite, missa est / Benedicamus Domino Last Gospel Post-Mass Leonine Prayers Recessional hymn Participants Acolyte Altar server female Bishop Boat boy Cantor Choir Crucifer Deacon Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion Laity Eucharistic Congress Lector Porter Priest Subdeacon Usher Altar Altar crucifix Altar rails Ambo Antependium Candles Altar candle Altar candlestick Paschal candle Sanctuary lamp Triple candlestick Chalice veil Communion bench Corporal Credence table Kneeler Lavabo Misericord Pall Piscina Purificator Rood Tabernacle Liturgical objects Altar bell Ashes Aspergillum Censer Chalice Ciborium Collection basket Communion-plate Cruet Evangeliary Fistula Flabellum Funghellino Holy water Incense use Manuterge Paten Processional cross Pyx Sacramental bread wafer Sacramental wine (or must) Thurible Liturgical books Ceremonial of Bishops Roman Gradual Graduale Simplex Roman Missal Sacramentary and Lectionary Tonary Vestments Alb Amice Chasuble Dalmatic Episcopal sandals Humeral veil Pallium Pontifical Stole Surplice Tunicle Vimpa Liturgical year Calendars Tridentine Calendar General Roman Calendar of 1954 General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII General Roman Calendar of 1960 General Roman Calendar (current) Periods Advent Christmastide Ordinary Time Septuagesima Lent Passiontide Holy Week Paschal Triduum Eastertide Ascensiontide Eucharistic discipline Abstemius Concelebration Church etiquette Closed communion Canon 844 Canon 915 Communion and the developmentally disabled Communion under both kinds Eucharistic fast First Communion Frequent Communion Genuflection Headcover Host desecration Infant communion Intinction Reserved sacrament Sacramental bread and wine (or must) Spiritual Communion Thanksgiving after Communion Anima Christi Viaticum Eucharistic theology Body and Blood of Christ Corpus Christi (feast) Epiousios Grace ex opere operato In persona Christi Historical roots of Catholic Eucharistic theology Koinonia Liturgical colours Mirae caritatis Mysterium fidei (encyclical) Origin of the Eucharist Last Supper Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature Priesthood of Melchizedek Real presence Transubstantiation Year of the Eucharist Regulations and concepts Accentus Ad orientem and versus populum Calendar of saints Canon law Code of Rubrics Commemoration Ecclesiastical Latin General Instruction of the Roman Missal Holy day of obligation Intercession of saints Ordinary and Propers Pro multis Sunday Lord's Day Vernacular Related Agape feast Anaphora of the Apostolic Tradition Anglican Use Ambrosian rite Catholic theology Christian liturgy Catholic Christian prayer effects of prayer Congregation for Divine Worship Council of Trent Ecclesia de Eucharistia Eucharistic adoration and benediction Dominicae Cenae / Holy Hour Eucharistic miracle Fermentum Fourth Council of the Lateran Gelineau psalmody Gregorian chant History of the Roman Canon Lex orandi, lex credendi Latin Mass Liturgical Movement Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII Mediator Dei Missale Romanum (apostolic constitution) Music Pope Paul VI Sacraments of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Sacrosanctum concilium Summorum Pontificum Stercoranism Tra le sollecitudini v t e Corsets and corsetmaking Types of corset Basque Corsage Corselet Girdle Waist cincher Corsetmaking Bone (corsetry) Busk Spoon busk History Corset controversy Metal corset Hourglass corset Roxey Ann Caplin Corset fetishism Body modification Bondage corset Neck corset Tightlacing Training corset Wasp waist Corset manufacturers Baystate Frederick's of Hollywood Kraus Spirella Strouse, Adler Vollers The Warner Brothers Corset Co. Worcester Categories Corsetry Fashion Foundation garments v t e Lingerie Upper torso Types of bras History Bandeau Bralette Nursing bra Sports bra Training bra Underwire bra Male bra Other garments Babydoll Bustier Camisole Dudou Negligee Torsolette Yếm Lower torso Bikini Boyshorts French knickers Girdle Girl boxers Panties Tanga Tap pants Thong (G-string) Full torso Bodice Corset Corselet Foundation garment Nightshirt Playsuit Slip Teddy Hosiery Garter Knee highs Pantyhose Stocking Historical Basque Boudoir cap Bustle Chemise Crinoline Farthingale Hoop skirt Liberty bodice Pannier Pantalettes Petticoat Pettipants Waist cincher Accessories Falsies Lingerie tape Brands List of lingerie brands Retail Brastop Cosmo Lady Figleaves HerRoom Journelle True & Co. Related Corset controversy Bralessness Lingerie party UK Lingerie Awards