Mythical creature For other uses, see API (disambiguation). This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. Please help to clean it up to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (April 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Goblin illustration by John D. Batten from "English Fairy Tales" (19th century) A goblin is a monstrous creature that appears in the folklore of multiple European cultures, first attested in stories from the Middle Ages. They are ascribed various and conflicting abilities, temperaments and appearances depending on the story and country of origin. They are almost always small and grotesque, mischievous or outright malicious, and greedy, especially for gold and jewelry. They often have magical abilities similar to a fairy or demon. Similar creatures include brownies, dwarfs, duendes, gnomes, imps, and kobolds. Contents 1 Name 2 Goblins in folklore 2.1 European folklore and collected folk stories 2.2 Goblin-like creatures in other cultures 3 Goblins in modern fiction 4 Goblin-related place names 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Name[edit] Alternative spellings include gobblin, gobeline, gobling, goblyn, goblino, and gobbelin. English goblin is first recorded in the 14th century and is probably from unattested Anglo-Norman *gobelin,[1] similar to Old French gobelin, already attested around 1195 in Ambroise of Normandy's Guerre sainte, and to Medieval Latin gobelinus in Orderic Vitalis before 1141,[2][3] which was the name of a devil or daemon haunting the country around Évreux, Normandy. It may be related both to German kobold and to Medieval Latin cabalus - or *gobalus, itself from Greek κόβαλος (kobalos), "rogue", "knave", "imp", "goblin".[2][4] Alternatively, it may be a diminutive or other derivative of the French proper name Gobel, more often Gobeau,[5][6] diminutive forms Gobelet, Goblin, Goblot, but their signification is probably "somebody who sells tumblers or beakers or cups".[7] Moreover, these proper names are not from Normandy, where the word gobelin, gobelinus first appears in the old documents. German Kobold contains the Germanic root kov- (Middle German Kobe "refuge, cavity", "hollow in a rock", Dial. English cove "hollow in a rock", English "sheltered recess on a coast", Old Norse kofi "hut, shed" ) which means originally a "hollow in the earth".[8][9] The word is probably related to Dial. Norman gobe "hollow in a cliff", with simple suffix -lin or double suffixation -el-in (cf. Norman surnames Beuzelin,[10] Gosselin,[11] Étancelin,[12] etc.) The Welsh coblyn, a type of knocker, derives from the Old French gobelin via the English goblin.[13][14] The term goblette has been used to refer to female goblins.[15][16] Goblins in folklore[edit] The Princess and the Goblin by George MacDonald, illustrated by Jessie Willcox Smith, 1920 From The Princess and the Goblin by George MacDonald, illustrated by Jessie Willcox Smith, 1920 European folklore and collected folk stories[edit] A redcap is a type of goblin who dyes its hat in human blood in Anglo-Scottish border folklore. Hobgoblins are friendly trickster goblins from English, Scottish, and Pilgrim folklore and literature. The Benevolent Goblin, from Gesta Romanorum (England)[17] The Erlking is a malevolent goblin from German legend. The Trasgu is a Northern Spanish and Northern Portuguese mythological creature of Celtic and Roman origin. "The Goblin Pony", from The Grey Fairy Book (French fairy tale) "The Goblins at the Bath House" (Estonia), from A Book of Ghosts and Goblins (1969) "The Goblins Turned to Stone" (Dutch fairy tale).[18] King Gobb (Moldovan Gypsy folktale) Goblins are featured in the Danish fairy tales:The Elf Mound, The Goblin and the Grocer, and The Goblin and the Woman. Goblins are featured in the Norwegian folktale The Christmas Visitors at Kvame. Goblins are featured in the Swedish fairy tales The Four big Trolls and little Peter Pastureman, and Dag, and Daga and the Flying Troll of Sky Mountain where they alongside sprites and gnomes live among trolls. Goblins are Featured in the French fairy tale called The Golden Branch. Goblins are featured in English, Scottish, and Irish Folklore where they are described as roaming around in marauding bands that pillage farms and villages, commune with the dead (especially on Halloween), and sell goblin fruits Goblin-like creatures in other cultures[edit] A pukwudgie is a type of goblin from Wamponoag folklore as well as Cryptozoology The Muki (mythology) is a pale goblin who lives in caves in the Andes in Quechuan folklore. Many Asian lagyt creatures have been likened to, or translated as, goblins. Some examples for these: Chinese Ghouls and Goblins (England 1928) The Goblin of Adachigahara (Japanese fairy tale)[19] The Goblin Rat, from The Boy Who Drew Cats (Japanese fairy tale) Twenty-Two Goblins (Indian fairy tale)[20] In South Korea, goblins, known as dokkaebi (도깨비), are important creatures in folklore. They usually appear in children's books.[citation needed] The nursery song 'Mountain Goblin(산도깨비)' tells of meeting a goblin and running away to live. In Bangladesh, Santal people believe in gudrobonga which is very similar to goblins. Other Goblins had been identified with creatures from another culture: Goblins sometimes became identified with jinn in Islamic culture.[21] Goblins in modern fiction[edit] Representation of a goblin as it appears in the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons Goblinoids are a category of humanoid legendary creatures related to the goblin. The term was popularized in the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game,[22] in which goblins and related creatures are a staple of random encounters. Goblinoids are typically barbaric foes of the various human and "demi-human" races. Even though goblinoids in modern fantasy fiction are derived from J. R. R. Tolkien's orcs, in his Middle-earth "orc" and "goblin" were names for the same race of creatures. The main types of goblinoids in Dungeons & Dragons are goblins, bugbears and hobgoblins; these creatures are also figures of mythology, next to ordinary goblins. In the Harry Potter book series and the shared universe in which its film adaptations are set, goblins are depicted as strange, but civilised, humanoids, who often serve as bankers or craftsmen. The Green Goblin is a well-known supervillain who has various abilities like enhanced stamina, durability, agility, reflexes and superhuman strength due to ingesting a substance known as the "Goblin Formula". He has appeared in various Spider-Man related media, such as comics and films, including Spider-Man (2002) as Norman Osborn, and Spider-Man 3 (2007) and The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (2014) as Harry Osborn. The early Smurfs were called goblins.[23] Goblin-related place names[edit] 'The Gap of Goeblin', a hole and tunnel in Mortain, France.[24] Goblin Combe, in north Somerset, UK Goblin Valley State Park, Utah, U.S. Goblin Crescent, Bryndwr, Christchurch, New Zealand Yester Castle (also known as "Goblin Hall") East Lothian, Scotland Goblin Bay, Beausoleil Island, Ontario, Canada Cowcaddens and Cowlairs, Glasgow, Scotland. 'Cow' is an old Scots word for Goblin, while 'cad' means 'nasty'. 'Dens' and 'lairs' refers to goblin homes.[25] 541132 Leleākūhonua (then known as 2015 TG387) is a minor planet in the outer solar system nicknamed "The Goblin" See also[edit] Lutin Púca Puck (folklore) Wirry-cow References[edit] ^ T. F. Hoad, English Etymology, Oxford University Press, p. 196b. ^ a b CNRTL etymology of gobelin (online French) ^ Du Cange et al, Glossarium mediae et infimae latinitatis ...(online French and Latin) [1] ^ κόβαλος, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus ^ Harper, Douglas. "Goblin". The Online Etymological Dictionary. Retrieved 2011-12-20. ^ HOAD, p. 196b. ^ Albert Dauzat, Noms et prénoms de France, Librairie Larousse 1980, édition revue et commentée par Marie-Thérèse Morlet. p. 295b Gobel. ^ Duden, Herkunftswörterbuch : Etymologie der deutschen Sprache, Band 7, Dudenverlag, p. 359 : Kobel, koben, Kobold. ^ HOAD, p. 101b. ^ Géopatronyme : surname Beuzelin in France (online French) ^ Géopatronyme : surname Gosselin in France (online French) Gosselin ^ Géopatronyme : surname Étancelin in France (online French) ^ Franklin, Anna (2002). "Goblin", The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Fairies. London: Paper Tiger. ISBN 1-84340-240-8. p. 108 ^ The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English ^ Anthony, Piers (1992). The Color of Her Panties. You can't move me out, you skirted goblette. ^ Porter, Jesse (28 September 2015). "Goblin". The Adventures of Puss in Boots. Episode 12. My dear, dear goblette, there is really nothing to it. ^ Apples4theTeacher - short stories ^ Dutch Fairy Tales for Young Folks, 1918, compiled by William Elliot Griffis ^ Rick Walton - folktale ^ Sacred texts ^ Sally M. Promey Sensational Religion: Sensory Cultures in Material Practice Yale University Press, 2014 ISBN 9780300187359 pp. 99–100 ^ Weinstock, Jeffrey (2014). The Ashgate Encyclopedia of Literary and Cinematic Monsters. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 9781409425625. ^ "9780854081530 - Dilly Duckling and the Goblins by Peyo; Matagne". www.biblio.com. Retrieved 2019-12-22. ^ Ghosts, Goblins, and Haunted Castles, Aventinum Publishers, 1990 in English, page 51 ^ Glasgow Street Names, Carol Foreman, Birlinn, 2007, page 58. Further reading[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Wikisource has original text related to this article: API Wikimedia Commons has media related to Goblins. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Briggs, K. M. (2003). The Anatomy of Puck. London: Routledge. Briggs, K. M. (1967). The Fairies in English Literature and Tradition. Chicago: Chicago University Press. Briggs, K. M. (1978). The Vanishing People. London: B.T. Batsford. Carryl, Charles E. (1884). Davy And The Goblin. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Dubois, Pierre (2005). The Complete Encyclopedia of Elves, Goblins, and Other Little Creatures. New York: Abbeville Press. ISBN 0-789-20878-4. Froud, Brian (1996). The Goblin Companion. Atlanta: Turner. Froud, Brian (1983). Goblins!. New York: Macmillan. Page, Michael and Robert Ingpen (1987). British Goblins: Encyclopedia of Things That Never Were. New York: Viking. Purkiss, Diane (2001). At the Bottom of the Garden. New York: New York University Press. Rose, Carol (1996). Spirits, Fairies, Gnomes and Goblins: an Encyclopedia of the Little People. Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. Sikes, Wirt (1973). British Goblins: Welsh Folk-lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends and Traditions. Wakefield: EP Pub. Silver, Carole G. (1999). Strange and Secret Peoples. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Zanger, Jules (1997). "Goblins, Morlocks, and Weasels". Children's Literature in Education. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 8: 154–162. v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Changeling Fairy godmother Fairy-locks Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale Familiar Household deity Hungry grass Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Notable royal fairies Aibell Clíodhna Fairy Queen Finvarra Gwyn ap Nudd Joan the Wad Morgan le Fay Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Oberon Queen of Elphame Sebile Titania Attested fairies A-E Adhene Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clurichaun Coblynau Cyhyraeth Dames blanches Drow Duende Duergar Dullahan Each-uisge Elf Enchanted Moura F-L Fachan Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Hulder Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Korrigan Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Ly Erg M-Z Mare Meg Mullach Melusine Mermaid Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Nain Rouge Nicnevin Nuckelavee Peg Powler Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Radande Redcap Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Tomte Tooth fairy Troll Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Little people Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Canotila Chaneque Curupira Encantado Ishigaq Jogah Menehune Nawao Nimerigar Nûñnë'hï Pukwudgie Saci Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Irshi Jinn Kijimuna Kodama Korpokkur Oni Orang bunian Peri Tengu Tennin Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Mimis Muldjewangk Patupaiarehe Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Celtic Tuatha Dé Danann Germanic Alberich Dwarf Elegast Erlking Hodekin Hinzelmann Imp King Goldemar Weiße Frauen Greek Dryad Hamadryad Kallikantzaros Lampad Naiad Nereid Nymph Oceanid Oread Potamides Romanic Căpcăun Doñas de fuera Iele Sânziană Spiriduș Squasc Vâlvă Vântoase Xana Zână Slavic Bagiennik & Bannik Berehynia Domovoi Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Likho Polevik Psotnik Rusalka Vila Vodyanoy Cross-cultural Goblin Early & late modern Gnome Gremlin See also Category List of beings referred to as fairies v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125