MonsterVerse character For other uses, see Godzilla (disambiguation). Godzilla MonsterVerse character Chinese textless poster for Godzilla vs. Kong First appearance Godzilla (2014) Last appearance Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) Based on Godzilla by Toho Adapted by Gareth Edwards David Callaham[1] Designed by Matt Allsopp[2][3] Portrayed by T.J. Storm[4][5] In-universe information Alias Gojira[6] King of the Monsters Species Titanus Gojira[7] Gender Male Godzilla (ゴジラ, Gojira) also dubbed as Titanus Gojira, is a fictional kaiju appearing in Legendary's MonsterVerse, based on Toho's character of the same name. This incarnation of Godzilla is depicted as the sole survivor of a prehistoric superspecies, theorized by Ishirō Serizawa, acting as a force of nature that maintains balance. The character was initially designed by Matt Allsopp, modeled after the Toho version.[8] It is the second incarnation of Godzilla to be created by an American studio, after TriStar's 1998 film Godzilla, and overall the tenth onscreen incarnation of the iconic character.[9] Contents 1 Overview 1.1 Name 1.2 Design 1.3 Personality 1.4 Size 1.5 Reception 2 Film appearances 2.1 Godzilla (2014) 2.2 Kong: Skull Island (2017) 2.3 Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) 2.4 Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) 3 Other appearances 3.1 Comics 3.2 Novels 3.3 Games 4 See also 5 References 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources Overview[edit] Name[edit] Godzilla is referred to by Ishirō Serizawa, played by Ken Watanabe, as "Gojira" (ゴジラ) though later on he would be referred to by the characters as "Godzilla". Watanabe fought with the producer to have his character refer to Godzilla by his Japanese name, stating, "the important thing is where the icon comes from. The first [movie] it was very important for me to call him Gojira, and I explained that his name was the really correct version I needed to say."[6] In Godzilla: King of the Monsters, Godzilla was given the scientific name "Titanus Gojira",[7] after the designation for the monsters was changed from "MUTOs" (Massive Unidentified Terrestrial Organisms) to "Titans."[10] Design[edit] Gareth Edwards and the design group reviewed all previous incarnations of Godzilla's design for inspiration. Edwards stated, "The way I tried to view it was to imagine Godzilla was a real creature and someone from Toho saw him in the 1950s and ran back to the studio to make a movie about the creature and was trying their best to remember it and draw it. And in our film you get to see him for real." He went on to say that his Godzilla remains true to the original in all aspects.[11] Edwards also stressed that, "It was important to me that this felt like a Toho Godzilla" and concluded by wishing, "I'd love ours (Godzilla) to be considered as part of the Toho group."[12] Much like the previous American incarnation of the character, the MonsterVerse Godzilla has a square shaped face on a broad neck. He also possesses gills despite being an amphibian. According to Andrew Baker, the filmmakers studied the faces of dogs, bears, and eagles to make Godzilla's face look noble and majestic, yet not too cute or threatening. Director Gareth Edwards also stated that they tried to sharpen and straighten his face and his body so it's less rounded.[13] Godzilla's dorsal plates are also smaller and straighter than the previous designs, but still retaining the core maple-leaf shape. His legs are very wide and resembles that of an elephant's. In King of the Monsters, Godzilla was given a slight revamp in his design, notably his dorsal plates changing in size and shape, more jagged and reminiscent of his 1954 design. He has also grown larger in size due to him being more active following the battle of San Francisco. As well as the claws on his feet being longer and pointier, his eyes glow when charging up his atomic breath. His atomic breath in 2014 was weakened due to the MUTOs' electromagnetic pulses and has since increased in mass and power.[14] In his Thermonuclear state, orange and yellow cracks appear throughout his body and his eyes glow orange when charging up a nuclear pulse. He largely retains his appearance from Godzilla: King of the Monsters in the 2021 film Godzilla vs. Kong. The only difference is that Godzilla has gained 1-2 new rows of tiny dorsal plates on each of his sides. Personality[edit] Godzilla was designed to have a personality that would evoke the "last samurai" archetype, a lone, ancient warrior who prefers to be left alone until world events force him to resurface.[15] Size[edit] In Godzilla (2014), Godzilla is 355 feet (108 meters) tall. In Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) and Godzilla vs. Kong (2021), his height is increased to 394 feet (120 meters) tall.[16] Reception[edit] IndieWire called Godzilla's design "more classic than groundbreaking", with praise for the size, scale, fins, sound design, and visual effects, stating, "The visuals are really impressive and perhaps more importantly, feel realistic to the world of the movie around it."[17] Screenwriter Kazuki Nakajima criticized the 2014 film for turning Godzilla into a "good guy", stating it is "the sort of Godzilla aimed at kids in the late Showa Era."[18] Illustrator Yuji Kaida praised the 2014 film for treating Godzilla like "a force beyond human understanding that maintained the Earth’s natural balance," as well as praising the physique of the design and how Edwards conveyed the mass.[18] Film appearances[edit] Godzilla (2014)[edit] Main article: Godzilla (2014 film) An ancient alpha predator, Godzilla retreated to the depths of Earth as the surface radiation levels declined, laying dormant and feeding on the planet's natural geothermal radiation. Only awakening in the modern world on 1954 when a nuclear submarine reached the lower depths of the ocean, the American military began detonating a series of nuclear bombs in the Marshall Islands to try and kill Godzilla, under the guise of nuclear testing. When this did not work, secret organization Monarch was established to search for and study Godzilla. In 1999, the collapse of a mining site in the Philippines reveals a skeleton of another one of Godzilla's species, discovered inside the corpse was two parasitic spores, one dormant and the other hatched, along with a trail leading to the sea, where the hatchling heads to a nuclear power plant in Japan where it burrows underground and lays dormant to absorb its radiation. In 2014, Godzilla detects a mating call of a MUTO, the aforementioned parasitic lifeform that lived during Godzilla's time. He goes to Oahu, creating a tsunami before finally arriving at the Honolulu Airport where he confronts the winged MUTO for the first time. After a brief clash Godzilla returned to the sea and continued pursuing his enemy. The United States military believes Godzilla to be just as big of a threat as the MUTO, although Serizawa stated that Godzilla was present to hunt the MUTO and that he should be allowed to do so. After a second MUTO, a larger female one appears in Las Vegas, the military forms a plan to lure Godzilla and both MUTOs out to a remote island and kill them all with a nuclear warhead several times more powerful than Castle Bravo. The winged MUTO uses his electromagnetic pulse ability to disable the military's vehicles and steal the warhead to be used as a radiation source for the nest in which the female would lay its eggs. Godzilla emerged from the Bay shortly afterward, surfacing near the Golden Gate Bridge. Soldiers were deployed onto the bridge and opened fire on Godzilla while civilians were attempting to cross it. Godzilla withstood the artillery fire until a blast hit him in the gills, causing him to smash into the bridge and split it in half. Godzilla roared and continued to approach the city, where the MUTOs had constructed their nest. When Godzilla entered downtown San Francisco, the winged MUTO attacks him while the female MUTO lays her eggs using the warhead. Godzilla finally reached the nest and confronts the female MUTO, who charged at Godzilla and attacked him. Soon, the male re-entered the battle and both MUTOs double-teamed Godzilla. Distracted by an explosion at the nest, the female MUTO leaves the fight to go check on her eggs just to find them all destroyed, wailing in pain, she notices Ford Brody who destroyed the nest. Before she could kill Brody, Godzilla charges up his atomic breath and releases it on her. The male flew behind Godzilla and pulled him out of the way, allowing the female to chase after the soldiers. As the male flew behind Godzilla to try and grab him again, Godzilla swung his tail at him, killing the MUTO by impaling him on a skyscraper. Godzilla stopped to catch his breath, only for the skyscraper to collapse onto him and bury him in debris and rubble. As Godzilla laid on the ground, he briefly stares down at Brody before being consumed by smoke. The female MUTO then chases down Brody to the docks before Godzilla suddenly came up behind her, pulling her away and prying open her jaws, and brutally killing her by firing his atomic breath down her throat until her neck blew open and her head tore off. After doing so, he roared into the sky before dropping her head and collapsing to the ground again due to exhaustion. The next morning, San Francisco was in ruins, while military and emergency personnel surrounded Godzilla's unconscious body. Serizawa and his assistant Vivienne Graham looked sadly at Godzilla, believing him to be dead. Suddenly, Godzilla's eye opened and he began to stir. Godzilla stood up and began walking back out to the ocean as he is crowned the saviour of the city. Godzilla let out one last roar before diving back into the sea and disappearing beneath the waves. Kong: Skull Island (2017)[edit] Main article: Kong: Skull Island Godzilla was alluded by Monarch operative William Randa, stating that the 1954 nuclear tests were not tests, but attempts to kill "something". After surviving the Skull Island expedition, James Conrad and Mason Weaver is briefed by Monarch members Aaron Brooks and San Lin, telling them that Kong is not the only king as they show them a series of cave paintings depicting Godzilla, a giant moth, a pterosaur-like creature, a three-headed dragon, and Godzilla seemingly fighting said dragon. The film then closes with an audio of Godzilla's roar. Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019)[edit] Main article: Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019 film) Five years after the battle of San Francisco, the government and military expressed a desire to exterminate Godzilla and all of the other Titans like him. After appearing near an underwater outpost on Bermuda, Monarch follows Godzilla to Antarctica where the team learns of eco-terrorist Alan Jonah's intentions to free a Titan encased in the ice called "Monster Zero". Upon arriving in Antarctica, Monarch was ambushed by Jonah's men and was unable to stop them from unleashing Monster Zero, a three-headed Titan named Ghidorah and an ancient rival of Godzilla. Godzilla soon erupted from the ice to challenge him, engaging in a fight that ends with Monster Zero flying away while Godzilla heads to Isla de Mara, Mexico, the site of Outpost 56, where the specimen Rodan is contained. Monster Zero later encounters the newly unleashed Rodan in an aerial clash, only for Godzilla to leap from the ocean and drag him underwater where he rips off Ghidorah's left head. The U.S. Military then attempted to kill both Titans with the experimental Oxygen Destroyer missile, seemingly killing Godzilla, who disappears into the ocean. Ghidorah however, was unharmed by the blast and promptly regenerated his severed head before awakening all other Titans around the world. Following Ghidorah's ascension and the awakening of Titans around the world, Mothra emerges from her cocoon at a waterfall and flies to the outpost on Bermuda where she hovers above the sea to communicate with Godzilla, who had survived the detonation and is recuperating in a chamber inside an ancient sunken city older than any civilization on Earth, where there were murals of Godzilla, hinting that he and the Titans were the first mythological gods. There, the Monarch team board a submarine to revive Godzilla, as they realize the natural process could take years. Ultimately, the team decides to detonate a nuclear weapon allowing Godzilla to feed on the radiation much faster. Unfortunately, the submarine's firing systems had been damaged, and Ishirō Serizawa volunteers to detonate the nuclear manually. As the weapon counts down, Godzilla awakens and stares at Serizawa, who bids goodbye to his old friend. Godzilla then emerges from the ocean, completely rejuvenated, firing his atomic breath into the sky, then turned his attention to the nearby humans before making his way to Boston. At Fenway Park, Madison Russell broadcasts a frequency that attracts all the Titans to its location. Ghidorah, detecting the ORCA, lands on Boston and begun to menace Madison. Just before he could kill her, he was struck and knocked off his feet by a blast of Godzilla's atomic breath. Godzilla came ashore in Boston accompanied by a full military escort, ready for a final battle with his ancient nemesis. During the fight, the radiation Godzilla absorbed from the blast had begun to reach critical levels, meaning that he would emit a thermonuclear explosion in 12 minutes. Mothra arrives but Ghidorah calls out to Rodan to intercept her while he battles Godzilla. Mothra finally defeats Rodan after a long fight in which she was nearly defeated. Ghidorah wrapped his middle neck around Godzilla's throat and strangled him until he went limp before grabbing him with his claws and lifting him into the air, he then flew above the clouds before dropping Godzilla, producing a blue explosion upon striking the ground. The wounded Mothra crawls on top of an immobilized Godzilla before flying straight to Ghidorah who vaporizes her with his gravity beams. Mothra's life force flowed into Godzilla, causing his skin to form glowing red cracks. Ghidorah bit down on Godzilla, draining his atomic energy through his bite. However, Emma and Mark were able to reactivate the ORCA and draw Ghidorah away from Godzilla. Just before killing Emma, Godzilla appears glowing orange and unleashes a series of thermonuclear blasts shaped like Mothra's wings, bombarding Ghidorah with atomic pulses, while Ghidorah desperately tries to fend him off. Godzilla, now impervious to his gravity beams lets out another pulse that destroys his body and two of his heads. Ghidorah fell to the ground as Godzilla stomped on his chest just before the nuclear energy inside of him consumed Boston with a fiery explosion. Rising out of the rubble, Godzilla bites down on Ghidorah's decapitated head and fires his atomic breath, disintegrating it. Following Godzilla's victory, some of the Titans Ghidorah awakened: Behemoth, Scylla, the Queen MUTO, and Methuselah converge on Godzilla along with Rodan, bowing to him as their true king. Godzilla vs. Kong (2021)[edit] Main article: Godzilla vs. Kong Five years after his rematch with King Ghidorah, Godzilla has suddenly become more aggressive, attacking major human settlements, mainly targeting Apex Cybernetics as he senses something is being built there that could disrupt the balance of nature. Later on Godzilla intercepts Kong's transport out of Skull Island, defeating him and only retreating after the ships disable their power to trick him into thinking they are destroyed. After the Apex team sends power source from the Hollow Earth's signature back to their base in Hong Kong, Godzilla immediately makes landfall after sensing the energy and directly attacks Kong's throne room by boring a hole through the ground using his atomic breath. Kong then escape through the hole to Hong Kong, where he and Godzilla fight again. Kong is able to deflect his atomic breaths due to him wielding an axe that is able to absorb the blast. Even then, the battle ends with Kong being overpowered and severely injured by Godzilla, thus crowning Godzilla as the strongest of the two. The battle ends with Kong being in critical condition when suddenly Mechagodzilla, a mechanical Titan possessed by Ghidorah, emerges from the base of Victoria Peak and wreaks havoc throughout the city, running into Godzilla. Godzilla, exhausted from his earlier battle with Kong, is quickly overpowered and gets easily thrown around by Mechagodzilla. After Kong is revived, he is convinced by his friend Jia that Godzilla is not the enemy and that Mechagodzilla is the enemy. Just before the Mecha is about to reenact Godzilla's killing move on the female MUTO by firing his proton beam down Godzilla's throat, Kong intervenes by redirecting its blast to the sky. The two Titans then team up to fight Mechagodzilla. But even with their combined force Mechagodzilla is shown to be powerful enough to hold both of them off and once again overpowers Kong. Just before killing Kong with its tail, the Mechagodzilla is short-circuited, allowing Godzilla to supercharge Kong's axe, which Kong uses to kill Mechagodzilla by mutilating its limbs and ripping off its head with his bare hands. After the fight, Godzilla and Kong acknowledges each other before going their separate ways as Godzilla retreats back into the sea. Other appearances[edit] Comics[edit] Godzilla: Awakening (2014) Godzilla: Aftershock (2019) Godzilla Dominion (2021) Novels[edit] Godzilla: The Official Movie Novelization (2014) Godzilla: King of the Monsters - The Official Movie Novelization (2019) Godzilla vs. Kong - The Official Movie Novelization (2021) Games[edit] Godzilla: Strike Zone (Android, iOS, and Browser - 2014) Godzilla: Crisis Defense (Browser - 2014) Godzilla: Smash3 (Android and iOS - 2014) Godzilla (PS3 and PS4 - 2014) – as Hollywood Godzilla Godzilla: Kaiju Collection (Android and iOS - 2015) PUBG Mobile (Android and iOS - 2021)[19] See also[edit] Godzilla MUTO MonsterVerse References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ "Screenwriter Profile: Dave Callaham". Fresh Voices. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2015. ^ Cotta Vaz 2014, p. 81. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCotta_Vaz2014 (help) ^ Cotta Vaz 2014, p. 102–103. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCotta_Vaz2014 (help) ^ Pockross, Adam (February 28, 2019). "Genre MVP: The Motion Capture Actor Who's Played Groot, Godzilla, and Iron Man". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved March 16, 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Godzilla: King of the Monsters Final Credits". SciFi Japan. May 23, 2019. Archived from the original on May 24, 2019. Retrieved May 23, 2019. ^ a b Manalo, Mike (May 29, 2019). "Preserving Culture with 'Godzilla' Star Ken Watanabe". The Nerds of Color. Archived from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. ^ a b Sarah Moran (May 31, 2019). "Every Titan In Godzilla: King Of The Monsters". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 25, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2019. ^ Graser, Marc (May 6, 2014). "How 'Godzilla' Roared Again with Director Gareth Edwards, Legendary's Thomas Tull". Variety. Retrieved May 11, 2018. ^ Raymond, Nicholas (June 22, 2020). "All 11 Versions Of Godzilla (& How They're All Different)". Screenrant. Retrieved March 30, 2021. ^ Orquiola, John (July 21, 2018). "Godzilla 2 Has Renamed The MonsterVerse Creatures". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2018. ^ Newitz, Annalee (July 25, 2013). "Godzilla director Gareth Edwards explains the symbolism of kaiju". i09. Archived from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2018. ^ Turek, Ryan (July 19, 2013). "Comic-Con 2013 Interview: Gareth Edwards On Godzilla, Atomic Breath, the Design, Darabont & More!". Comingsoon.net. Archived from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. ^ Sacks, Ethan (May 11, 2014). "'Godzilla' director Gareth Edwards and the design team reached back in time to create the new monster". New York Daily News. Retrieved March 29, 2021. ^ Libbey, Dirk (May 8, 2018). "Godzilla unleashes 'atomic breath' in Godzilla: King of the Monsters first look". Yahoo! News. Retrieved March 29, 2021. ^ "'Godzilla is like the last samurai'". Daily Pioneer. May 4, 2014. Retrieved March 29, 2021. ^ Nicholas Raymond (March 30, 2021). "How Tall Godzilla Is In Each Movie (Including MonsterVerse)". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved April 11, 2021. ^ "Breaking Down The Monster: The Best & Worst of Godzilla". IndieWire. May 19, 2014. Retrieved March 12, 2017. ^ a b Brasor, Philip (August 9, 2014). "Critics get frank when it comes to Godzilla". Japan Times. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved February 26, 2016. ^ Tuting, Kristine (March 26, 2021). "Godzilla and King Kong are coming to PUBG Mobile". One Esports. Retrieved March 30, 2021. Sources[edit] Cotta Vaz, Mark (2014). Godzilla: The Art of Destruction. Insight Editions. ISBN 978-1-60887-344-9. v t e Godzilla Films Toho films Shōwa era Godzilla (1954) Godzilla, King of the Monsters! Godzilla Raids Again (1955) King Kong vs. Godzilla (1962) Mothra vs. Godzilla (1964) Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster (1964) Invasion of Astro-Monster (1965) Ebirah, Horror of the Deep (1966) Son of Godzilla (1967) Destroy All Monsters (1968) All Monsters Attack (1969) Godzilla vs. Hedorah (1971) Godzilla vs. Gigan (1972) Godzilla vs. Megalon (1973) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla (1974) Terror of Mechagodzilla (1975) Heisei era The Return of Godzilla (1984) Godzilla 1985 Godzilla vs. Biollante (1989) Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah (1991) Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (1993) Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (1994) Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995) Millennium era Godzilla 2000 (1999) Godzilla vs. Megaguirus (2000) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001) Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla (2002) Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S. (2003) Godzilla: Final Wars (2004) Reiwa era Shin Godzilla (2016) Godzilla: Planet of the Monsters (2017) Godzilla: City on the Edge of Battle (2018) Godzilla: The Planet Eater (2018) American films TriStar Pictures Godzilla (1998) Legendary Pictures (MonsterVerse) Godzilla (2014) Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) Television Japanese Zone Fighter (1973) Godzilland (1992–1996) Godzilla Island (1997–1998) episodes Godzilla Singular Point (2021–) American Godzilla (1978–1979) Godzilla: The Series (1998–2000) Music Blue Öyster Cult song Main Theme 1998 film soundtrack Godzilla March Eminem song Miscellaneous Godzilla in popular culture -zilla Comics Video games Locations The Movie Monster Game Battle Soccer: Field no Hasha Godzilla Game Godzilla (Scott Ciencin series) Godzilla (Marc Cerasini series) Bambi Meets Godzilla Godzilla vs. Charles Barkley Gotengo Miki Saegusa Monsterland and Monster Island Monster Planet of Godzilla Super X Toho SciFi Japan TV MonsterVerse King Kong (franchise) Hibiya Godzilla Square Legendary Giant Beast Wolfman vs. Godzilla Kaiju Godzilla Anguirus Rodan Moguera Varan Mothra King Kong Manda Dogora King Ghidorah Baragon Frankenstein Ebirah Mechani-Kong Gorosaurus Kamacuras Kumonga Minilla Hedorah Gigan Megalon King Caesar Mechagodzilla Titanosaurus Biollante Godzilla Junior SpaceGodzilla Destoroyah Megaguirus Zilla MUTO Book Category v t e MonsterVerse Films Godzilla (2014) Kong: Skull Island (2017) Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) Monsters Godzilla King Kong King Ghidorah Mechagodzilla Mothra Rodan MUTO Miscellaneous Godzilla (franchise) King Kong (franchise) Category