1993 film by Takao Okawara This article is about the 1993 film. For the 1974 film, see Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla. For the 2002 film, see Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla. Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II Theatrical release poster Directed by Takao Okawara Produced by Shōgo Tomiyama Written by Wataru Mimura Starring Masahiro Takashima Ryoko Sano Megumi Odaka Yûsuke Kawazu Daijiro Harada Music by Akira Ifukube Cinematography Yoshinori Sekiguchi Edited by Miho Yoneda Production companies Toho Pictures, Inc. Distributed by Toho Release date December 11, 1993 (1993-12-11) Running time 107 minutes Country Japan Languages Japanese English Box office ¥3.18 billion[1] Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (ゴジラvsメカゴジラ, Gojira tai Mekagojira, released in Japan as Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla), is a 1993 Japanese kaiju film directed by Takao Okawara, written by Wataru Mimura, and produced by Shōgo Tomiyama. Produced and distributed by Toho Studios, it is the 20th film in the Godzilla franchise, as well as the fifth film to be released during the franchise's Heisei era. The film features the fictional monster character Godzilla, along with Baby Godzilla and the mecha character Mechagodzilla. Despite its Japanese and English titles, the film is not a sequel to the 1974 film Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla. Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II was released theatrically in Japan on December 11, 1993. It was released directly to pay-per-view satellite television in the United States in 1998 by Sony Pictures Television. The film was promoted as the last film in the franchise's Heisei series, and was also promoted by a children's television program called Adventure! Godzilland 2. Although Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II was not the final entry in the Heisei series, as it was followed by Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla in 1994, Toho producers initially wished to avoid competing with TriStar's then-upcoming Godzilla reboot.[2] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 English versions 5 Box office 6 Critical reaction 7 Home media 8 References 9 External links Plot[edit] In 1992, following the events of Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah, the United Nations establishes the United Nations Godzilla Countermeasures Center (UNGCC) to stop Godzilla. Their military branch, G-Force, salvages Mecha-King Ghidorah's remains and use it to reverse engineer two anti-Godzilla machines: an aerial gunship called Garuda and a mecha modeled after Godzilla called Mechagodzilla. Two years later, while on a mission to Adona Island, a Japanese team comes across what they assume is a large Pteranodon egg, which gives off a telepathic signal that attracts Godzilla and Rodan, an adult Pteranodon irradiated by nuclear waste. Godzilla critically wounds Rodan during the ensuing battle while the research team escapes with the egg. It is taken to a research center in Kyoto, where it imprints on a young female scientist. When a Baby Godzilla hatches from the egg, the research team concludes that the egg was left in the Pteranodon nest with Rodan in a manner similar to the brood parasitism displayed by European cuckoos. Godzilla appears, once again responding to the creature's psychic call. The JSDF mobilizes Mechagodzilla, which intercepts Godzilla as it is heading to Kyoto. The two battle, with Mechagodzilla initially having the upper hand until Godzilla disables the robot with an energy pulse. Godzilla continues searching for Baby, but the scientists, having discovered the telepathic link between the monsters, shield it from Godzilla. Frustrated, it destroys most of Kyoto before returning to the ocean. Tests on the baby reveal that it has a second brain in its hips that controls the animal's movement. The UNGCC assumes that this also holds true for Godzilla, and decide to use Baby to bait Godzilla into another fight with Mechagodzilla. The "G-Crusher" is installed into Mechagodzilla, which will allow the robot to penetrate Godzilla's hide and destroy its second brain. Young psychic Miki Saegusa is ordered to become a part of Mechagodzilla's crew to locate Godzilla's second brain. While she is reluctant due to her mental connection with Godzilla, she agrees. The plan backfires when Rodan, having survived its battle with Godzilla and further mutated by radiation, responds to Baby's call and intercepts the UNGCC transport. In response, they send Mechagodzilla and Garuda after Rodan instead, which mortally wound it. Godzilla arrives soon after and attacks Mechagodzilla. The fight is evenly matched until Mechagodzilla combines with Garuda to become Super-Mechagodzilla and use the G-Crusher to successfully paralyze Godzilla. Suddenly, the dying Rodan, revived by Baby's call, begins flying towards it, but is shot down by Super-Mechagodzilla, crashing atop Godzilla. Rodan's life force regenerates Godzilla's second brain and supercharges the monster. Now more powerful than before, Godzilla attacks and destroys Super-Mechagodzilla with a high-powered, spiral-shaped atomic ray. Godzilla locates Baby, who is initially afraid of the giant. Miki telepathically communicates with Baby, convincing it to go with Godzilla. The two monsters head out to the sea. Cast[edit] Masahiro Takashima as Kazuma Aoki Ryoko Sano as Azusa Gojo Megumi Odaka as Miki Saegusa Yûsuke Kawazu as Professor Ohmae Akira Nakao as General Aso Kenji Sahara as Segawa Daijiro Harada as Takuya Sasaki Koichi Ueda as General Hyodo Leo Meneghetti as Dr. Asimov Andrew Smith as Andrew Johnson Shelley Sweeney as Catherine Berger Kenpachiro Satsuma as Godzilla Wataru Fukuda as Mechagodzilla Hurricane Ryu as Baby Godzilla Production[edit] Wataru Fukuda during a suit-fitting session The fifth film in the Heisei series of Godzilla movies was originally meant to be the last, in order to avoid competing with the upcoming TriStar American Godzilla reboot film and to honor the recent passing of Ishirō Honda.[2] Toho had initially wanted to produce a remake of King Kong vs. Godzilla, but were unable to acquire the rights to use the King Kong character from Universal Pictures. When that project was scrapped, Toho considered pitting Godzilla against Mechani-Kong, a mecha first introduced in King Kong Escapes. The plot would have involved Mechani-Kong sporting syringes containing G-Force special forces which would have been injected into Godzilla's bloodstream in a manner similar to Fantastic Voyage, though the project was abandoned, as obtaining the rights to a monster even bearing the semblance of King Kong proved too costly.[3] Producers Tomoyuki Tanaka and Shōgo Tomiyama felt that reviving Mechagodzilla was a logical next step for the series after the successful reintroduction of King Ghidorah and Mothra to contemporary audiences. Furthermore, effects artist Koichi Kawakita had already demonstrated his competence in designing and creating mecha contraptions like the Super XII, Mecha-King Ghidorah, and the machines featured in Gunhed. The decision to reintroduce Minilla (rechristened as Baby Godzilla) was made in order to appeal to the largely female audience that made Godzilla vs. Mothra a financial success, despite objections by director Takao Okawara, who held a low opinion of the 1960s movies the character had previously been featured in.[2] In the original ending for the film, Godzilla destroys Garuda but is killed by Mechagodzilla. Garuda's nuclear reactor explodes and resurrects the King of the Monsters. Another ending was considered in which Godzilla's escaping life energy mutates Baby Godzilla into a new adult Godzilla.[4] Toho promoted the film as Akira Ifukube's last performance as composer, and aired the children's program Adventure Godzilla-land, which portrayed Godzilla and Mechagodzilla as rival news anchors reporting on the events of the upcoming movie, as well as featuring the dance routine "Be like Godzilla". Shortly after the movie was released, Toho further promoted the film's merchandise by opening a Godzilla-themed simulation ride in Sanrio Puroland called "Monster Planet of Godzilla", which featured Megumi Odaka as the captain of a spacecraft which lands on a planet inhabited by Godzilla, Rodan, and Mothra, who are then accidentally transported to contemporary Tokyo.[2] Kawakita made more extensive use of CGI than in previous Godzilla movies he worked on, and made an effort for the featured monsters to be less reliant on energy beams during battle sequences, particularly Rodan, who was portrayed via handpuppets and marionettes rather than through suitmation. Baby Godzilla was performed by series veteran Hurricane Ryu, and was designed to look much more dinosaur-like than his previous incarnation. Mechagodzilla was redesigned to be much less angular in form, and was performed by Wataru Fukuda. The Mechagodzilla suit itself consisted of multiple separate elements which Fukuda wore like plate armor. Kawakita originally envisioned Mechagodzilla being able to split into aerial and terrestrial units, though this idea was scrapped in favor of the character merging with the flying battleship Garuda.[2] The new Godzilla suit was notably bulkier in profile than its predecessor, and had smaller shoulders and slimmer legs. The tail was also placed higher up the back, thus resulting in a very top-heavy appearance. Like the previous suit, the one used in Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II had an electronically operated head that could tilt its head independently of the body. The suit previously used for Godzilla vs. Mothra was recycled for the long shots during the battle with Rodan, the rampage through Tokyo, and the character's departure into the sea during the end credits.[5] English versions[edit] This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) After the film was released in Japan, Toho commissioned a Hong Kong company to dub the film into English. In this international version of the movie, an English title card was superimposed over the Japanese title, as had been done with the previous 1990s Godzilla films. In past English releases, including dubbed films and video game titles, Rodan's name was pronounced "roh-dan." In Japan, however, his name has always been pronounced (and spelled in katakana) as "rah-dohn"(ラドン). In the English version of this film, the producers changed his name back to Radon, as it is in Japan. Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment released Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II on home video on August 3, 1999. This was the first time the film had been officially released in the United States. Instead of using the original monaural English dub, a newer stereo version was included, with the main characters' lines and most other dialog re-recorded by a mostly different Hong Kong cast. Most of the new cast did not start dubbing until the late '90s. The purpose or origin of this revised English version is unknown. TriStar additionally cut the end credits and created new titles and opening credits. The original version of the international dub is not known to have ever been released on video in its complete form. The only evidence of its existence is in the Hindi theatrical version. The Hindi dubbing company lacked a clean music and effects track and only had access to a copy of the original English version. Therefore, English dialog was muted and replaced with library tracks and music from other parts of the film itself, but occasionally the English source track was left intact.[6] An anamorphic widescreen transfer of the "new" English version was later released on DVD by TriStar in February 2005 with the option to listen to the original Japanese audio. Box office[edit] The film sold approximately 3,800,000 tickets in Japan, earning roughly $18 million in distribution income,[citation needed] and grossing a total of ¥3.18 billion.[1] Critical reaction[edit] Monster Zero said that "some critical flaws exist" but felt overall that "of all the films of the [Heisei era], Godzilla vs MechaGodzilla II represents Toho's most technically and artistically successful effort," adding that "the action sequences in this film are impeccable... excitingly staged, logical, and quite dramatic."[7] American Kaiju said the film "stumbles in the areas of both story and special effects" but concluded it to be "a good, solid entry in the Godzilla series," saying that "the battles between Godzilla and Mechagodilla entertain" and "Akira Ifukube's music score soars."[8] Japan Hero said "the story was interesting," "the soundtrack is plain gorgeous," and "the costume designs are just as great," concluding: "While this is not my top favorite movie [of the Heisei series], it is definitely one of the best."[9] Home media[edit] The film has been released twice on home media. The first release, by Columbia/Tristar Home Entertainment, was released on February 8, 2005. The subtitles for the Japanese track are really "dubtitles" (the subtitles are actually the captions for the English track). The video transfer is a 1.78:1 widescreen version of TriStar's print. This means the Toho logos and end credits have been cut and all the onscreen, optical text from Toho's international version has been removed or replaced by video-generated text. The second release was by Sony on Blu-ray as part of The Toho Godzilla Collection and was released on May 6, 2014 in a two-disc double feature with Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla.[10] References[edit] ^ a b "『ゴジラVSメカゴジラ』の詳細情報". Eiga Ranking. Retrieved 18 February 2019. ^ a b c d e Kalat, David (2010). A Critical History and Filmography of Toho's Godzilla Series (2nd ed.). Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co. pp. 196–201. ISBN 978-0-7864-47-49-7. ^ Ryfle, Steve (1998). Japan's Favorite Mon-Star: The Unauthorized Biography of the Big G. Toronto: ECW Press. pp. 293. ISBN 1550223488. ^ Lost Projects: Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (Early Draft), Toho Kingdom (accessed 16/02/2016) ^ Robert Biondi, "The Evolution of Godzilla – G-Suit Variations Throughout the Monster King’s Twenty One Films", G-FAN #16 (July/August 1995) ^ "Godzilla vs Mechagodzilla" (worse quality segments are from the Hindi version). dailymotion.com ^ "Godzilla vs Mechagodzilla". monsterzero.us Archived June 23, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "American Kaiju: Mike Bogue's Articles and Reviews: Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla 2". Americankaiju.kaijuphile.com. 1993-12-11. Retrieved 2015-07-30. ^ "Godzilla vs Mechagodzilla". japanhero.com Archived May 9, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II / Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (Blu-ray) : DVD Talk Review of the Blu-ray". Dvdtalk.com. Retrieved 2015-07-30. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API "ゴジラvsメカゴジラ (Gojira tai MekaGojira)" (in Japanese). Japanese Movie Database. Retrieved 2007-07-19. Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II at IMDb Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II at AllMovie Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Godzilla Films Toho films Shōwa era Godzilla (1954) Godzilla, King of the Monsters! Godzilla Raids Again (1955) King Kong vs. Godzilla (1962) Mothra vs. Godzilla (1964) Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster (1964) Invasion of Astro-Monster (1965) Ebirah, Horror of the Deep (1966) Son of Godzilla (1967) Destroy All Monsters (1968) All Monsters Attack (1969) Godzilla vs. Hedorah (1971) Godzilla vs. Gigan (1972) Godzilla vs. Megalon (1973) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla (1974) Terror of Mechagodzilla (1975) Heisei era The Return of Godzilla (1984) Godzilla 1985 Godzilla vs. Biollante (1989) Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah (1991) Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (1993) Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (1994) Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995) Millennium era Godzilla 2000 (1999) Godzilla vs. Megaguirus (2000) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001) Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla (2002) Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S. (2003) Godzilla: Final Wars (2004) Reiwa era Shin Godzilla (2016) Godzilla: Planet of the Monsters (2017) Godzilla: City on the Edge of Battle (2018) Godzilla: The Planet Eater (2018) American films TriStar Pictures Godzilla (1998) Legendary Pictures (MonsterVerse) Godzilla (2014) Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) Television Japanese Zone Fighter (1973) Godzilland (1992–1996) Godzilla Island (1997–1998) episodes Godzilla Singular Point (2021–) American Godzilla (1978–1979) Godzilla: The Series (1998–2000) Music Blue Öyster Cult song Main Theme 1998 film soundtrack Godzilla March Eminem song Miscellaneous Godzilla in popular culture -zilla Comics Video games Locations The Movie Monster Game Battle Soccer: Field no Hasha Godzilla Game Godzilla (Scott Ciencin series) Godzilla (Marc Cerasini series) Bambi Meets Godzilla Godzilla vs. Charles Barkley Gotengo Miki Saegusa Monsterland and Monster Island Monster Planet of Godzilla Super X Toho SciFi Japan TV MonsterVerse King Kong (franchise) Hibiya Godzilla Square Legendary Giant Beast Wolfman vs. Godzilla Kaiju Godzilla Anguirus Rodan Moguera Varan Mothra King Kong Manda Dogora King Ghidorah Baragon Frankenstein Ebirah Mechani-Kong Gorosaurus Kamacuras Kumonga Minilla Hedorah Gigan Megalon King Caesar Mechagodzilla Titanosaurus Biollante Godzilla Junior SpaceGodzilla Destoroyah Megaguirus Zilla MUTO Book Category v t e Films directed by Takao Okawara Chōshōjo Reiko (1991) Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (1993) Orochi, the Eight-Headed Dragon (1994) Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995) Abduction (1997) Godzilla 2000 (1999)