2001 film by Shūsuke Kaneko This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Japanese. (October 2014) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Japanese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Japanese Wikipedia article at [[:ja:ゴジラ・モスラ・キングギドラ 大怪獣総攻撃]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ja|ゴジラ・モスラ・キングギドラ 大怪獣総攻撃}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack Theatrical release poster Directed by Shusuke Kaneko Produced by Shogo Tomiyama Hideyuki Honma Written by Keiichi Hasegawa Masahiro Yokotani Shusuke Kaneko Starring Chiharu Niiyama Ryudo Uzaki Masahiro Kobayashi Shiro Sano Takashi Nishina Kaho Minami Shinya Owada Kunio Murai Hiroyuki Watanabe Shingo Katsurayama Takeo Nakahara Toshikazu Fukawa Hideyo Amamoto Music by Kow Otani Cinematography Masahiro Kishimoto Edited by Isao Tomita Production companies Toho Pictures, Inc. Distributed by Toho Release date December 15, 2001 (2001-12-15) Running time 105 minutes Country Japan Language Japanese Box office ¥2.7 billion[1] Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (ゴジラ・モスラ・キングギドラ 大怪獣総攻撃, Gojira, Mosura, Kingu Gidora: Daikaijū Sōkōgeki, also known as GMK)[2][3] is a 2001 Japanese kaiju film directed by Shūsuke Kaneko. Produced and distributed by Toho Studios, it is the 26th film in the Godzilla franchise and the third film in the franchise's Millennium era, as well as the 25th Godzilla film produced by Toho. Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack stars Chiharu Niiyama, Ryudo Uzaki, Masahiro Kobayashi, Takashi Nishina, Kaho Minami, Shinya Owada, Kunio Murai, Hiroyuki Watanabe, Shingo Katsurayama, Takeo Nakahara, Toshikazu Fukawa, and Hideyo Amamoto, alongside Mizuho Yoshida as Godzilla, Akira Ohashi as King Ghidorah, and Rie Ota as Baragon. The film places Godzilla in an antagonistic role, possessed by the souls of those that were killed during World War II, while Mothra, King Ghidorah, and Baragon team up to defeat it. Like the other films in the franchise's Millennium period, Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack serves as a direct sequel to the original 1954 Godzilla film, ignoring the events of every other installment in the series. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Release 4.1 Box office 4.2 Home media 4.3 English version 5 Critical response 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] During a briefing with the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) regarding Godzilla's first attack, Admiral Taizo Tachibana is alerted about an American nuclear submarine missing off Guam. Search and rescue units find the sub destroyed and capture footage of a giant creature's fins nearby. Tachibana's daughter, Yuri, films a docudrama with her production crew at Mount Myōkō, where a mysterious brief earthquake occurs. The earthquake returns later that night burying a biker gang and leaving one surviving trucker who witnesses the monster Baragon, which he misidentifies as Godzilla. The next day, Yuri's colleague Teruaki Takeda supports her theory that a monster may have been the cause of the mysterious Myōkō earthquake by giving her a book on The Guardian Monsters. At Lake Ikeda, a Mothra larva attacks a group of teenagers after disturbing her shrine, and in Aokigahara, a suicidal man accidentally encounters a frozen Ghidorah. Yuri interviews Hirotoshi Isayama, an elderly man who explains to her the legend of the Guardian Monsters: Baragon, Mothra, and King Ghidorah, and iterates that they must be awakened before Godzilla destroys Japan. Yuri and her team visit the Guardian Monsters' shrine, where she finds a stone. Godzilla attacks the Bonin Islands chain, leaving few survivors. Yuri returns to interview Isayama and discovers that the souls of all those who were killed during the Pacific War are embedded within Godzilla, and are lashing out due to modern Japan's denial of its past crimes. Godzilla and Baragon surface and battle in Hakone, with Godzilla emerging victorious. Yuri is injured during the fray and goes on her own after Takeda refuses to take her to Godzilla's location. Mothra's cocoon is immediately discovered in Lake Ikeda. After jets fail to stop Godzilla, Tachibana sets up a defense line in Yokohama. An imago Mothra and a juvenile Ghidorah awaken and battle Godzilla in Yokohama. Mothra sacrifices itself and imbues its spirit into Ghidorah, transforming it into the 3,000-year-old dragon King Ghidorah. King Ghidorah manages to injure and drag Godzilla underwater. Tachibana and his colleague board miniature submarines to launch missiles into Godzilla's wound. Yuri and Takeda report the struggle from a bridge that later collapses from Godzilla's atomic breath. The shrine stone falls from Takeda's pocket and revives King Ghidorah. Yuri and Takeda fall from the bridge and swim ashore as the monsters continue to fight. Godzilla destroys King Ghidorah, unleashing the spirits of the Guardian Monsters, which drag Godzilla into the sea. After entering Godzilla's body through its mouth, Tachibana fires a missile at its wound. Godzilla attempts to kill Yuri and Takeda but Tachibana's missile explodes, forcing its breath to escape through the gaping wound and build pressure within its body. Tachibana escapes as Godzilla sinks and explodes after attempting to kill Tachibana with its breath. Japan rejoices at their victory, with Tachibana saluting his colleagues and the guardian monsters. On the ocean floor, Godzilla's disembodied heart continues to beat. Cast[edit] Chiharu Niiyama as Yuri Tachibana Ryūdō Uzaki as Admiral Taizo Tachibana Masahiro Kobayashi as Teruaki Takeda Shirō Sano as Haruki Kadokura Kaho Minami as Intelligence Captain Kumi Emori Shinya Owada as Lt. General Mikumo Kunio Murai as HQ Secretary Masato Hinogaki Hiroyuki Watanabe as Yutaka Hirose Takashi Nishina as AD Aki Maruo Shingo Katsurayama as SDF Intelligence Major Tokihiko Kobayakawa Toshikazu Fukawa as Adjutant Miyashita Masahiko Tsugawa as Chief Cabinet Secretary Katsuo Nakamura as Yaizu Harbor Fisherman Hideyo Amamoto as Professor Hirotoshi Isayama Ryo Kase as Fisher Tomoe Shinohara Kōichi Yamadera Mizuho Yoshida as Godzilla Akira Ohashi as King Ghidorah Rie Ota as Baragon Production[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Director Shūsuke Kaneko cycled through various script ideas when attempting to conceive this film. In the earliest known script, Godzilla would have faced off against a revamped version of Kamacuras, but this idea was scrapped since Godzilla had fought another insect-like kaiju in the previous film (Godzilla vs. Megaguirus). A second idea involved Godzilla battling a new alien monster in a futuristic setting, but the script was considered too dark for a Godzilla film. The Guardian Monsters concept came next, though Kaneko's original script originally had Anguirus, Varan and Baragon defend Japan against Godzilla. Toho told him to replace the former two with the more popular Mothra and King Ghidorah, as Anguirus and Varan were not considered bankable enough to guarantee a box-office hit. Skeptical at first, he managed to work the two monsters into the film. The film is especially notable for the changes made to the monsters. For example, King Ghidorah typically played the villain in previous Godzilla films; this film has him as a hero. In fact, King Ghidorah is actually portrayed a few meters shorter than Godzilla; previous incarnations of the monster were much larger, and towered over Godzilla. Originally, the idea was to have Godzilla to walk with his back and tail parallel to the ground; however, this idea was dropped due to the strain it put on Mizuho Yoshida (the actor playing Godzilla), and Godzilla retained his traditional posture.[4] Mothra was also revamped. Like King Ghidorah, Mothra is portrayed as being far smaller than normal and looking more like a butterfly than a moth. Her poison powder and hurricane wind attacks were removed, and were replaced with a burst of stingers fired from her abdomen. In addition, Mothra's fairy servants, the Shobijin, were dropped completely, (though a homage exists in the form of twins who look up in awe at Mothra as she flies overhead). Baragon was also altered. His heat ray was removed, his roar was changed and his horn is no longer bioluminescent. Apparently, the reason behind the changes to King Ghidorah, Mothra, and Baragon were made in order to make Godzilla seem stronger. Director Kaneko wanted Godzilla to be the most powerful monster in the film. He originally wanted to use monsters who are notably smaller and less powerful than Godzilla as his opponents. When advised by Toho to replace them, he compensated by making Ghidorah and Mothra weaker than they normally were. Fuyuki Shinada, who designed the monster suits for the film, was disappointed that Varan (his all-time favorite monster) was not going to be in the film, so he compensated by putting Varan's facial features on King Ghidorah's three heads. In addition, the radioactive element has been replaced with a more mystical element. Godzilla has origins rooted in Japan's World War II past. Although Godzilla is still a mutant dinosaur created by the atomic bomb, he is also described as an incarnation of those killed or who were left to die at the hands of the Imperial Japanese Army during the Pacific War. The extent to which his nuclear and spiritual origins balance is never specified. Kaneko, a lifelong pacifist, wanted to give the film an anti-war angle. The nuclear origin was left in because he knew that audiences wanted a realistic Godzilla, but he thought it worked better with a fantasy element. Release[edit] Box office[edit] Produced with a budget of $9,400,000, Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack opened in Japan on December 15, 2001 on a double-bill with an animated film called Hamtaro: Ham Ham Big Land Adventure.[5] In its opening weekend, it grossed approximately $1,900,000.[5] By the end of its box office run, Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack grossed a total of approximately $20,000,000, with 2,400,000 admissions.[5] It was one of the largest-grossing Godzilla films of the Millennium series in Japan. Home media[edit] The film was released on DVD on January 27, 2004, and on Blu-ray, bundled with Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla, on September 9, 2014.[6] English version[edit] After the film was completed, Toho had their international versions of the movie dubbed in Hong Kong. This dubbed version significantly changes the meaning of several lines throughout the film. Sony licensed GMK and Godzilla vs. Megaguirus with the hope of giving both films a theatrical release in the United States. However, after the American release of Godzilla 2000 under-performed at the box office, plans to give any newer Godzilla films a wide release were scrapped. Instead, Sony prepared edited television versions of both films. These premiered in the United States on the Sci-Fi Channel on August 31, 2003, during the channel's Labor Day marathon. In February 2004, the uncut international versions of both films were released on DVD with the addition of the original Japanese soundtracks, a first for an American release of a Godzilla film. Critical response[edit] Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 63% rating from critics, based on 16 reviews with an average score of 5.29/10.[7] Troy Guinn of Eccentric Cinema gave the film a score of 8/10, calling it "one of only three Godzilla films I would recommend to anyone besides giant monster-movie fans or sci-fi buffs, the other two being the original Gojira and Mothra vs. Godzilla."[8] Bryan Byun of DVD Verdict gave it a positive review, calling it "one of the most exciting entries in Godzilla's long cinematic history."[9] Stomp Tokyo gave the film a score of 3/5, calling it "one of the better-looking entries in the series, albeit one of unfulfilled potential."[10] John Wallis of DVD Talk felt that "the story is quite weak and somber" and that "this new take on [Godzilla] doesn't really work,"[11] while Gemma Tarlach of the Milwaukee Journal said that "GMK is best when it embraces its unabashed cheesiness. But when it tries to make Statements with Meaning, whether on Japan's past aggressions or ersatz samurai ruminations on the duty of a warrior, the movie flounders like a giant lizard hogtied by power lines."[12] Film critic Leonard Maltin gave it three out of four stars, one of only two Godzilla films to receive more than two and a half stars, with the other being Godzilla 2000. References[edit] ^ 歴代ゴジラ映画作品一覧 ^ Vizard, Guy (September 13, 2018). "The 10 Best Godzilla Movies Of All Time". ComingSoon.net. Retrieved December 27, 2018. ^ Seibold, Witney (May 29, 2014). "Godzilla Goodness: Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001)". Nerdist. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved December 27, 2018. ^ "Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001". IMDB. ^ a b c GMK Box Office, Toho Kingdom ^ http://www.blu-ray.com/movies/Godzilla-Mothra-and-King-Ghidorah-Giant-Monsters-All-Out-Attack-Blu-ray/112192/#Review ^ "Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved July 4, 2020. ^ Review by Troy Guinn, Eccentric Cinema ^ Review by Bryan Byun Archived 2008-05-26 at the Wayback Machine, DVD Verdict ^ Review by Stomp Tokyo ^ Review John Wallis, DVD Talk ^ Review[permanent dead link] Gemma Tarlach, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API API at IMDb API at AllMovie "ゴジラ・モスラ・キングギドラ大怪獣総進撃 (Gojira, Mosura, Kingu Gidora: Daikaijū Sōkōgeki)" (in Japanese). Japanese Movie Database. Retrieved 2007-07-21. v t e Godzilla Films Toho films Shōwa era Godzilla (1954) Godzilla, King of the Monsters! Godzilla Raids Again (1955) King Kong vs. Godzilla (1962) Mothra vs. Godzilla (1964) Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster (1964) Invasion of Astro-Monster (1965) Ebirah, Horror of the Deep (1966) Son of Godzilla (1967) Destroy All Monsters (1968) All Monsters Attack (1969) Godzilla vs. Hedorah (1971) Godzilla vs. Gigan (1972) Godzilla vs. Megalon (1973) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla (1974) Terror of Mechagodzilla (1975) Heisei era The Return of Godzilla (1984) Godzilla 1985 Godzilla vs. Biollante (1989) Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah (1991) Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (1993) Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (1994) Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995) Millennium era Godzilla 2000 (1999) Godzilla vs. Megaguirus (2000) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001) Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla (2002) Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S. (2003) Godzilla: Final Wars (2004) Reiwa era Shin Godzilla (2016) Godzilla: Planet of the Monsters (2017) Godzilla: City on the Edge of Battle (2018) Godzilla: The Planet Eater (2018) American films TriStar Pictures Godzilla (1998) Legendary Pictures (MonsterVerse) Godzilla (2014) Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) Television Japanese Zone Fighter (1973) Godzilland (1992–1996) Godzilla Island (1997–1998) episodes Godzilla Singular Point (2021–) American Godzilla (1978–1979) Godzilla: The Series (1998–2000) Music Blue Öyster Cult song Main Theme 1998 film soundtrack Godzilla March Eminem song Miscellaneous Godzilla in popular culture -zilla Comics Video games Locations The Movie Monster Game Battle Soccer: Field no Hasha Godzilla Game Godzilla (Scott Ciencin series) Godzilla (Marc Cerasini series) Bambi Meets Godzilla Godzilla vs. Charles Barkley Gotengo Miki Saegusa Monsterland and Monster Island Monster Planet of Godzilla Super X Toho SciFi Japan TV MonsterVerse King Kong (franchise) Hibiya Godzilla Square Legendary Giant Beast Wolfman vs. Godzilla Kaiju Godzilla Anguirus Rodan Moguera Varan Mothra King Kong Manda Dogora King Ghidorah Baragon Frankenstein Ebirah Mechani-Kong Gorosaurus Kamacuras Kumonga Minilla Hedorah Gigan Megalon King Caesar Mechagodzilla Titanosaurus Biollante Godzilla Junior SpaceGodzilla Destoroyah Megaguirus Zilla MUTO Book Category v t e Mothra Films Solo Mothra (1961) Rebirth of Mothra (1996) Rebirth of Mothra II (1997) Rebirth of Mothra III (1998) with Godzilla Mothra vs. Godzilla (1964) Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster (1964) Ebirah, Horror of the Deep (1966) Destroy All Monsters (1968) Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992) Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (1994) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001) Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S. (2003) Godzilla: Final Wars (2004) Godzilla: The Planet Eater (2018) Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) Literature The Luminous Fairies and Mothra Related MonsterVerse Godzilla (franchise) Category v t e Films directed by Shusuke Kaneko Kōichirō Uno's Wet and Swinging (1984) Minna Agechau (1985) Last Cabaret (1988) Summer Vacation 1999 (1988) Who Do I Choose? (1989) Hong Kong Paradise (1990) My Soul Is Slashed (1991) No Worries on the Recruit Front (1991) Graduation Journey: I Came from Japan (1993) Necronomicon (1993) It's a Summer Vacation Everyday (1994) Gamera the Guardian of the Universe (1995) Gamera 2: Attack of Legion (1996) School Ghost Stories 3 (1997) Gamera 3: The Revenge of Iris (1999) Pyrokinesis (2000) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001) Azumi 2: Death or Love (2005) Death Note (2006) Death Note: The Last Name (2006) God's Left Hand, Devil's Right Hand (2006) Pride (2009) Messiah (2011) Danger Dolls (2014)