Extinct genus of dinosaurs API Temporal range: Late Triassic, 210 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N ↓ Hypothetical restoration Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade: Dinosauria Clade: Saurischia Clade: Theropoda Superfamily: †Coelophysoidea Genus: †Gojirasaurus Carpenter, 1997 Type species †Gojirasaurus quayi Carpenter, 1997 Gojirasaurus (meaning "Godzilla lizard")[1] is a dubious genus of coelophysoid theropod dinosaur named after the giant monster movie character Gojira (the Japanese name for the monster Godzilla). Contents 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 Classification 3.1 Distinguishing anatomical features 4 Paleoecology 5 See also 6 References Etymology[edit] The composite term Gojirasaurus is derived from the name of the giant Japanese movie monster "Gojira" (Godzilla) and the Greek word "{{lang|grc-Latn|sauros}" (σαυρος) meaning "lizard";[2] thus, "Godzilla lizard". In addition, a theropod dinosaur with the name Godzillasaurus exists in the Heisei era of Godzilla films, and in that continuity is explained to be the unmutated form of Godzilla. "Gojira" was selected as a reference to the great size of this theropod, which exceeded that of its Triassic counterparts. The specific name quayi, is a reference to Quay County, New Mexico, where the holotype specimen was discovered. Gojirasaurus was described and named by Kenneth Carpenter in 1997 and the type species is Gojirasaurus quayi. Description[edit] Gojirasaurus is one of the largest meat-eating dinosaurs known from the Triassic Period, almost the size of its relative, the large coelophysoid Dilophosaurus.[3][4] The size of its tibia was 469 mm, which was comparable to that of Liliensternus (409 mm) and Dilophosaurus (555 mm), suggesting that it was a large Triassic dinosaur, estimated to be about 5.5 m (18 ft) long, which can be extrapolated to a weight of approximately 150–200 kg (330–440 lb).[5] Carpenter (1997) pointed to features of the pelvis and ankle suggesting that this was an immature individual, and could therefore have grown to even a larger size in maturity. Christopher T. Griffith (2019) confirmed Gojirasaurus possessed features indicative of ontogenetic immaturity.[6] Specimen NMMNH P-4666, which consists of only a pubis, was referred to this genus by Hunt in 1994. Classification[edit] In 1994 Adrian Hunt, in his unpublished thesis, described and named this material "Revueltoraptor lucasi" which is now considered a nomen nudum.[7] Carpenter officially described and named UCM 47221, Gojirasaurus quayi in 1997 and classified it as a coelophysoid. The original remains attributed to this dinosaur included a serrated tooth, a cervical rib, two anterior dorsal ribs, one posterior dorsal rib, a right scapula, two gastralia, four vertebrae, one anterior chevron, a right pubis, a left tibia, and one metatarsal.[1] Tykoski and Rowe (2004) and later Carrano et al. (2005) agreed that Gojirasaurus is more derived than Dilophosaurus[8][9] However, later study by Nesbitt et al. (2007) showed that the vertebrae actually belonged to the rauisuchian Shuvosaurus, and the pubis and tibia belonged to another coelophysoid, indistinguishable from the contemporary Coelophysis, making the status of Gojirasaurus as a valid genus dubious.[7] Distinguishing anatomical features[edit] According to Nesbitt et al. (2007), Gojirasaurus can be distinguished based on the fact that its tibia is more robust than that of its relative Coelophysis.[1] Mortimer (2012) has proposed that the observed difference in the leg bone might be just size-related, and not a true apomorphy. Rauhut (2003) attempted to diagnose this genus based on the fact that the mid/posterior dorsal vertebrae had taller neural spines than those observed in other coelophysoids. However, the reassignment of the dorsal vertebrae on which the diagnosis was based would render it invalid.[10] Paleoecology[edit] The only known specimen of Gojirasaurus was discovered in the Cooper Canyon Formation of the Dockum Group near Revuelto Creek, Quay County, in New Mexico. This genus was discovered in 1981, in gray carbonaceous mudstone deposited during the Norian stage of the Late Triassic, which based on magnetostratigraphy,[11] was approximately 228 to 208 million years ago. This specimen is housed in the collection of the University of Colorado Museum, in Boulder, Colorado. Gojirasaurus's assignment to the Coelophysoidea, would suggest that it was a bipedal, terrestrial, actively mobile carnivore. Contemporaries of Gojirasaurus included the pseudosuchian Shuvosaurus, and the phytosaur Rutiodon. See also[edit] Dinosaurs portal Timeline of coelophysoid research References[edit] ^ a b c K. Carpenter, 1997, "A giant coelophysoid (Ceratosauria) theropod from the Upper Triassic of New Mexico, USA", Neues Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie, Abhandlungen 205 (#2): 189-208 ^ Liddell, Henry George and Robert Scott (1980). A Greek-English Lexicon (Abridged ed.). United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-910207-5. ^ Parrish, J. M., and Carpenter, K., 1986, A new vertebrate fauna from the Dockum Formation (Late Triassic) of eastern New Mexico: In: The Beginning of the Age of Dinosaurs, Faunal change across the Triassic Jurassic Boundary, edited by Padian, K., Cambridge University Press, p. 151-160. ^ Strauss, Bob. "Gojirasaurus". About.com:Dinosaurs. New York Times. Retrieved 17 January 2010. ^ "Gojirasaurus". Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 7 December 2012. ^ Griffin, Christopher T. (September 2019). "Large neotheropods from the Upper Triassic of North America and the early evolution of large theropod body sizes". Journal of Paleontology. 93 (5): 1010–1030. doi:10.1017/jpa.2019.13. ISSN 0022-3360. ^ a b Nesbitt, Irmis and Parker (2007). "A critical re-evaluation of the Late Triassic dinosaur taxa of North America." Journal of Systematic Palaeontology, 5 (#2): 209–243. ^ Tykoski, R.S. & Rowe, T. (2004). "Ceratosauria". In: Weishampel, D.B., Dodson, P., & Osmolska, H. (Eds.) The Dinosauria (2nd edition). Berkeley: University of California Press. pg. 47–70 ISBN 0-520-24209-2 ^ Carrano, Hutchinson and Sampson, 2005. New information on Segisaurus halli, a small theropod dinosaur from the Early Jurassic of Arizona. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology. 25 (#4), 835–849. ^ Mortimer, Mickey (2012). "Coelophysoidea". Archived from the original on 4 May 2013. ^ Molina-Garza, R. S., Geissman, J. W., and Lucas, S. G. 1993. Late Carnian-early Norian magnetostratigraphy from nonmarine strata, Chinle Group, New Mexico. v t e Theropoda Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Sauropsida Clade: Avemetatarsalia Clade: Dinosauria Avemetatarsalia see Avemetatarsalia Theropoda see below↓ Theropoda Theropoda †Chindesaurus? †Daemonosaurus? †Eodromaeus? †Eoraptor? †Erythrovenator †Guaibasaurus? †Nhandumirim? †Tawa? †Herrerasauridae? Neotheropoda †Dolichosuchus? †Gojirasaurus †Halticosaurus? †Liliensternus †Lophostropheus †Notatesseraeraptor †Sarcosaurus †Shuangbaisaurus †Sinosaurus †Tachiraptor †Velocipes? †Zupaysaurus †Coelophysoidea Dracoraptor Podokesaurus Coelophysidae Camposaurus Coelophysis Lepidus Lucianovenator Panguraptor Powellvenator Procompsognathus Pterospondylus? Segisaurus †Dilophosauridae Dilophosaurus Dracovenator Cryolophosaurus? Sarcosaurus? Averostra see below↓ Dubious neotheropods †Teinurosaurus Averostra Averostra †Lophostropheus †Kaijiangosaurus? †Ceratosauria Berberosaurus Fosterovenator? Jubbulpuria Lukousaurus? Saltriovenator Ceratosauridae Ceratosaurus Genyodectes Abelisauroidea Betasuchus? Lametasaurus? Ornithomimoides? Ozraptor? Noasauridae Afromimus Austrocheirus Compsosuchus Deltadromeus? Ligabueino Spinostropheus Elaphrosaurinae Elaphrosaurus Huinculsaurus Limusaurus Noasaurinae Laevisuchus Masiakasaurus Noasaurus Velocisaurus Vespersaurus Abelisauridae Chenanisaurus Dryptosauroides? Eoabelisaurus Indosuchus Kryptops Rugops Spectrovenator Tarascosaurus Tralkasaurus Xenotarsosaurus Carnotaurinae Majungasaurini Arcovenator Genusaurus Indosaurus Majungasaurus Rajasaurus Brachyrostra Dahalokely? Ekrixinatosaurus Ilokelesia Rahiolisaurus? Skorpiovenator Thanos Furileusauria Abelisaurus Aucasaurus Carnotaurus Llukalkan Niebla Pycnonemosaurus Quilmesaurus Viavenator Tetanurae see below↓ Tetanurae Tetanurae †Calamospondylus? †Chienkosaurus? †Chuandongocoelurus †Cruxicheiros? †Cryolophosaurus †Kaijiangosaurus? †Kayentavenator †Monolophosaurus †Pandoravenator †Sinosaurus †Szechuanosaurus †Vectaerovenator Orionides †Megalosauroidea Yunyangosaurus Piatnitzkysauridae Condorraptor Marshosaurus Piatnitzkysaurus Xuanhanosaurus? Megalosauria Streptospondylus? Megalosauridae Eustreptospondylus Megalosaurinae Duriavenator Megalosaurus Torvosaurus Wiehenvenator Afrovenatorinae Afrovenator Dubreuillosaurus Leshansaurus Magnosaurus Piveteausaurus Poekilopleuron? Spinosauridae Camarillasaurus Ostafrikasaurus? Baryonychinae Baryonyx Cristatusaurus Suchomimus Suchosaurus? Spinosaurinae Ichthyovenator Irritator Oxalaia Siamosaurus Vallibonavenatrix Spinosaurini Sigilmassasaurus Spinosaurus Avetheropoda see below↓ Avetheropoda Avetheropoda †Gasosaurus? †Lourinhanosaurus? †Carnosauria Altispinax Monolophosaurus? Spinosauridae? Megalosauridae? Allosauroidea Asfaltovenator Erectopus Xuanhanosaurus? Piatnitzkysauridae? Metriacanthosauridae Xuanhanosaurus? Yangchuanosaurus Metriacanthosaurinae Metriacanthosaurus Shidaisaurus Siamotyrannus Sinraptor Allosauria Allosauridae Allosaurus Antrodemus? Epanterias? Saurophaganax Carcharodontosauria Datanglong Lusovenator Siamraptor Veterupristisaurus Neovenatoridae Chilantaisaurus? Deltadromeus? Gualicho? Neovenator Siats Megaraptora? Carcharodontosauridae Acrocanthosaurus Altispinax? Concavenator Eocarcharia Kelmayisaurus Lajasvenator Sauroniops Shaochilong Taurovenator Veterupristisaurus? Carcharodontosaurinae Carcharodontosaurus Giganotosaurini Giganotosaurus Mapusaurus Tyrannotitan †Megaraptora Aoniraptor? Bahariasaurus? Deltadromeus? Fukuiraptor Phuwiangvenator Rapator? Megaraptoridae Aerosteon Australovenator Megaraptor Murusraptor Orkoraptor Tratayenia Coelurosauria see below↓ Coelurosauria Coelurosauria †Aratasaurus †Bicentenaria †Chilantaisaurus? †Gualicho? †Richardoestesia? †Sciurumimus? †Vayuraptor? †Xinjiangovenator? †Zuolong †Megaraptora? Tyrannoraptora †Tyrannosauroidea Chingkankousaurus? Labocania? Coeluridae? Coelurus Tanycolagreus? Proceratosauridae Guanlong Kileskus Proceratosaurus Sinotyrannus Yutyrannus Pantyrannosauria Alectrosaurus Aviatyrannis Bagaraatan? Dilong Eotyrannus Jinbeisaurus Juratyrant Moros Santanaraptor Stokesosaurus Suskityrannus Timimus? Timurlengia Xiongguanlong Megaraptora? Eutyrannosauria Appalachiosaurus Bistahieversor Dryptosaurus Tyrannosauridae Albertosaurinae Albertosaurus Gorgosaurus Tyrannosaurinae Dynamoterror Lythronax Nanotyrannus? Nanuqsaurus Raptorex? Teratophoneus Alioramini Alioramus Qianzhousaurus Daspletosaurini Daspletosaurus Thanatotheristes Tyrannosaurini Tarbosaurus Tyrannosaurus Zhuchengtyrannus Maniraptoromorpha see below↓ Dubious coelurosaurs †Iliosuchus †Kakuru? †Phaedrolosaurus? †Shanyangosaurus Maniraptoromorpha Maniraptoromorpha †Coelurus? †Juravenator †Ornitholestes Neocoelurosauria †Aniksosaurus †Compsognathidae Aniksosaurus? Aristosuchus Beipiaognathus? Compsognathus Huaxiagnathus Juravenator? Mirischia Scipionyx Sinocalliopteryx Sinosauropteryx Ubirajara Xunmenglong Maniraptoriformes †Fukuivenator †Compsognathidae? †Ornithomimosauria Arkansaurus Calamosaurus? Hexing Kinnareemimus Nedcolbertia Nqwebasaurus Thecocoelurus? Valdoraptor? Ornithomimoidea Pelecanimimus Shenzhousaurus Deinocheiridae Beishanlong? Deinocheirus Garudimimus Harpymimus? Paraxenisaurus Ornithomimidae Aepyornithomimus Anserimimus Archaeornithomimus? "Coelosaurus" Dromiceiomimus Gallimimus Ornithomimus Qiupalong Rativates Sinornithomimus Struthiomimus Tototlmimus Maniraptora see Maniraptora includes birds Taxon identifiers Wikidata: Q134199 Wikispecies: Gojirasaurus Fossilworks: 65489 GBIF: 4574775 IRMNG: 1154597