Artefact in Greek mythology, part of the Argonauts' tale For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Jason returns with the Golden Fleece, shown on an Apulian red-figure calyx krater, c. 340–330 BC In Greek mythology, the Golden Fleece (Greek: Χρυσόμαλλο δέρας, Chrysómallo déras) is the fleece of the golden-woolled,[a] winged ram, Chrysomallos, which was held in Colchis.[1] The fleece is a symbol of authority and kingship. It figures in the tale of the hero Jason and his crew of Argonauts, who set out on a quest for the fleece by order of King Pelias, in order to place Jason rightfully on the throne of Iolcus in Thessaly. Through the help of Medea, they acquire the Golden Fleece. The story is of great antiquity and was current in the time of Homer (eighth century BC). It survives in various forms, among which the details vary. Nowadays, The heraldic variations of Golden Fleece is featured frequently in the Republic of Georgia, especially for Coats of Arms and Flags associated with Western Georgian (Historical Colchis) municipalities and cities, including the Coats of Arms of City of Kutaisi, ancient capital city of Colchis. Contents 1 Plot 2 Evolution of plot 3 Interpretations 3.1 Main theories 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 6.1 Bibliography 7 External links Plot[edit] Greek mythology Deities Primordial Titans Olympians Nymphs Sea-deities Earth-deities Heroes and heroism Heracles / Hercules Labors Achilles Hector Trojan War Odysseus Odyssey Jason Argonauts Golden Fleece Perseus Medusa Gorgon Oedipus Sphinx Orpheus Orphism Theseus Minotaur Bellerophon Pegasus Chimera Daedalus Labyrinth Atalanta Hippomenes Golden apple Cadmus Thebes Aeneas Aeneid Triptolemus Eleusinian Mysteries Pelops Ancient Olympic Games Pirithous Centauromachy Amphitryon Teumessian fox Narcissus Narcissism Meleager Calydonian boar hunt Otrera Amazons Related Satyrs Centaurs Dragons Demogorgon Religion in Ancient Greece Mycenaean gods  Ancient Greece portal  Myths portal v t e Athamas the Minyan, a founder of Halos in Thessaly[2] but also king of the city of Orchomenus in Boeotia (a region of southeastern Greece), took the goddess Nephele as his first wife. They had two children, the boy Phrixus (whose name means "curly," as in the texture of the ram's fleece) and the girl Helle. Later Athamas became enamored of and married Ino, the daughter of Cadmus. When Nephele left in anger, drought came upon the land. Ino was jealous of her stepchildren and plotted their deaths; in some versions, she persuaded Athamas that sacrificing Phrixus was the only way to end the drought. Nephele, or her spirit, appeared to the children with a winged ram whose fleece was of gold.[b] The ram had been sired by Poseidon in his primitive ram-form upon Theophane, a nymph[c] and the granddaughter of Helios, the sun-god. According to Hyginus,[4] Poseidon carried Theophane to an island where he made her into a ewe, so that he could have his way with her among the flocks. There Theophane's other suitors could not distinguish the ram-god and his consort.[5] Nepheles' children escaped on the yellow ram over the sea, but Helle fell off and drowned in the strait now named after her, the Hellespont. The ram spoke to Phrixus, encouraging him,[d] and took the boy safely to Colchis (modern-day Georgia), on the easternmost shore of the Euxine (Black) Sea. In essence this act returned the ram to the god Poseidon, and The ram became the constellation Aries. Phrixus settled in the house of Aeetes, son of Helios the sun god. He hung the Golden Fleece preserved from the ram on an oak in a grove sacred to Ares, the god of war and one of the Twelve Olympians. The golden fleece was defended by bulls with hoofs of brass and breath of fire. It was also guarded by a never sleeping dragon with teeth which could become soldiers when planted in the ground. The dragon was at the foot of the tree on which the fleece was placed.[1] In some versions of the story, Jason attempts to put the guard serpent to sleep. The snake is coiled around a column at the base of which is a ram and on top of which is a bird.[citation needed] Evolution of plot[edit] Pindar employed the quest for the Golden Fleece in his Fourth Pythian Ode (written in 462 BC), though the fleece is not in the foreground. When Aeetes challenges Jason to yoke the fire-breathing bulls, the fleece is the prize: "Let the King do this, the captain of the ship! Let him do this, I say, and have for his own the immortal coverlet, the fleece, glowing with matted skeins of gold".[7] In later versions of the story, the ram is said to have been the offspring of the sea god Poseidon and Themisto (less often, Nephele or Theophane). The classic telling is the Argonautica of Apollonius of Rhodes, composed in the mid-third century BC Alexandria, recasting early sources that have not survived. Another, much less-known Argonautica, using the same body of myth, was composed in Latin by Valerius Flaccus during the time of Vespasian. Where the written sources fail, through accidents of history, sometimes the continuity of a mythic tradition can be found among the vase-painters. The story of the Golden Fleece appeared to have little resonance for Athenians of the Classic age, for only two representations of it on Attic-painted wares of the fifth century have been identified: a krater at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a kylix in the Vatican collections.[e][f][8] In the kylix painted by Douris, ca 480-470, Jason is being disgorged from the mouth of the dragon, a detail that does not fit easily into the literary sources; behind the dragon, the fleece hangs from an apple tree. Jason's helper in the Athenian vase-paintings is not Medea— who had a history in Athens as the opponent of Theseus— but Athena. Interpretations[edit] The very early origin of the myth in preliterate times means that during the more than a millennium when it was to some degree part of the fabric of culture, its perceived significance likely passed through numerous developments. Several euhemeristic attempts to interpret the Golden Fleece "realistically" as reflecting some physical cultural object or alleged historical practice have been made. For example, in the 20th century, some scholars suggested that the story of the Golden Fleece signified the bringing of sheep husbandry to Greece from the east;[g] in other readings, scholars theorized it referred to golden grain,[h] or to the sun.[i] A sluice box used in placer mining. A more widespread interpretation relates the myth of the fleece to a method of washing gold from streams, which was well attested (but only from c. 5th century BC) in the region of Georgia to the east of the Black Sea. Sheep fleeces, sometimes stretched over a wooden frame, would be submerged in the stream, and gold flecks borne down from upstream placer deposits would collect in them. The fleeces would be hung in trees to dry before the gold was shaken or combed out. Alternatively, the fleeces would be used on washing tables in alluvial mining of gold or on washing tables at deep gold mines.[j] Judging by the very early gold objects from a range of cultures, washing for gold is a very old human activity. Strabo describes the way in which gold could be washed: "It is said that in their country gold is carried down by the mountain torrents, and that the barbarians obtain it by means of perforated troughs and fleecy skins, and that this is the origin of the myth of the golden fleece—unless they call them Iberians, by the same name as the western Iberians, from the gold mines in both countries." Another interpretation is based on the references in some versions to purple or purple-dyed cloth. The purple dye extracted from the purple dye murex snail and related species was highly prized in ancient times. Clothing made of cloth dyed with Tyrian purple was a mark of great wealth and high station (hence the phrase "royal purple"). The association of gold with purple is natural and occurs frequently in literature.[k] Main theories[edit] The Douris cup, depicting Jason being regurgitated by the dragon protecting the fleece The following are the chief among the various interpretations of the fleece, with notes on sources and major critical discussions: It represents royal power.[9][10][11][12][13] It represents the flayed skin of Krios ('Ram'), companion of Phrixus.[14] It represents a book on alchemy.[15][16] It represents a technique of writing in gold on parchment.[17] It represents a form of placer mining practiced in Georgia, for example.[18][19][20][21][22][23] It represents the forgiveness of the Gods.[24][25] It represents a rain cloud.[26][27] It represents a land of golden grain.[27][28] It represents the spring-hero.[27][29] It represents the sea reflecting the sun.[27][30][31] It represents the gilded prow of Phrixus' ship.[27][32] It represents a breed of sheep in ancient Georgia.[33][34][35] It represents the riches imported from the East.[36] It represents the wealth or technology of Colchis.[37][38][39] It was a covering for a cult image of Zeus in the form of a ram.[40] It represents a fabric woven from sea silk.[41][42][43] It is about a voyage from Greece, through the Mediterranean, across the Atlantic to the Americas.[44] It represents trading fleece dyed murex-purple for Georgian gold.[45] See also[edit] List of mythological objects Absyrtus Gold mining Order of the Golden Fleece The Sea of Monsters Notes[edit] ^ Greek: Χρυσόμαλλος, Khrusómallos. ^ That the ram was sent by Zeus was the version heard by Pausanias in the second century of the Christian era (Pausanias, ix.34.5). ^ Theophane may equally be construed as "appearing as a goddess" or as "causing a god to appear".[3] ^ Upon the shield of Jason, as it was described in Apollonius' Argonautica, "was Phrixos the Minyan, depicted as though really listening to the ram, and the ram seemed to be speaking. As you looked on this pair, you would be struck dumb with amazement and deceived, for you would expect to hear some wise utterance from them, with this hope you would gaze long upon them.".[6] ^ Vatican 16545 ^ Gisela Richter published the Metropolitan Museum 's krater in: Richter, Gisela (1935). "Jason and the Golden Fleece". American Journal of Archaeology. 39 (2): 182–184. doi:10.2307/498331. JSTOR 498331. ^ Interpretation #12 ^ Interpretation #8 ^ Interpretation #10 ^ Interpretation #5 ^ Interpretation #17 References[edit] ^ a b William Godwin (1876). Lives of the Necromancers. London, F. J. Mason. p. 41. ^ Strabo, ix.5.8. ^ Karl Kerenyi, The Heroes of the Greeks ^ Hyginus, Fabulae, 163 ^ Karl Kerenyi The Gods of the Greeks, (1951) 1980:182f ^ Richard Hunter, tr. Apollonius of Rhodes: Jason and the Golden Fleece, (Oxford University Press) 1993:21) ^ Translation in Nicholson, Nigel (Autumn–Winter 2000). "Polysemy and Ideology in Pindar 'Pythian' 4.229-230". Phoenix. 54 (3/4): 192. doi:10.2307/1089054. JSTOR 1089054.. ^ King, Cynthia (July 1983). "Who Is That Cloaked Man? Observations on Early Fifth Century B. C. Pictures of the Golden Fleece". American Journal of Archaeology. 87 (3): 385–387. doi:10.2307/504803. JSTOR 504803. ^ Marcus Porcius Cato and Marcus Terentius Varro, Roman Farm Management, The Treatises of Cato and Varro, in English, with Notes of Modern Instances ^ Braund (1994), pp. 21–23 harvp error: no target: CITEREFBraund1994 (help) ^ Popko, M. (1974). "Kult Swietego runa w hetyckiej Anatolii" [The Cult of the Golden Fleece in Hittite Anatolia]. Preglad Orientalistyczuy (in Russian). 91: 225–30. ^ Newman, John Kevin (2001) "The Golden Fleece. Imperial Dream" (Theodore Papanghelis and Antonios Rengakos (eds.). A Companion to Apollonius Rhodius. Leiden: Brill (Mnemosyne Supplement 217), 309-40) ^ Lordkipanidze (2001) harvp error: no target: CITEREFLordkipanidze2001 (help) ^ Diodorus Siculus 4. 47; cf. scholia on Apollonius Rhodius 2. 1144; 4. 119, citing Dionysus' Argonautica ^ Palaephatus (fourth century BC) 'On the Incredible' (Festa, N. (ed.) (1902) Mythographi Graeca III, 2, Lipsiae, p. 89 ^ John of Antioch fr.15.3 FHG (5.548) ^ Haraxes of Pergamum (c. first to sixth century) (Jacoby, F. (1923) Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker I (Berlin), IIA, 490, fr. 37) ^ Strabo (first century BC) Geography I, 2, 39 (Jones, H.L. (ed.) (1969) The Geography of Strabo (in eight volumes) London "Strabo, Geography, NOTICE". Perseus.tufts.edu. Retrieved 26 May 2012. ^ Tran, T (1992). "The Hydrometallurgy of Gold Processing". Interdisciplinary Science Reviews. 17 (4): 356–365. doi:10.1179/isr.1992.17.4.356. ^ "Gold - during the Classic Era". Minelinks.com. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 26 May 2012. ^ Shuker, Karl P. N. (1997), From Flying Toads To Snakes With Wings, Llewellyn ^ Renault, Mary (2004), The Bull from the Sea, Arrow (Rand) ^ refuted in Braund (1994), p. 24 harvp error: no target: CITEREFBraund1994 (help) and Lordkipanidze (2001) harvp error: no target: CITEREFLordkipanidze2001 (help) ^ Müller, Karl Otfried (1844), Orchomenos und die Minyer, Breslau ^ refuted in Bacon (1925), pp. 64 ff, 163 ff harvp error: no target: CITEREFBacon1925 (help) ^ Forchhammer, P. W. (1857) Hellenica Berlin p. 205 ff, 330 ff ^ a b c d e refuted in Bacon (1925) harvp error: no target: CITEREFBacon1925 (help) ^ Faust, Adolf (1898), Einige deutsche und griechische Sagen im Lichte ihrer ursprünglichen Bedeutung. Mulhausen ^ Schroder, R. (1899), Argonautensage und Verwandtes, Poznań ^ Vurthiem, V (1902), "De Argonautarum Vellere aureo", Mnemosyne, New Series, XXX, pp. 54–67; XXXI, p. 116 ^ Wilhelm Mannhardt, in Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, VII, p. 241 ff, 281 ff ^ Svoronos, M. (1914). Journal International d'Archéologie Numismatique. XVI: 81–152. Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ Ninck, M. (1921). "Die Bedeutung des Wassers im Kult und Leben der Alten". Philologus Suppl. 14 (2). ^ Ryder, M.L. (1991). "The last word on the Golden Fleece legend?". Oxford Journal of Archaeology. 10: 57–60. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0092.1991.tb00005.x. ^ Smith, G.J.; Smith, A.J. (1992). "Jason's Golden Fleece". Oxford Journal of Archaeology. 11: 119–20. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0092.1992.tb00260.x. ^ Bacon (1925) harvp error: no target: CITEREFBacon1925 (help) ^ Akaki Urushadze (1984), The Country of the Enchantress Medea, Tbilisi ^ "Archived Copy". Archived from the original on 25 November 2005. Retrieved 13 October 2005.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Colchis, The Land Of The Golden Fleece, Republic Of Georgia". Great-adventures.com. Retrieved 26 May 2012. ^ Robert Graves (1944/1945), The Golden Fleece/Hercules, My Shipmate, New York: Grosset & Dunlap ^ Verrill, A. Hyatt (1950), Shell Collector's Handbook, New York: Putnam, p. 77 ^ Abbott, R. Tucker (1972), Kingdom of the Seashell, New York: Crown Publishers, p. 184; "history of sea byssus cloth". Designboom.com. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 26 May 2012. ^ refuted in Barber (1991) harvp error: no target: CITEREFBarber1991 (help) and McKinley (1999), pp. 9–29 harvp error: no target: CITEREFMcKinley1999 (help) ^ Bailey, James R. (1973), The God Kings and the Titans; The New World Ascendancy in Ancient Times, St. Martin's Press ^ Silver, Morris (1992), Taking Ancient Mythology Economically, Leiden: Brill "Document Title". Members.tripod.com. Retrieved 26 May 2012. Bibliography[edit] Bacon, Janet Ruth (1925). The Voyage of the Argonauts. London: Methuen. Barber, Elizabeth J. W. (1991). Prehistoric Textiles: the Development of Cloth in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages with Special Reference to the Aegean. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00224-8. Braund, David (1994). Georgia in Antiquity: A History of Colchis and Transcaucasian Iberia, 550 BC–AD 562. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-814473-1. Lordkipanidze, Otar (2001). "The Golden Fleece: myth, euhemeristic explanation and archaeology". Oxford Journal of Archaeology. 20 (1): 1–38. doi:10.1111/1468-0092.00121. McKinley, Daniel (1999). Pinna and her Silken Beard: a Foray into Historical Misappropriations. Ars Textrina. 29. Charles Babbage Research Centre. External links[edit] Media related to Golden Fleece Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons The Project Gutenberg text of The Golden Fleece and the Heroes Who Lived Before Achilles v t e Jason and the Argonauts Characters and topics Aeson (father) Argonauts Medea (spouse) Argus Aeëtes (father-in-law) Pelias (uncle) Phineus (oracle) Cheiron (trainer) Argo (ship) Golden Fleece Ancient sources Medea by Euripides Argonautica by Apollonius of Rhodes Argonautica (Latin) by Gaius Valerius Flaccus Argonautica Orphica Film/TV Jason and the Argonauts (1963 film) Medea Young Hercules (1998) Jason and the Argonauts (2000 miniseries) Atlantis (2013) Opera Giasone (1649) La toison d'or (1789) Other The Golden Fleecing (comic book story) Jason with the Golden Fleece (sculpture) Jason et Médée (ballet) Jason and Medea (painting) Rise of the Argonauts (video game) Related The Golden Fleece and the Heroes Who Lived Before Achilles Jason in popular culture v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Classical religious forms Ancient Greek religion Gnosticism Paleo-Balkan mythology Hellenistic religion Orphism Pythagoreanism Mycenaean deities Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Samothracian Mysteries Main beliefs Ages of Man Apotheosis Euhemerism Eusebeia Greek Heroic Age Interpretatio graeca Monism Mythology Nympholepsy Paganism Paradoxography Polytheism Theism Texts/epic poems/odes Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Cyranides Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Ehoiai Greek Magical Papyri Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Interpretation of Dreams (Antiphon) Oneirocritica Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Telegony The golden verses of Pythagoras Theogony Works and Days Epic Cycle Theban Cycle Rites and practices Amphidromia Animal sacrifice Apotheosis Baptes Curse tablet Daduchos Delphinion Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Hymns Hero cult Heroon Hierophany Hierophant Hierophylakes Hieros gamos Hypsistarians Iatromantis Interpretatio graeca Kanephoros Kykeon Libations Mystagogue Nekyia Necromancy Necromanteion Nymphaeum Panegyris Pharmakos Prayers Orgia Sacrifices Temenos Thyia Temples Votive offerings Sacred places Oracles, sanctuaries, Necromanteion Aornum Delphi Didymaion Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros island Oracle of Menestheus Tegyra Mountain Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Cave of Zeus, Crete Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Achilles island Delos Diomedes island Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Others Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Mythical beings Dragons in Greek mythology Greek mythological creatures Greek mythological figures List of minor Greek mythological figures Deities Primordial deities Aether Aion Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Aquatic deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Potamoi Potamides Proteus Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Hermanubis Hermes Thanatos Achlys Angelos Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Macaria Melinoë Persephone Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Dolos Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Other major deities Azone Eileithyia The Erinyes Harmonia The Muses Nemesis Pan Unknown God Zelus Heroes/heroines Abderus Achilles Actaeon Aeneas Argonauts Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Mythical tribes Amazons Anthropophage Atlantians Bebryces Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Telchines Oracles/seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Delphic Sibyl Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyl Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Magic Apotropaic magic Greek Magical Papyri Pella curse tablet Philia Mythical realms Aethiopia Atlantis Erytheia Hyperborea Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Scheria Scythia Themiscyra Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Fields of Punishment Isles of the Blessed Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Ferryman Charon Charon's obol Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Animals, daemons and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Hade's cattle Mythological wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Cranes-Pygmies war Gigantomachy Indian War (it is described at Dionysiaca) Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Mythological and religious objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Ara Baetylus Caduceus Cornucopia Dragon's teeth Diipetes Galatea Golden apple Golden Fleece Gorgoneion Greek terracotta figurines Harpe Ichor Lotus tree Minoan seals Moly Necklace of Harmonia Omphalos Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos (Winged helmet) Philosopher's stone Ring of Gyges Rod of Asclepius Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thymiaterion Thyrsus Trident Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of Fortune Wheel of fire Xoanon Symbols Arkalochori Axe Labrys Ouroboros Owl of Athena Mythological powers Divination Eidolon Eternal youth Evocation Fortune-telling Immortality Language of the birds Nympholepsy Magic Ornithomancy Shamanism Shapeshifting Weather modification Storage containers, cups, vases Amphora Calathus Chalice Ciborium Cotyla Hydria Hydriske Kalpis Kantharos Kernos Kylix Lebes Lekythos Loutrophoros Oenochoe Pelike Pithos Skyphos Stamnos Urn Musical Instruments Aulos Barbiton Chelys Cithara Cochilia Crotalum (Castanets) Epigonion Kollops Lyre Pan flute Pandura Phorminx Psaltery Salpinx Sistrum Tambourine Trigonon Tympanum Water organ Games Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Festivals/feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Vessels Argo Phaeacian ships Modern offshoot religions Discordianism Gaianism Feraferia Hellenism Modern popular culture Greek mythology in popular culture Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125