1998 American science fiction film This article is about the film. For the soundtrack, see Small Soldiers (soundtrack). For the video game, see Small Soldiers (video game). Small Soldiers North American theatrical release poster Directed by Joe Dante Produced by Michael Finnell Colin Wilson[1] Screenplay by Ted Elliott Terry Rossio Gavin Scott Adam Rifkin Starring Kirsten Dunst Gregory Smith Jay Mohr Phil Hartman Kevin Dunn Denis Leary Frank Langella Tommy Lee Jones Music by Jerry Goldsmith Cinematography Jamie Anderson Edited by Marshall Havey Michael Thau Production companies DreamWorks Pictures Universal Pictures Amblin Entertainment Distributed by DreamWorks Pictures (North America) Universal Pictures (International) Release date June 4, 1998 (1998-06-04) (United Kingdom) July 10, 1998 (1998-07-10) (United States) Running time 108 minutes Country United States Language English Budget $40 million Box office $87.5 million[2] Small Soldiers is a 1998 American science fiction film directed by Joe Dante from a story by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio. It stars Kirsten Dunst and Gregory Smith, along with the voices of Frank Langella and Tommy Lee Jones. The film depicts two conflicting factions of action figures who turn sentient after being programmed with a military microprocessor, putting lives in danger when one faction turns violent in their efforts to eliminate their enemy toys and anyone assisting them. Released on July 10, 1998, in the United States, the film received mixed reviews, but grossed $87.5 million on a $40 million budget. Small Soldiers marks the last on-screen film role of Phil Hartman, who died two months before the film's American premiere, and is dedicated in his memory. Additionally, it marked the final film role of Clint Walker before his retirement and later death in May 2018. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 2.1 Voice cast 3 Production 4 Reception 5 Lawsuit 6 In other media 7 Cancelled remake 8 References 9 External links Plot[edit] Top defense contractor GloboTech Industries acquires the Heartland Toy Company and as part of the move, Globotech CEO Gil Mars commissions Heartland toy designers Larry Benson and Irwin Wayfair to develop actual live action toys capable of "playing back". Mars selects Larry's soldiers, the Commando Elite for the project and Irwin's creatures, the Gorgonites for their enemies, despite Irwin designing them as peaceful educational toys. Faced with a tight three-month deadline for the toys' release, Larry forgoes safety testing, then uses Irwin's password and chooses GloboTech's X1000 microprocessor to activate the toys. Adolescent Alan Abernathy signs off for a shipment of the toys at his family's toy store without his father's consent. He and delivery driver Joe activate the leaders, Archer and Chip Hazard. Alan's neighbor and love interest, Christy Fimple, buys Chip Hazard as a birthday present for her brother, Timmy. Alan returns home to discover Archer in his backpack; he realizes Archer is sentient, but in the meantime, the Commando Elite apparently attack the Gorgonites in the toy store. Alan calls the company and files a complaint. Later, when Larry and Irwin listen to Alan's voice mail, Irwin is terrified to discover the X1000 was designed for smart munitions guidance; a Globotech engineer reveals the artificial intelligence circuit is designed to learn over time, but mass production was scrapped due to issues with electromagnetic pulse shielding. The Commando Elite pursue Alan to his home and attempt to interrogate and kill Archer in the kitchen. Alan intervenes and is wounded by Nick Nitro, whom he partially destroys by shoving the Commando in the garbage disposal. His parents, Stuart and Irene, arrive in the kitchen, having been alerted by the sounds of the scuffle there. Alan attempts to explain what is going on, but with Archer not supporting his explanation, neither of his parents believe him. The next day, Alan and Archer find the Gorgonites in a dumpster at the store. At home, Alan learns the goal of the Gorgonites is to seek their home Gorgon, which they mistakenly believe to be in Yosemite National Park. Through tapping the Abernathys' phone line, the Commando Elite learn of Alan's interest in Christy, sedate and subdue the Fimples and use the destroyed Nick Nitro’s AI chip to bring to life an army of Gwendy fashion dolls to act as reinforcements. The Commandos then take Christy hostage to force Alan into surrendering the Gorgonites. Alan and Archer sneak into the Fimples' house to save Christy, but the Gwendy dolls quickly subdue Alan. Archer cuts Christy loose from her bonds, and together they save Alan and destroy the Gwendys before escaping. The Commando Elite pursue them in improvised vehicles, but all except Chip Hazard are destroyed in a crash. The two teens and Archer return to Alan's house, only to find both their families waiting for them, believing that Alan kidnapped Christy and immobilized the Fimples. This time, Stuart and Irene believe Alan and Christy's account of the Gorgonites and the Commando Elite, but Phil and Marion, Christy's parents, remain skeptical. Irwin and Larry arrive and talk to Alan about his voicemail. At that moment, Chip Hazard attacks the house with a new force of Commando Elite from a hijacked recall shipment by Joe and with more improvised vehicles and weapons. The Commando Elite attack the Gorgonites and the humans, resulting in the house's electricity supply being cut off. Inspired by Irwin's advice to create an EMP blast, Alan heads out to force an overload of the power lines. Christy, Irwin, and Larry head to the Fimples' house to turn on all electronic items inside and wedge the circuit breakers open for a larger surge. The Gorgonites emerge and fight back against the Commando Elite. Chip Hazard flies to the top of the power line pole to stop Alan, where he battles and defeats Archer, but finds himself thrust by Alan into the power transformers, triggering the EMP blast, which destroys Chip Hazard along with the remaining Commando Elite. Mars arrives in his helicopter during the police and fire department cleanup the next day. He pays Joe, the Fimples, and the Abernathys for damages, as well as buying their silence from the media, and orders Larry and Irwin to repurpose the Commando Elite for military use. Among the craziness of the aftermath, Alan and Christy part on highly amicable terms, having agreed to start a relationship with each other. Alan later discovers the Gorgonites have screened themselves from the EMP blast by hiding underneath the Fimples' large satellite dish. The Abernathys bring the Gorgonites to Yosemite National Park, where Alan sends them out in a large toy boat from his father's store to find their home of Gorgon. Cast[edit] Gregory Smith as Alan Abernathy Kirsten Dunst as Christy Fimple Kevin Dunn as Stuart Abernathy Phil Hartman as Phil Fimple Ann Magnuson as Irene Abernathy Jay Mohr as Larry Benson David Cross as Irwin Wayfair Wendy Schaal as Marion Fimple Jacob Smith as Timmy Fimple Denis Leary as Gil Mars Alexandra Wilson as Ms. Kegel Dick Miller as Joe Robert Picardo as Ralph Quist Jonathan Bouck as Brad Belinda Balaski as Neighbor Rance Howard as Husband Jackie Joseph as Wife Voice cast[edit] Frank Langella as the voice of Archer: the cat-like leader of the Gorgonites Tommy Lee Jones as the voice of Chip Hazard: the platoon leader of the Commando Elite George Kennedy as the voice of Brick Bazooka: heavy artillery expert Jim Brown as the voice of Butch Meathook: sniper Ernest Borgnine as the voice of Kip Killigan: covert operations expert Clint Walker as the voice of Nick Nitro: demolitions expert Bruce Dern as the voice of Link Static: communications expert Christopher Guest as the voices of Slamfist and Scratch-It: the hunchback-like enforcer and Punch-It's female frog-like sibling Michael McKean as the voices of Insaniac and Troglokhan aka Freakenstein: the crazed Gorgonite and the navigator Harry Shearer as the voice of Punch-It: the brontothere-like Gorgonite Jim Cummings as the voice of Ocula: the one-eyed insect-like scout. Cummings was uncredited for the role. Sarah Michelle Gellar and Christina Ricci as the Gwendy dolls: dolls owned by Christy who are engineered to assist the Commando Elite Excluding Jones and Dern, the Commando Elite are voiced by cast members from the 1967 film The Dirty Dozen. Dern replaced The Dirty Dozen actor Richard Jaeckel, who died before shooting began. Excluding Langella and Cummings, the Gorgonites are voiced by cast members from the 1984 film This Is Spinal Tap. Miller and Balaski previously appeared in Joe Dante's films Piranha and The Howling, while the character of fellow The Howling cast member Picardo, Ralph Quist, shares a surname with Eddie Quist, his character in that film. Small Soldiers was Hartman's last on-screen role before his death and the film is dedicated to his memory.[3] Production[edit] On making the film, director Joe Dante recalled, "Originally I was told to make an edgy picture for teenagers, but when the sponsor tie-ins came in the new mandate was to soften it up as a kiddie movie. Too late, as it turned out, and there are elements of both approaches in there. Just before release it was purged of a lot of action and explosions."[4] On the film's special effects, Dante stated, "We were planning to use a lot of Stan Winston's puppets—he had made some very elaborate puppets that could do a lot of things. But in practice, we found it was much simpler and cheaper to let the CGI people do the work after we'd shot the scenes. So, I would say, it's one-third puppetry and the rest CGI in Small Soldiers, even though the original idea was to do mostly puppetry."[5] Reception[edit] Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 48% of 44 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average score is of 6.2/10. The critical consensus states, "Small Soldiers has plenty of visual razzle-dazzle, but the rote story proves disappointingly deficient in director Joe Dante's trademark anarchic spirit."[6] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of B+ on an A+ to F scale.[7] Siskel & Ebert gave it Two Thumbs Down. Roger Ebert gave the film 2.5 out of 4 stars, saying: "The toys are presented as individuals who can think for themselves, and there are believable heroes and villains among them. For smaller children, this could be a terrifying experience."[8] Caroline Westbrook of Empire Magazine gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and said: "It's Gremlins with toy soldiers, except not quite as dark or funny."[9] The film grossed $55.2 million in the United States and Canada and $87.5 million worldwide.[2] Lawsuit[edit] Filmmaker Gregory P. Grant filed suit against Steven Spielberg[10] for copying his film Ode to GI Joe,[11] which played at film festivals and earned him a Student Academy Award.[12][13][14][15][16][17] In other media[edit] See also: Small Soldiers (soundtrack) and Small Soldiers (video game) A soundtrack containing classic rock blended with hip hop was released on July 7, 1998 by DreamWorks Records. It peaked at 103 on the Billboard 200. The film score was composed and conducted by veteran composer Jerry Goldsmith. In addition, a video game based on the film was developed by DreamWorks Interactive and released by Electronic Arts on September 30, 1998. Kenner Products (a subsidiary of Hasbro) produced a line of toys, which featured the Gorgonites and the Commando Elite. Burger King teamed up with the film to promote their new product, the Rodeo Burger. They created a line of kids' meal toys tied to the film. They were met with some controversy after the film received a PG-13 rating from the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA). Burger King executives claimed this caught the company by surprise and they were led to believe the film would receive no higher than a PG rating. According to Joe Dante, the MPAA gave the film a PG-13 rating due to the scene in which the Commando Elite put drugs in Phil and Marion's drink. While the pamphlet accompanying the toys included the disclaimer "While toys are suitable for children of all ages, the movie Small Soldiers may contain material that is inappropriate for younger children," some restaurants accepted an exchange for Mr. Potato Head toys.[18][19][20] Cancelled remake[edit] A remake of Small Soldiers was in development by 20th Century Fox called Toymageddon. The script was purchased in January 2014, and director Justin Lin was set to produce the film. The story was described to be set in a "toy factory that begins to run amok." At that time it was not explicitly stated to be a remake of Small Soldiers.[21] Due to the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney on March 20, 2019, Disney later in August cancelled the film along with over 200 other projects, which revealed the film was intended as a remake of Small Soldiers.[22][23] References[edit] ^ "Small Soldiers - Thoughts". ^ a b Klady, Leonard (January 25, 1999). "The Top 125 Worldwide". Variety. p. 36. ^ Philpot, Robert (1998-12-06). "1998's top closing moments". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. p. Arts 1. ^ Brew, Simon (February 21, 2008). "The Den of Geek interview: Joe Dante". The Den of Geek. Retrieved January 9, 2016. ^ Sachs, Ben (August 8, 2012). "The orgiast: an interview with Joe Dante (part one)". Chicago Reader. Retrieved January 9, 2016. ^ "Rotten Tomatoes". ^ "CinemaScore". cinemascore.com. ^ Ebert, Roger (July 10, 1998). "Small Soldiers movie review & film summary (1998) | Roger Ebert". rogerebert. Retrieved 2020-07-17. ^ Westbrook, Caroline (2000-01-01). "Small Soldiers". Empire. Retrieved 2020-07-17. ^ Spielberg sued over Small Soldiers|Film|The Guardian ^ Ode to G.I. Joe (1991) - Turner Classic Movies ^ REEL LIFE / FILM & VIDEO FILE: Animation Panel Will Include a Familiar Voice : June Foray, known for her vocals of Rocky the Squirrel and Natasha, will join the discussion at a screening fund-raiser Sunday in Ojai. - Los Angeles Times ^ BEST OF THE INTERNATIONAL TOURNEE OF ANIMATION|Movieguide|Movie Reviews for Christians ^ `ANIMATION` SERVES UP A SMORGASBORD - Chicago Tribune ^ The 23rd Tournee of Animation Film Festival - Box Office Mojo ^ The Best Of The International Tournee Of Animation|Jonathan Rosenbaum ^ The Best of the International Tournee of Animation - The Austin Chronicle ^ Neville, Ken. ""Small Soldiers," Big Controversy". E Online. Retrieved 12 May 2015. ^ Small Soldiers: Squad Commander for PC - GameFAQs ^ Abrams, Simon. "Like Going to Church: Joe Dante on "The Movie Orgy"". rogerebert.com. Retrieved February 1, 2021. ^ Kit, Borys (January 27, 2014). "Fox Buys 'Toymageddon' for Justin Lin to Produce (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 7, 2019. ^ Boone, Brian (August 6, 2019). "Canceled Fox movies we'll never get to see". Looper. Retrieved September 7, 2019. ^ Donnelly, Matt (August 6, 2019). "Disney Flushes Fox Film Development, 'Redirects' Strategy After Big Q3 Loss". Variety. Retrieved September 7, 2019. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API API at IMDb API at AllMovie Small Soldiers at Box Office Mojo v t e Small Soldiers Film Small Soldiers (1998) soundtrack Video game Small Soldiers v t e Films directed by Joe Dante The Movie Orgy (1968) Hollywood Boulevard (1976) Piranha (1978) The Howling (1981) Twilight Zone: The Movie (1983) Gremlins (1984) Explorers (1985) Innerspace (1987) Amazon Women on the Moon (1987) The 'Burbs (1989) Gremlins 2: The New Batch (1990) Matinee (1993) Runaway Daughters (1994) The Second Civil War (1997) The Warlord: Battle for the Galaxy (1998) Small Soldiers (1998) Looney Tunes: Back in Action (2003) "Homecoming" (TV, 2005) Trapped Ashes (2006) "The Screwfly Solution" (TV, 2006) The Hole (2009) Burying the Ex (2014) Nightmare Cinema (2018)