This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Great Ape Project Founded 1993 Founder Peter Singer and Paola Cavalieri Focus Animal rights Website www.projetogap.org.br/en/ Warning: Page using Template:Infobox organization with unknown parameter "Non-profit_slogan" (this message is shown only in preview). Part of a series on Animal rights Around the world Timeline Animal cruelty Veganism Primate rights in research The Movement Advocates Vegans Groups Aspects Killing Mutilation Wild animals Consumption Dogs Horses Cats Cattle Bloodsports Bullfighting Hunting Fishing Animal testing Cosmetic Captivity Zoos Circuses Oceanariums Companion animals Puppy mills Abandonment Ideas Abolitionism Animal protectionism Carnism Personism Sentientism Sentiocentrism Speciesism Related Environmentalism  Animals portal v t e The Great Ape Project (GAP), founded in 1993, is an international organization of primatologists, anthropologists, ethicists, and others who advocate a United Nations Declaration of the Rights of Great Apes that would confer basic legal rights on non-human great apes: chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans. The rights suggested are the right to life, the protection of individual liberty, and the prohibition of torture. The organization also monitors individual great ape activity in the United States through a census program. Once rights are established, GAP would demand the release of great apes from captivity; currently 3,100 are held in the U.S., including 1,280 in biomedical research facilities. Contents 1 The Great Ape Project (book) 2 World Declaration on Great Apes 2.1 Right to life 2.2 Protection of individual liberty 2.3 Prohibition of torture 3 Opposition 4 Recent developments 4.1 United States 4.2 Germany 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links The Great Ape Project (book)[edit] The book of the same name, edited by philosophers Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer, features contributions from thirty-four authors, including Jane Goodall and Richard Dawkins, who have submitted articles voicing their support for the project. The authors write that human beings are intelligent animals with a varied social, emotional, and cognitive life. If great apes also display such attributes, the authors argue, they deserve the same consideration humans extend to members of their own species. The book highlights findings that support the capacity of great apes to possess rationality and self-consciousness, and the ability to be aware of themselves as distinct entities with a past and future. Documented conversations (in sign languages) with individual great apes are the basis for these findings. Other subjects addressed within the book include the division placed between humans and great apes, great apes as persons, progress in gaining rights for the severely intellectually disabled (once an overlooked minority), and the situation of great apes in the world today. World Declaration on Great Apes[edit] v t e Worldwide laws regarding experimentation on non-human apes    Ban on all ape experimentation    Ban on great ape experimentation The Great Ape Project is campaigning to have the United Nations endorse a World Declaration on Great Apes.[1] This would extend what the project calls the "community of equals" to include chimpanzees, bonobos, gorillas and orangutans. The declaration seeks to extend to non-human great apes the protection of three basic interests: the right to life, the protection of individual liberty, and the prohibition of torture. Right to life[edit] The declaration states that members of the community of equals, which includes humans, have an essential right to life and may not be killed except in certain strictly defined circumstances such as self-defense. Protection of individual liberty[edit] The declaration states that members of the community of equals are not to be deprived of their liberty, and are entitled to immediate release where there has been no form of due process. Under the proposed declaration, the detention of great apes who have not been convicted of any crime or who are not criminally liable should be permitted only where it can be shown that the detention is in their own interests or is necessary to protect the public. The declaration says there must be a right of appeal, either directly or through an advocate, to a judicial tribunal. Prohibition of torture[edit] The declaration prohibits the torture, defined as the deliberate infliction of severe pain, on any great ape, whether wantonly or because of a perceived benefit to others. Under International Human Rights Law this is a jus cogens principle and under all major human rights documents it cannot at any time be derogated by any State. Opposition[edit] Professor Colin Blakemore, head of the Medical Research Council in the United Kingdom from 2003–2007, is opposed to granting rights to non-human apes, stating "I can see no current necessity for the use of great apes, and I'm pleased that they're not being used and that every effort is being made to reduce the use of other primates. But I worry about the principle of where the moral boundaries lie. There is only one very secure definition that can be made, and that is between our species and others." Blakemore suggests that it would be necessary to perform research on great apes if humans were threatened by a pandemic virus that afflicted only humans and other great apes.[2] The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection described Blakemore's stance as "backward-looking." [3][4][5] Recent developments[edit] United States[edit] A study commissioned by the National Institute of Health (NIH) and conducted by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) concluded in a report (see report brief[6]) released on December 15, 2011 that ‘while the chimpanzee has been a valuable animal model in past research, most current use of chimpanzees for biomedical research is unnecessary’. The primary recommendation is that the use of chimpanzees in research be guided by a set of principles and criteria, in effect to greatly limit government-funded research using chimpanzees. Falling short of calling for the out-right ban of using chimpanzees for research, the report acknowledged that new emerging, or re-emerging diseases may require the use of chimpanzees, echoing Professor Colin Blakemore's concern. Francis Collins, Director of NIH announced on the same day the report was released that he accepted the recommendations and will develop the implementation plan which includes the forming of an expert committee to review all submitted grant applications and projects already underway involving the use of chimpanzees. Furthermore, no new grant applications using chimpanzees will be reviewed until further notice.[7] On 21 September 2012, NIH announced that 110 chimpanzees owned by the government will be retired. NIH owns about 500 chimpanzees for research, this move signifies the first step to wind down NIH's investment in chimpanzee research, according to Francis Collins. Currently housed at the New Iberia Research Center in Louisiana, 10 of the retired chimpanzees will go to the chimpanzee sanctuary Chimp Haven while the rest will go to Texas Biomedical Research Institute in San Antonio.[8] However concerns over the chimpanzee's status in the Texas Biomedical Research Institute as ‘research ineligible’ rather than ‘retired’ prompted NIH to reconsider the plan and it announced on 17 October 2012 that as many chimpanzees as possible will be relocated to Chimp Haven by August 2013 and eventually all 110 will move there.[9] On 22 January 2013, a NIH task force released a report calling for the government to retire most of the chimpanzees the U.S. government support. The panel concluded that the animals provide little benefit in biomedical discoveries except in a few disease cases which can be supported by a small population of 50 primates for future research. Other approaches such as genetically altered mice should be developed and refined.[10][11] On 13 November 2013, the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate passed ‘The Chimpanzee Health Improvement, Maintenance and Protection Act’, approving the funding to expand the capacity of Chimp Haven and other chimpanzee sanctuaries, thus allowing the transfer of almost all of the apes owned by the federal government to live in a more natural and group environment than in the laboratory. The transfer is expected to take five years when all but 50 chimpanzees, which will remain with the NIH, will be ‘retired’.[12] Germany[edit] The Great Ape Project achieved many of its goals in its early years: New Zealand completely banned invasive experiments on great apes in 1999, as did the Balearic Islands (an autonomous region of the monarchy of Spain) in 2007, deciding to implement certain fundamental rights for great apes in their code of law. However, the project entered a long period of political stagnation in Europe. All hopes that the achievements on the Balearic Islands would spark off further steps on the mainland of Spain and from there to other European countries proved to be futile. Efforts in Spain were largely curtailed due to the influence of the Catholic Church, obstructing the project's goals. In 2011, however, the project was given an official relaunch in Germany, supported by the Germany-based Giordano-Bruno-Stiftung.[13] Great Ape Project[14] Germany filed an official law initiative in spring of 2014, to have the aforesaid fundamental rights for great apes implemented into the constitutional law of the Federal Republic of Germany. The goal was (and still is) to have the animal welfare law extended to specifically grant the great apes the rights needed, to give them the chance, to have legal guardians representing their interests. In analogy to infants or of people suffering from dementia or Alzheimer disease, who cannot speak for themselves, legal guardians could file lawsuits against anyone violating the fundamental rights of the apes. Right now there are only have animal protection laws, giving the animals no active legitimization. See also[edit] Wikinews has related news: Spanish Socialist Workers' Party proposes human rights bill for great apes Great ape personhood Great ape language Non-human primate experiments Great Ape Trust Great Apes Survival Partnership Kinshasa Declaration on Great Apes Great ape research ban Primate trade: International primate trade Nafovanny General: Animal rights Animal welfare Animal rights by country or territory List of animal rights advocates List of animal rights groups International Primate Day Monkey Day References[edit] ^ "World declaration on Great Apes". GAP Project. Retrieved 2019-11-04. ^ Connor, Steve. [1] Scientists 'should be allowed to test on apes'], The Independent, June 3, 2006. ^ Steve Connor (June 3, 2006). "Scientists 'should be allowed to test on apes'". The Independent. ^ "Ban all experiments on the higher primates". The Independent. March 28, 2001. ^ Helene Guldberg (March 29, 2001). "The great ape debate". Spiked online. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2019. ^ "Chimpanzees in Biomedical and Behavioral Research: Assessing the Necessity". iom.edu. Institute of Medicine. December 15, 2011. Archived from the original on August 5, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2011. ^ "Statement by NIH Director Dr. Francis Collins on the Institute of Medicine report addressing the scientific need for the use of chimpanzees in research". National Institutes of Health. December 15, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. ^ Greenfieldboyce, Nell (21 September 2012). "Government Officials Retire Chimpanzees From Research". NPR. Retrieved 24 September 2012. ^ Lisa Myers and Diane Beasley (17 October 2012). "Goodall praises NIH decision to remove some chimps from research, but controversy erupts over their next home". nbcnews.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2012. ^ Flinn, Ryan (23 January 2013). "U.S. Panel Calls for Limits on Medical Use of Chimpanzees". Bloomberg.com. Retrieved 15 February 2013. ^ Working Group on the Use of Chimpanzees in National Institutes of Health (NIH)-Supported Research (22 January 2013). "Council of Councils Working Group on the Use of Chimpanzees in NIH-Supported Research Report" (PDF). NIH. ^ Dizard, Wilson (15 November 2013). "Federal government to transfer laboratory chimps to sanctuaries". Aljazeera America. Retrieved 3 December 2013. ^ [2] ^ http://www.greatapeproject.de Further reading[edit] The Great Ape Project: Equality beyond humanity. 1993. Editors, Peter Singer and P. Cavalieri., Fourth Estate publishing, London, England. Pp. 312. Poala Cavalieri. 2015. "The Meaning of the Great Ape Project". Politics and Animals. 1 (1): 16-34. Peter Singer. 1993. Practical Ethics. 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, New York, U.S.A. Pp. 395. Peter Singer. 2002. Animal Liberation. HarperCollins, New York, U.S.A. Pp. 324. New Scientist 19 May 2003 - Chimps are human, gene study implies External links[edit] Official website v t e Apes Extant ape species Human (Homo sapiens) Pan (genus) Bonobo (Pan paniscus) Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) Gorilla (Gorilla spp.) Western gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) Eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei) Orangutan (Pongo spp.) Sumatran orangutan (Pongo abelii) Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) Tapanuli orangutan (Pongo tapanuliensis) Gibbon (family: Hylobatidae) Study of apes Ape language Dian Fossey Birutė Galdikas Jane Goodall Chimpanzee genome project Human genome project Neanderthal genome project Willie Smits Lone Drøscher Nielsen Ian Redmond Elgin Center Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary Borneo Orangutan Survival Legal and social status Personhood Research ban Kinshasa Declaration Great Ape Project Survival Project International Primate Day Related List of individual apes (non-human) Apes in space (non-human) Bigfoot Bushmeat Chimpanzee–human last common ancestor Gorilla–human last common ancestor Orangutan–human last common ancestor Gibbon–human last common ancestor List of fictional primates (non-human) Great apes Human evolution Monkey Day Mythic humanoids Sasquatch Yeren Yeti Yowie Category v t e Jane Goodall Institutions Jane Goodall Institute Jane Goodall Institute (Hong Kong) Advocates for Animals Tchimpounga Sanctuary Education centers Jane Goodall Center for Excellence in Environmental Studies USC Jane Goodall Research Center Jane Goodall Environmental Middle School Research Primatology Gombe Stream National Park Kasakela Chimpanzee Community The Trimates Great Ape Project Other work Evolution Chimpanzee Chimps: So Like Us Awards Kyoto Prize (1990) Hubbard Medal (1995) William Procter Prize for Scientific Achievement (1996) Community of Christ International Peace Award (1999) Gandhi–King Award (2001) Huxley Memorial Medal (2002) United Nations Messenger of Peace (2002) Dame of the British Empire (2003) Global Environmental Citizen Award (2003) Légion d'honneur (2006) Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (2011) Honorary degrees Syracuse University (2005) Uppsala University (2007) University of Liverpool (2007) University of Toronto (2008) v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Animal rights movement Animal rights by country or territory Anarchism and animal rights Animal rights and punk subculture Animal rights and the Holocaust Animal rights in Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism Christianity and animal rights Moral status of animals in the ancient world Timeline of animal welfare and rights Universal Declaration on Animal Welfare Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal ethics Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal protectionism Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthrozoology Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Ethology Insects in ethics Meat paradox Nonviolence Open rescue Opposition to hunting Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Sentiocentrism Speciesism Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal agriculture Animal product Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Concentrated animal feeding operation Fish farming Fur farming Fur trade Insect farming Intensive animal farming Intensive pig farming Livestock Poultry farming Slaughterhouse Wildlife farming Animal testing Animal testing on non-human primates Animal testing regulations Covance Great ape research ban Green Scare Huntingdon Life Sciences Model organism Nafovanny Operation Backfire Animal welfare Animal euthanasia Cruelty to animals Pain in animals Pain in amphibians Pain in cephalopods Pain in crustaceans Pain in fish Pain in invertebrates Pain and suffering in laboratory animals Welfare of farmed insects Fishing Commercial fishing Fishing bait Recreational fishing Wild animals Culling wildlife Hare coursing Hunting International primate trade Ivory trade Predation problem Wild animal suffering Wildlife management Other Abandoned pets Animal sacrifice Animals in sport Live food Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Kristin Andrews Tom Beauchamp Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Jake Conroy Alice Crary David DeGrazia Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux John Hadley Oscar Horta Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum David Pearce Siobhan O'Sullivan Clare Palmer Bernard Rollin Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Peter Singer Jérôme Segal Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein Corey Lee Wrenn Historical David Renaud Boullier Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry Arthur Helps John Hildrop Soame Jenyns John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Edward Nicholson Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Adam Gottlieb Weigen Thomas Tryon Jon Wynne-Tyson Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Brigitte Gothière Bob Barker Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Rod Coronado Karen Davis Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Jordan Halliday Wayne Hsiung Ronnie Lee Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Nathan Runkle Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Gary Yourofsky Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Ernest Bell Frances Power Cobbe Alice Drakoules Robert Enke Emarel Freshel Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jill Phipps Catherine Smithies Henry Spira Andrew Tyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Front Anonymous for the Voiceless Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Equanimal Farm Animal Rights Movement Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Mercy for Animals New England Anti-Vivisection Society Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for Animals People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Sentience Politics Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Historical Animal Defence and Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Welfare Party (UK) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animalist Party Against Mistreatment of Animals (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for Animal Welfare (Ireland) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) Animals' Rights (1892) The Universal Kinship (1906) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) The Lives of Animals (1999) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Sentientist Politics (2019) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Dominion (2018) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Category ( 84 )