Seal used by a head of state This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Dutch. (October 2017) Click [show] for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Dutch Wikipedia article at [[:nl:]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated page}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Norwegian. (October 2017) Click [show] for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Norwegian Wikipedia article at [[:no:]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated page}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Great Seal of Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor The Great Seal of France attached to the French Constitution of 1958. A great seal is a seal used by a head of state, or someone authorised to do so on their behalf, to confirm formal documents, such as laws, treaties, appointments and letters of dispatch. It was and is used as a guarantee of the authenticity of the most important and solemn records and documents.[1] In the Middle Ages, the great seal played a far greater political role and there was much real power associated with having control over the seal. In addition to the great seal, a prince usually also had a privy seal, used for correspondence of a more private nature. The seal is usually formally entrusted upon an office-holder to act as keeper of the seal. This keeper may be a separate office but was also usually combined with that of the chancellor. Nowadays, the great seal is usually entrusted upon a minister, particularly a minister of justice. Contents 1 Design 2 By country 3 References 4 See also Design[edit] Great seals of republics usually show the nation's coat of arms (e.g. the Great Seal of the United States) or an allegorical image (e.g. France). For this reason, the design used usually remains unchanged. The seals themselves may, however, be replaced because of wear depending on how often the seal is used. In monarchies, by contrast, the great seal is often changed some time after the accession of a new monarch as the seal often depicts the reigning monarch in full form. By country[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (October 2017) Current countries Great Seal of Canada Great Seal of Ontario Great Seal of France Great Seal of the State (Greece) Seal of the President of Ireland Seal of New Zealand Great Seal of the Realm (United Kingdom) Great Seal of Northern Ireland Great Seal of Scotland Welsh Seal Great Seal of the State (Peru) Great Seal of the Philippines Great Seal of the United States National Seal of the Republic of Korea National Seals of the Republic of China All pages with titles beginning with Great Seal of Historic seals Great Seal of the Commonwealth (1655) Seal of the Confederate States Public Seal of Hong Kong, the official seal prior to the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong Great Seal of the Irish Free State The Seal of Solomon is often referred to as the Great Seal References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Seals. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) ^ "Great Seal". Oxford Dictionaries. See also[edit] Privy seal, term sometimes used for the monarch's personal seal. Keeper of the Seals, the person to whom a great seal may be officially entrusted with.