This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Green Lantern versus Aliens Cover to Green Lantern Versus Aliens #1, by Dwayne Turner Publication information Publisher DC Comics / Dark Horse Comics Schedule Monthly Format Limited series Publication date September 2000 - December 2000 No. of issues 4 Creative team Written by Ron Marz Penciller(s) Rick Leonardi Inker(s) Mike Perkins Collected editions Green Lantern Versus Aliens ISBN 1-56971-538-6 Green Lantern versus Aliens is a four-issue comic book intercompany crossover mini-series published jointly by DC Comics and Dark Horse Comics monthly from September 2000 to December 2000. It is written by Ron Marz and illustrated by penciller Rick Leonardi and inker Mike Perkins, with covers by Dwayne Turner. The series stars several Green Lanterns, primarily Kyle Rayner, and the titular xenomorphs from the Alien movie series. Whether the series takes place in the continuity of the DC Comics Universe is unclear, as Brik and Salaak are alive in current Green Lantern continuity, and no mention of Mogo's Xenomorph inhabitants is ever made. However, the series is set sometime after the destruction of the original Green Lantern Corps.[1] In 2001, the series was collected into a single volume with a new cover by artist Eric Kohler. Contents 1 Plot 2 Collected editions 3 Notes 4 References Plot[edit] The story opens in flashback, ten years before the (at the time) current continuity of the Green Lantern comic books, showing an extraterrestrial Barin Char, the Green Lantern of Sector 1522, dying when a chestburster bursts from his chest. Hal Jordan (who, at the time of the series’ publication, had long been dead) is then summoned by the Guardians of the Universe to rendezvous with fellow Green Lanterns Kilowog, Katma Tui, Tomar-Re, The Green Man and Salaak on the planet Tirama in Sector 1522. The six Green Lanterns are informed of the disappearance of Barin Char and proceed to the border world where he is believed to have disappeared. Tracing the signal from Char's displaced power ring, they enter a cavern inside a mountainous butte where they discover Char's corpse before being attacked by a swarm of Xenomorphs. Jordan decides that rather than exterminate an alien species—particularly since the Xenomorphs appear to be only the interstellar equivalent of sharks, the perfect killing machine without actually being evil—they would transport the Xenomorphs to the sentient Green Lantern planet Mogo, where they can not harm anyone. A decade later, the Signet Dawn, a Coluan long-range ore transport vessel, crashes onto the planet. Five extraterrestrials—the Xudarian Tomar-Dar, Brik, Ash, M’Hdahna and the aforementioned Salaak—appear on Earth in the apartment of Kyle Rayner, who at the time, is the Green Lantern of Earth and the only Green Lantern in existence. These five are either former Green Lanterns or were intended to become Green Lanterns at the time of Parallax’s destruction of the Green Lantern Corps, and they inform Rayner of the Signet Dawn’s crash on Mogo. The six then journey to Mogo to rescue the ship's crew. Inside the hull of the ship, they encounter Crowe, the ship's first officer, who tells Rayner that after the crash, the aliens carried off the other 37 crew members but left her for some reason. Crowe leads Rayner and the others deeper into the ship, where the Xenomorphs attack them, taking Rayner's companions captive, leaving only him, Crowe, and Salaak. When Rayner tries to grab Tomar as he is pulled down a shaft, his power ring slips off his finger and falls down the shaft. The trio then climbs down the shaft—Kyle and Salaak subsequently settling any remaining tension between them when Salaak apologizes for judging Kyle by what he was not rather than what he was—and discover five of Crowe's crewmates cocooned by the Xenomorphs, four of whom have been killed by chestbursters. The Xenomorphs then attack the trio, and Crowe and Rayner flee through a passageway, separated from Salaak. They then come across a chamber where they discover a Xenomorph queen with the remainder of Crowe's crew and Rayner's companions cocooned around the walls and Rayner's power ring on the floor. After exchanging a brief kiss for luck, Crowe jumps into the chamber firing at the aliens to distract them while Rayner goes for his ring. During this attempt, the skin on the right half of Crowe's face is ripped away, revealing that she is a gynoid. Rayner reacquires his ring. Crowe, fatally damaged during the melee, tells Rayner that he shouldn't leave the Xenomorphs alive to endanger someone else in the future as Jordan did, so Rayner destroys the Xenomorphs, rescuing the surviving Signet Dawn crew and his companions. Ash, Brik and Salaak do not survive. Rayner is left with the thought that sometimes the past comes back to haunt you no matter what one does, another reminder of the legacy of Hal Jordan that looms over him. Collected editions[edit] The series has been collected into a trade paperback: Green Lantern versus Aliens (96 pages, September, Titan Books, ISBN 1-84023-283-8, August 2001, Dark Horse, ISBN 1-56971-538-6) Notes[edit] ^ Cyriaque Lamar. "The 10 most deranged Alien crossover stories". io9. Retrieved 20 November 2014. References[edit] Green Lantern vs. Aliens at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) v t e Alien Films Alien (1979) Aliens (1986) Alien 3 (1992) Alien Resurrection (1997) Prometheus (2012) Alien: Covenant (2017) Media Soundtracks Alien Aliens Alien 3 Alien Resurrection Prometheus Alien: Covenant Comics Alien: The Illustrated Story Dark Horse line Superman/Aliens Batman/Aliens WildC.A.T.s/Aliens Green Lantern Versus Aliens Judge Dredd vs. Aliens Novels Alien: Out of the Shadows Aliens: Earth Hive Aliens: Nightmare Asylum Aliens: The Female War Aliens: Phalanx Games Alien (1982) Alien (1984) Aliens: The Computer Game (Activision) Aliens: The Computer Game (Software Studios) Aliens (1990) Aliens Adventure Game (tabletop) Alien 3 Alien 3: The Gun Aliens: A Comic Book Adventure Alien Trilogy Aliens Online Alien Resurrection Aliens: Thanatos Encounter Aliens Infestation Aliens: Colonial Marines Alien: Isolation Aliens: Fireteam Other media Aliens: Colonial Marines Technical Manual Alien: Isolation – The Digital Series Universe Characters Ellen Ripley Ash Bishop Amanda Ripley David 8 Corporal Dwayne Hicks Hudson Concepts USS Sulaco Alien Other Accolades for the film series Alien War Alien vs. Predator franchise Related Ripley (crater) Alien 2: On Earth Memory: The Origins of Alien Category v t e Green Lantern Bill Finger Martin Nodell John Broome Gil Kane Dennis O'Neil Neal Adams Ron Marz Darryl Banks Geoff Johns Doug Mahnke Ethan Van Sciver Earth's Green Lanterns Alan Scott Hal Jordan Guy Gardner John Stewart Kyle Rayner Simon Baz Jessica Cruz Supporting characters Alexandra DeWitt Doiby Dickles Carol Ferris Guardians of the Universe Ganthet Sayd Jade Justice League Superman Batman Wonder Woman The Flash/Barry Allen Aquaman Martian Manhunter Cyborg Justice Society of America The Atom/Al Pratt Dr Fate/Kent Nelson The Flash/Jay Garrick Hawkman/Carter Hall Hourman/Rex Tyler Sandman/Wesley Dodds Spectre/Jim Corrigan Thomas Kalmaku Obsidian Jillian Pearlman Olivia Reynolds Donna Troy Saint Walker Zamarons Green Lantern Corps Abin Sur Arisia Rrab Boodikka Ch'p Earth-Man G'nort Green Man Ion Isamot Kol Jack T. Chance Katma Tui Ke'Haan Kilowog Kreon Lar Gand Mogo the Living Planet Salaak Sodam Yat Soranik Natu Stel Tomar-Re Tomar-Tu Turytt Enemies Golden Age villains Gambler Harlequin Icicle Solomon Grundy Sportsmaster Vandal Savage General Anti-Monitor Controllers Demolition Team Doctor Polaris Doctor Ub'x Effigy Evil Star Fatality Grayven Hector Hammond Krona Larfleeze Legion Major Disaster Major Force Manhunters Power Ring Professor Ojo Sonar Star Sapphire Tattooed Man Sinestro Corps Amon Sur Lyssa Drak Hank Henshaw Mongul Parallax Scarecrow Sinestro Superboy-Prime Red Lanterns Atrocitus Bleez Orange Lanterns Larfleeze Black Lanterns Black Hand Nekron Comics All-American Comics "Snowbirds Don't Fly" "Emerald Twilight" "Emerald Knights" "Circle of Fire" Green Lantern: Rebirth "Sinestro Corps War" "Secret Origin" Blackest Night Brightest Day "War of the Green Lanterns" Batman: In Darkest Knight Comic Cavalcade Green Lantern: 1001 Emerald Nights The Green Lantern Chronicles Emerald Dawn Green Lantern: Evil's Might Green Lantern: Mosaic Green Lantern: New Guardians Green Lantern Corps: Recharge Green Lantern/Superman: Legend of the Green Flame Green Lantern Versus Aliens Planet of the Apes/Green Lantern Star Trek/Green Lantern Star Trek/Green Lantern: Stranger Worlds Wrath of the First Lantern In other media Green Lantern: First Flight Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths. Green Lantern: Emerald Knights Green Lantern (film) Green Lantern: Rise of the Manhunters Green Lantern: The Animated Series Locations Coast City Mogo the Living Planet Oa Qward Miscellany Power ring (equipment) Darkstars Blue Lantern Corps Indigo Tribe Star Sapphires White Lantern Corps Alien races Source Wall Green Lantern (Great Adventure) Green Lantern Coaster (Warner Bros. Movie World) Green Lantern: First Flight (Magic Mountain) Category