This article is about the island and autonomous territory within the Kingdom of Denmark. For other uses, see Greenland (disambiguation). Large island in northeastern North America Autonomous territory within the Kingdom of Denmark Greenland Kalaallit Nunaat  (Greenlandic) Grønland  (Danish) Autonomous territory within the Kingdom of Denmark Flag Coat of arms Anthem: "Nunarput utoqqarsuanngoravit" (Greenlandic) (English: "You Our Ancient Land") Kalaallit anthem: "Nuna asiilasooq" (Greenlandic) (English: "The Land of Great Length")[a] Location of Greenland Location of API (red) in the Kingdom of Denmark (red and beige) Sovereign state Kingdom of Denmark Union with Norway 1262 Danish-Norwegian recolonization 1721 Cession to Denmark 14 January 1814 Home rule 1 May 1979 Further autonomy and self rule 21 June 2009[2][3] Capital and largest city Nuuk 64°10′N 51°44′W﻿ / ﻿64.167°N 51.733°W﻿ / 64.167; -51.733 Official languages Greenlandic[b] (Kalaallisut Inuktun Tunumiisut) Recognised languages Danish, English and other languages if necessary[b] Ethnic groups (2018[6][b]) Indigenous status:[5] 88.9% Inuit (including multi-ethnic European-Inuit, mainly Danish and other Nordic) Non-Indigenous: 7.8% Danish 1.1% Nordic 1.4% others Religion Christianity (Church of Greenland) Demonym(s) Greenlander Greenlandic Government Devolved government within a parliamentary constitutional monarchy • Monarch Margrethe II • High Commissioner Mikaela Engell • Premier Kim Kielsen • Speaker of the Inatsisartut Vivian Motzfeldt Legislature Inatsisartut National representation • Folketing 2 members Area • Total 2,166,086 km2 (836,330 sq mi) • Water (%) 83.1[c] Highest elevation 3,700 m (12,100 ft) Population • 2020 estimate 56,081[7] (210th) • Density 0.028/km2 (0.1/sq mi) GDP (PPP) 2011 estimate • Total $1.8 billion[8] (not ranked) • Per capita $37,000 (40-th) HDI (2010)  0.786[9] high · 61st Currency Danish krone (DKK) Time zone UTC±00:00 to UTC-04:00 Date format dd-mm-yyyy Driving side right Calling code +299 Postal codes 39xx ISO 3166 code GL Internet TLD .gl Greenland (Greenlandic: Kalaallit Nunaat, pronounced [kalaːɬit nunaːt]; Danish: Grønland, pronounced [ˈkʁɶnˌlænˀ]) is the world's largest island,[d] located between the Arctic and Atlantic oceans, east of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. Greenland is an autonomous territory[11] within the Kingdom of Denmark. Though physiographically a part of the continent of North America, Greenland has been politically and culturally associated with Europe (specifically Norway and Denmark, the colonial powers) for more than a millennium, beginning in 986.[12] The majority of its residents are Inuit, whose ancestors migrated from Alaska through Northern Canada, gradually settling across the island by the 13th century.[13] Today, the population is concentrated mainly on the southwest coast, while the rest of the island is sparsely populated. Greenland is divided into five municipalities – Sermersooq, Kujalleq, Qeqertalik, Qeqqata, and Avannaata. It has two unincorporated areas – the Northeast Greenland National Park and the Thule Air Base. The latter, while under Danish control, is administered by the United States Air Force.[14] Three-quarters of Greenland is covered by the only permanent ice sheet outside of Antarctica. With a population of 56,081 (2020),[7] it is the least densely populated region in the world.[15] About a third of the population lives in Nuuk, the capital and largest city; the second-largest city in terms of population is Sisimiut, 320 kilometres (200 mi) north of Nuuk. The Arctic Umiaq Line ferry acts as a lifeline for western Greenland, connecting the various cities and settlements. Greenland has been inhabited at intervals over at least the last 4,500 years by Arctic peoples whose forebears migrated there from what is now Canada.[16][17] Norsemen settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th century, having previously settled Iceland. These Norsemen later set sail from Greenland and Iceland, with Leif Erikson becoming the first known European to reach North America nearly 500 years before Columbus reached the Caribbean islands. Inuit peoples arrived in the 13th century. Though under continuous influence of Norway and Norwegians, Greenland was not formally under the Norwegian crown until 1261. The Norse colonies disappeared in the late 15th century after Norway was hit by the Black Death and entered a severe decline. Soon after their demise, beginning in 1499, the Portuguese briefly explored and claimed the island, naming it Terra do Lavrador (later applied to Labrador in Canada).[18] In the early 17th century, Danish explorers reached Greenland again. To strengthen trading and power, Denmark–Norway affirmed sovereignty over the island. Because of Norway's weak status, it lost sovereignty over Greenland in 1814 when the union was dissolved. Greenland became Danish in 1814 and was fully integrated in Denmark in 1953 organised in the Danish constitution. With the Constitution of 1953, the people in Greenland became citizens of Denmark. From 1961 Greenland joined the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), which Denmark joined as a founding member of the EFTA in 1960, but its membership ceased with effect from 1973 when Denmark joined the European Communities. In 1973, Greenland joined the European Economic Community (EEC) with Denmark. However, in a referendum in 1982, a majority of the population voted for Greenland to withdraw from the EEC. This was effected in 1985, changing Greenland to an OCT (Overseas Countries and Territories) associated with the EEC, now the European Union (EU). The associated relationship with the EU also means that all Greenlandic nationals (OCT-nationals) are EU citizens.[19] Greenland contains the world's largest and northernmost national park, Northeast Greenland National Park (Kalaallit Nunaanni nuna eqqissisimatitaq). Established in 1974 and expanded to its present size in 1988, it protects 972,001 square kilometres (375,292 sq mi) of the interior and northeastern coast of Greenland and is bigger than all but twenty-nine countries in the world. In 1979, Denmark granted home rule to Greenland; in 2008, Greenlanders voted in favour of the Self-Government Act, which transferred more power from the Danish government to the local Greenlandic government.[20] Under the new structure, Greenland has gradually assumed responsibility for policing, the judicial system, company law, accounting, auditing, mineral resource activities, aviation, law of legal capacity, family law and succession law, aliens and border controls, the working environment, and financial regulation and supervision. The Danish government still retains control of monetary policy and foreign affairs including defence. It also provided an initial annual subsidy of DKK 3.4 billion, and to diminish gradually over time. Greenland expects to grow its economy based on increased income from the extraction of natural resources. The capital, Nuuk, held the 2016 Arctic Winter Games. At 70%, Greenland has one of the highest shares of renewable energy in the world, mostly coming from hydropower.[21] Contents 1 Etymology 2 History 2.1 Early Paleo-Inuit cultures 2.2 Norse settlement 2.3 Thule culture (1300–present) 2.4 1500–1814 2.5 Treaty of Kiel to World War II 2.6 Home rule and self-rule 3 Tourism 4 Geography and climate 4.1 Climate change 5 Biodiversity 6 Politics 6.1 Political system 6.2 Government 6.3 Military 6.4 Administrative divisions 7 Economy 7.1 Transport 8 Population 8.1 Demographics 8.2 Languages 8.3 Education 8.4 Religion 8.5 Social issues 9 Culture 9.1 Sport 9.2 Cuisine 10 See also 10.1 Other similar territories 11 Notes 12 References 12.1 Bibliography 12.2 Works cited 13 External links Etymology[edit] The early Norse settlers named the island as Greenland. In the Icelandic sagas, the Norwegian-born Icelander Erik the Red was said to be exiled from Iceland for manslaughter. Along with his extended family and his thralls (i.e. slaves or serfs), he set out in ships to explore an icy land known to lie to the northwest. After finding a habitable area and settling there, he named it Grœnland (translated as "Greenland"), supposedly in the hope that the pleasant name would attract settlers.[22][23][24] The Saga of Erik the Red states: "In the summer, Erik left to settle in the country he had found, which he called Greenland, as he said people would be attracted there if it had a favorable name."[25] The name of the country in the indigenous Greenlandic language is Kalaallit Nunaat ("land of the Kalaallit").[26] The Kalaallit are the indigenous Greenlandic Inuit people who inhabit the country's western region. History[edit] Main article: History of Greenland Early Paleo-Inuit cultures[edit] Areas of Independence I and Independence II cultures around Independence Fjord In prehistoric times, Greenland was home to several successive Paleo-Inuit cultures known today primarily through archaeological finds. The earliest entry of the Paleo-Inuit into Greenland is thought to have occurred about 2500 BC. From around 2500 BC to 800 BC, southern and western Greenland were inhabited by the Saqqaq culture. Most finds of Saqqaq-period archaeological remains have been around Disko Bay, including the site of Saqqaq, after which the culture is named.[27][28] From 2400 BC to 1300 BC, the Independence I culture existed in northern Greenland. It was a part of the Arctic small tool tradition.[29][30][31] Towns, including Deltaterrasserne, started to appear. Around 800 BC, the Saqqaq culture disappeared and the Early Dorset culture emerged in western Greenland and the Independence II culture in northern Greenland.[32] The Dorset culture was the first culture to extend throughout the Greenlandic coastal areas, both on the west and east coasts. It lasted until the total onset of the Thule culture in 1500 AD. The Dorset culture population lived primarily from hunting of whales and caribou.[33][34][35][36] Norse settlement[edit] The Kingittorsuaq Runestone from Kingittorsuaq Island (Middle Ages) From 986, Greenland's west coast was settled by Icelanders and Norwegians, through a contingent of 14 boats led by Erik the Red. They formed three settlements – known as the Eastern Settlement, the Western Settlement and the Middle Settlement – on fjords near the southwesternmost tip of the island.[12][37] They shared the island with the late Dorset culture inhabitants who occupied the northern and western parts, and later with the Thule culture that entered from the north. Norse Greenlanders submitted to Norwegian rule in 1261 under the Kingdom of Norway. Later the Kingdom of Norway entered into a personal union with Denmark in 1380 and from 1397 was a part of the Kalmar Union.[38] The Norse settlements, such as Brattahlíð, thrived for centuries but disappeared sometime in the 15th century, perhaps at the onset of the Little Ice Age.[39] Apart from some runic inscriptions, no contemporary records or historiography survives from the Norse settlements. Medieval Norwegian sagas and historical works mention Greenland's economy as well as the bishops of Gardar and the collection of tithes. A chapter in the Konungs skuggsjá (The King's Mirror) describes Norse Greenland's exports and imports as well as grain cultivation. One of the last contemporary written mentions of the Norse Greenlanders records a marriage which took place in 1408 in the church of Hvalsey – today the best-preserved Nordic ruins in Greenland. Icelandic saga accounts of life in Greenland were composed in the 13th century and later, and do not constitute primary sources for the history of early Norse Greenland.[24] Modern understanding therefore mostly depends on the physical data from archeological sites. Interpretation of ice core and clam shell data suggests that between 800 and 1300 AD, the regions around the fjords of southern Greenland experienced a relatively mild climate several degrees Celsius higher than usual in the North Atlantic,[40] with trees and herbaceous plants growing, and livestock being farmed. Barley was grown as a crop up to the 70th parallel.[41] The ice cores indicate Greenland has had dramatic temperature shifts many times over the past 100,000 years.[42] Similarly the Icelandic Book of Settlements records famines during the winters, in which "the old and helpless were killed and thrown over cliffs".[40] Ingibjørg Tombstone. These Icelandic settlements vanished during the 14th and early 15th centuries.[43] The demise of the Western Settlement coincides with a decrease in summer and winter temperatures. A study of North Atlantic seasonal temperature variability during the Little Ice Age showed a significant decrease in maximum summer temperatures beginning in the late 13th century to early 14th century – as much as 6 to 8 °C (11 to 14 °F) lower than modern summer temperatures.[44] The study also found that the lowest winter temperatures of the last 2,000 years occurred in the late 14th century and early 15th century. The Eastern Settlement was likely abandoned in the early to mid-15th century, during this cold period. Theories drawn from archeological excavations at Herjolfsnes in the 1920s suggest that the condition of human bones from this period indicates that the Norse population was malnourished, possibly because of soil erosion resulting from the Norsemen's destruction of natural vegetation in the course of farming, turf-cutting, and wood-cutting. Malnutrition may also have resulted from widespread deaths from pandemic plague;[45] the decline in temperatures during the Little Ice Age; and armed conflicts with the Skrælings (Norse word for Inuit, meaning "wretches"[39]). Recent archeological studies somewhat challenge the general assumption that the Norse colonisation had a dramatic negative environmental effect on the vegetation. Data support traces of a possible Norse soil amendment strategy.[46] More recent evidence suggests that the Norse, who never numbered more than about 2,500, gradually abandoned the Greenland settlements over the 15th century as walrus ivory,[47] the most valuable export from Greenland, decreased in price because of competition with other sources of higher-quality ivory, and that there was actually little evidence of starvation or difficulties.[48] Other theories about the disappearance of the Norse settlement have been proposed; Lack of support from the homeland.[45] Ship-borne marauders (such as Basque, English, or German pirates) rather than Skrælings, could have plundered and displaced the Greenlanders.[49] They were "the victims of hidebound thinking and of a hierarchical society dominated by the Church and the biggest land owners. In their reluctance to see themselves as anything but Europeans, the Greenlanders failed to adopt the kind of apparel that the Inuit employed as protection against the cold and damp or to borrow any of the Inuit hunting gear."[12][39] "Norse society's structure created a conflict between the short-term interests of those in power, and the long-term interests of the society as a whole."[39] Thule culture (1300–present)[edit] Pictures of Greenland, c. 1863 The Thule people are the ancestors of the current Greenlandic population. No genes from the Paleo-Inuit have been found in the present population of Greenland.[50] The Thule culture migrated eastward from what is now known as Alaska around 1000 AD, reaching Greenland around 1300. The Thule culture was the first to introduce to Greenland such technological innovations as dog sleds and toggling harpoons. 1500–1814[edit] In 1500, King Manuel I of Portugal sent Gaspar Corte-Real to Greenland in search of a Northwest Passage to Asia which, according to the Treaty of Tordesillas, was part of Portugal's sphere of influence. In 1501, Corte-Real returned with his brother, Miguel Corte-Real. Finding the sea frozen, they headed south and arrived in Labrador and Newfoundland. Upon the brothers' return to Portugal, the cartographic information supplied by Corte-Real was incorporated into a new map of the world which was presented to Ercole I d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, by Alberto Cantino in 1502. The Cantino planisphere, made in Lisbon, accurately depicts the southern coastline of Greenland.[51] An English map of 1747, based on Hans Egede's descriptions and misconceptions, by Emanuel Bowen In 1605–1607, King Christian IV of Denmark sent a series of expeditions to Greenland and Arctic waterways to locate the lost eastern Norse settlement and assert Danish sovereignty over Greenland. The expeditions were mostly unsuccessful, partly due to leaders who lacked experience with the difficult Arctic ice and weather conditions, and partly because the expedition leaders were given instructions to search for the Eastern Settlement on the east coast of Greenland just north of Cape Farewell, which is almost inaccessible due to southward drifting ice. The pilot on all three trips was English explorer James Hall. Godthåb in Greenland, c. 1878 After the Norse settlements died off, Greenland came under the de facto control of various Inuit groups, but the Danish government never forgot or relinquished the claims to Greenland that it had inherited from the Norse. When it re-established contact with Greenland in the early 17th century, Denmark asserted its sovereignty over the island. In 1721, a joint mercantile and clerical expedition led by Danish-Norwegian missionary Hans Egede was sent to Greenland, not knowing whether a Norse civilization remained there. This expedition is part of the Dano-Norwegian colonization of the Americas. After 15 years in Greenland, Hans Egede left his son Paul Egede in charge of the mission there and returned to Denmark, where he established a Greenland Seminary. This new colony was centred at Godthåb ("Good Hope") on the southwest coast. Gradually, Greenland was opened up to Danish merchants, but closed to those from other countries. Treaty of Kiel to World War II[edit] Main article: Greenland in World War II 1869 photograph of Greenlandic Inuit. When the union between the crowns of Denmark and Norway was dissolved in 1814, the Treaty of Kiel severed Norway's former colonies and left them under the control of the Danish monarch. Norway occupied then-uninhabited eastern Greenland as Erik the Red's Land in July 1931, claiming that it constituted terra nullius. Norway and Denmark agreed to submit the matter in 1933 to the Permanent Court of International Justice, which decided against Norway.[52] Greenland's connection to Denmark was severed on 9 April 1940, early in World War II, after Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany. On 8 April 1941, the United States occupied Greenland to defend it against a possible invasion by Germany.[53] The United States occupation of Greenland continued until 1945. Greenland was able to buy goods from the United States and Canada by selling cryolite from the mine at Ivittuut. The major air bases were Bluie West-1 at Narsarsuaq and Bluie West-8 at Søndre Strømfjord (Kangerlussuaq), both of which are still used as Greenland's major international airports. Bluie was the military code name for Greenland. Map of Eirik Raudes Land During this war, the system of government changed: Governor Eske Brun ruled the island under a law of 1925 that allowed governors to take control under extreme circumstances; Governor Aksel Svane was transferred to the United States to lead the commission to supply Greenland. The Danish Sirius Patrol guarded the northeastern shores of Greenland in 1942 using dogsleds. They detected several German weather stations and alerted American troops, who destroyed the facilities. After the collapse of the Third Reich, Albert Speer briefly considered escaping in a small aeroplane to hide out in Greenland, but changed his mind and decided to surrender to the United States Armed Forces.[54] Greenland had been a protected and very isolated society until 1940. The Danish government had maintained a strict monopoly of Greenlandic trade, allowing no more than small scale barter trading with British whalers. In wartime Greenland developed a sense of self-reliance through self-government and independent communication with the outside world. Despite this change, in 1946 a commission including the highest Greenlandic council, the Landsrådene, recommended patience and no radical reform of the system. Two years later, the first step towards a change of government was initiated when a grand commission was established. A final report (G-50) was presented in 1950, which recommended the introduction of a modern welfare state with Denmark's development as sponsor and model. In 1953, Greenland was made an equal part of the Danish Kingdom. Home rule was granted in 1979. Home rule and self-rule[edit] See also: Greenlandic independence The orthography and vocabulary of the Greenlandic language is governed by Oqaasileriffik, the Greenlandic language secretariat, located in the Ilimmarfik University of Greenland, Nuuk. Following World War II, the United States developed a geopolitical interest in Greenland, and in 1946 the United States offered to buy the island from Denmark for $100,000,000. Denmark refused to sell it.[55][56] Historically this repeated an interest by Secretary of State William H. Seward. In 1867 he worked with former senator Robert J. Walker to explore the possibility of buying Greenland and perhaps Iceland. Opposition in Congress ended this project.[57] In the 21st century, the United States, according to WikiLeaks, remains interested in investing in the resource base of Greenland and in tapping hydrocarbons off the Greenlandic coast.[58][59] In August 2019, the American president Donald Trump again proposed to buy the country, prompting premier Kim Kielsen to issue the statement, "Greenland is not for sale and cannot be sold, but Greenland is open for trade and cooperation with other countries – including the United States."[60] In 1950, Denmark agreed to allow the US to regain the use of Thule Air Base; it was greatly expanded between 1951 and 1953 as part of a unified NATO Cold War defense strategy. The local population of three nearby villages was moved more than 100 kilometres (62 mi) away in the winter. The United States tried to construct a subterranean network of secret nuclear missile launch sites in the Greenlandic ice cap, named Project Iceworm. According to documents declassified in 1996,[61] this project was managed from Camp Century from 1960 to 1966 before abandonment as unworkable.[62] The missiles were never fielded and necessary consent from the Danish Government to do so was never sought. The Danish government did not become aware of the program's mission until 1997, when they discovered it while looking, in the declassified documents, for records related to the crash of a nuclear equipped B-52 bomber at Thule in 1968.[63] The United States has operated Thule Air Base since the 1950s. With the 1953 Danish constitution, Greenland's colonial status ended as the island was incorporated into the Danish realm as an amt (county). Danish citizenship was extended to Greenlanders. Danish policies toward Greenland consisted of a strategy of cultural assimilation – or de-Greenlandification. During this period, the Danish government promoted the exclusive use of the Danish language in official matters, and required Greenlanders to go to Denmark for their post-secondary education. Many Greenlandic children grew up in boarding schools in southern Denmark, and a number lost their cultural ties to Greenland. While the policies "succeeded" in the sense of shifting Greenlanders from being primarily subsistence hunters into being urbanized wage earners, the Greenlandic elite began to reassert a Greenlandic cultural identity. A movement developed in favour of independence, reaching its peak in the 1970s.[64] As a consequence of political complications in relation to Denmark's entry into the European Common Market in 1972, Denmark began to seek a different status for Greenland, resulting in the Home Rule Act of 1979. Sermiligaaq. Greenland has more than 60 settlements. This gave Greenland limited autonomy with its own legislature taking control of some internal policies, while the Parliament of Denmark maintained full control of external policies, security, and natural resources. The law came into effect on 1 May 1979. The Queen of Denmark, Margrethe II, remains Greenland's head of state. In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC) upon achieving self-rule, as it did not agree with the EEC's commercial fishing regulations and an EEC ban on seal skin products.[65] Greenland voters approved a referendum on greater autonomy on 25 November 2008.[66][67] According to one study, the 2008 vote created what "can be seen as a system between home rule and full independence."[68] On 21 June 2009, Greenland gained self-rule with provisions for assuming responsibility for self-government of judicial affairs, policing, and natural resources. Also, Greenlanders were recognized as a separate people under international law.[69] Denmark maintains control of foreign affairs and defence matters. Denmark upholds the annual block grant of 3.2 billion Danish kroner, but as Greenland begins to collect revenues of its natural resources, the grant will gradually be diminished. This is generally considered to be a step toward eventual full independence from Denmark.[70] Greenlandic was declared the sole official language of Greenland at the historic ceremony.[2][4][71][72][73] Tourism[edit] Main article: Tourism in Greenland Tourism increased significantly between 2010 and 2019, with the number of visitors increasing from 460,000 per year to 2 million. Condé Nast Traveler describes that high level as "overtourism". One source estimated that in 2019 the revenue from this aspect of the economy was about 450 million kroner (US$67 million). Like many aspects of the economy, this slowed dramatically in 2020, and into 2021, due to restrictions required as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;[74] one source describes it as being the "biggest economic victim of the coronavirus". (The overall economy did not suffer too severely as of mid 2020, thanks to the fisheries "and a hefty subsidy from Copenhagen".)[75] Visitors will begin arriving again in late 2020 or early 2021. Greenland's goal is to develop it "right" and to "build a more sustainable tourism for the long run".[76] Geography and climate[edit] Main article: Geography of Greenland See also: Administrative divisions of Greenland, Territorial claims in the Arctic, and Climate of the Arctic § Greenland Map of Greenland Greenland bedrock, at current elevation above sea level Greenland is the world's largest non-continental island[77] and the third largest area in North America after Canada and the United States.[78] It is between latitudes 59° and 83°N, and longitudes 11° and 74°W. Greenland is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Greenland Sea to the east, the North Atlantic Ocean to the southeast, the Davis Strait to the southwest, Baffin Bay to the west, the Nares Strait and Lincoln Sea to the northwest. The nearest countries are Canada, to the west and southwest across Nares Strait and Baffin Bay; and Iceland, southeast of Greenland in the Atlantic Ocean. Greenland also contains the world's largest national park, and it is the largest dependent territory by area in the world, as well as the fourth largest country subdivision in the world, after Sakha Republic in Russia, Australia's state of Western Australia, and Russia's Krasnoyarsk Krai, and the largest in North America. The lowest temperature ever recorded in the Northern Hemisphere was recorded in Greenland, near the topographic summit of the Greenland Ice Sheet, on 22 December 1991, when the temperature reached −69.6 °C (−93.3 °F).[79] In Nuuk, the average daily temperature varies over the seasons from −5.1 to 9.9 °C (23 to 50 °F)[80] The total area of Greenland is 2,166,086 km2 (836,330 sq mi) (including other offshore minor islands), of which the Greenland ice sheet covers 1,755,637 km2 (677,855 sq mi) (81%) and has a volume of approximately 2,850,000 km3 (680,000 cu mi).[81] The highest point on Greenland is Gunnbjørn Fjeld at 3,700 m (12,139 ft) of the Watkins Range (East Greenland mountain range). The majority of Greenland, however, is less than 1,500 m (4,921 ft) in elevation. The weight of the ice sheet has depressed the central land area to form a basin lying more than 300 m (984 ft) below sea level,[82][83] while elevations rise suddenly and steeply near the coast.[84] The ice flows generally to the coast from the centre of the island. A survey led by French scientist Paul-Emile Victor in 1951 concluded that, under the ice sheet, Greenland is composed of three large islands.[85] This is disputed, but if it is so, they would be separated by narrow straits, reaching the sea at Ilulissat Icefjord, at Greenland's Grand Canyon and south of Nordostrundingen. All towns and settlements of Greenland are situated along the ice-free coast, with the population being concentrated along the west coast. The northeastern part of Greenland is not part of any municipality, but it is the site of the world's largest national park, Northeast Greenland National Park.[86] At least four scientific expedition stations and camps had been established on the ice sheet in the ice-covered central part of Greenland (indicated as pale blue in the adjacent map): Eismitte, North Ice, North GRIP Camp and The Raven Skiway. There is a year-round station Summit Camp on the ice sheet, established in 1989. The radio station Jørgen Brønlund Fjord was, until 1950, the northernmost permanent outpost in the world. The extreme north of Greenland, Peary Land, is not covered by an ice sheet, because the air there is too dry to produce snow, which is essential in the production and maintenance of an ice sheet. If the Greenland ice sheet were to melt away completely, the world's sea level would rise by more than 7 m (23 ft).[87] In 2003, a small island, 35 by 15 metres (115 by 49 feet) in length and width, was discovered by arctic explorer Dennis Schmitt and his team at the coordinates of 83-42. Whether this island is permanent is not yet confirmed. If it is, it is the northernmost permanent known land on Earth. In 2007, the existence of a new island was announced. Named "Uunartoq Qeqertaq" (English: Warming Island), this island has always been present off the coast of Greenland, but was covered by a glacier. This glacier was discovered in 2002 to be shrinking rapidly, and by 2007 had completely melted away, leaving the exposed island.[88] The island was named Place of the Year by the Oxford Atlas of the World in 2007.[89] Ben Keene, the atlas's editor, commented: "In the last two or three decades, global warming has reduced the size of glaciers throughout the Arctic and earlier this year, news sources confirmed what climate scientists already knew: water, not rock, lay beneath this ice bridge on the east coast of Greenland. More islets are likely to appear as the sheet of frozen water covering the world's largest island continues to melt".[90] Some controversy surrounds the history of the island, specifically over whether the island might have been revealed during a brief warm period in Greenland during the mid-20th century.[91] Climate change[edit] See also: Climate change in the Arctic, Retreat of glaciers since 1850 § Greenland, and Greenland's Grand Canyon Between 1989 and 1993, US and European climate researchers drilled into the summit of Greenland's ice sheet, obtaining a pair of 3 km (1.9 mi) long ice cores. Analysis of the layering and chemical composition of the cores has provided a revolutionary new record of climate change in the Northern Hemisphere going back about 100,000 years and illustrated that the world's weather and temperature have often shifted rapidly from one seemingly stable state to another, with worldwide consequences.[92] The glaciers of Greenland are also contributing to a rise in the global sea level faster than was previously believed.[93] Between 1991 and 2004, monitoring of the weather at one location (Swiss Camp) showed that the average winter temperature had risen almost 6 °C (11 °F).[94] Other research has shown that higher snowfalls from the North Atlantic oscillation caused the interior of the ice cap to thicken by an average of 6 cm or 2.36 in/y between 1994 and 2005.[95] Biodiversity[edit] See also: Flora and fauna of Greenland, Reindeer hunting in Greenland, Fishing industry in Greenland, and Whaling § Greenland Muskoxen in Greenland Greenland is home to two ecoregions: Kalaallit Nunaat high arctic tundra and Kalaallit Nunaat low arctic tundra.[96] There are approximately 700 known species of insects in Greenland, which is low compared with other countries (over one million species have been described worldwide). The sea is rich in fish and invertebrates, especially in the milder West Greenland Current; a large part of the Greenland fauna is associated with marine-based food chains, including large colonies of seabirds. The few native land mammals in Greenland include the polar bear, reindeer (introduced by Europeans), arctic fox, arctic hare, musk ox, collared lemming, ermine, and arctic wolf. The last four are found naturally only in East Greenland, having immigrated from Ellesmere Island. There are dozens of species of seals and whales along the coast. Land fauna consists predominantly of animals which have spread from North America or, in the case of many birds and insects, from Europe. There are no native or free-living reptiles or amphibians on the island.[97] Phytogeographically, Greenland belongs to the Arctic province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. The island is sparsely populated in vegetation; plant life consists mainly of grassland and small shrubs, which are regularly grazed by livestock. The most common tree native to Greenland is the European white birch (Betula pubescens) along with gray-leaf willow (Salix glauca), rowan (Sorbus aucuparia), common juniper (Juniperus communis) and other smaller trees, mainly willows. Greenland's flora consists of about 500 species of "higher" plants, i.e. flowering plants, ferns, horsetails and lycopodiophyta. Of the other groups, the lichens are the most diverse, with about 950 species; there are 600–700 species of fungi; mosses and bryophytes are also found. Most of Greenland's higher plants have circumpolar or circumboreal distributions; only a dozen species of saxifrage and hawkweed are endemic. A few plant species were introduced by the Norsemen, such as cow vetch. The Greenland Dog was brought from Siberia 1,000 years ago. The terrestrial vertebrates of Greenland include the Greenland dog, which was introduced by the Inuit, as well as European-introduced species such as Greenlandic sheep, goats, cattle, reindeer, horse, chicken and sheepdog, all descendants of animals imported by Europeans.[citation needed] Marine mammals include the hooded seal (Cystophora cristata) as well as the grey seal (Halichoerus grypus).[98] Whales frequently pass very close to Greenland's shores in the late summer and early autumn. Whale species include the beluga whale, blue whale, Greenland whale, fin whale, humpback whale, minke whale, narwhal, pilot whale, sperm whale.[99] As of 2009, 269 species of fish from over 80 different families are known from the waters surrounding Greenland. Almost all are marine species with only a few in freshwater, notably Atlantic salmon and charr.[100] The fishing industry is the primary industry of Greenland's economy, accounting for the majority of the country's total exports.[101] Birds, particularly seabirds, are an important part of Greenland's animal life; breeding populations of auks, puffins, skuas, and kittiwakes are found on steep mountainsides.[citation needed] Greenland's ducks and geese include common eider, long-tailed duck, king eider, white-fronted goose, pink-footed goose and barnacle goose. Breeding migratory birds include the snow bunting, lapland bunting, ringed plover, red-throated loon and red-necked phalarope. Non-migratory land birds include the arctic redpoll, ptarmigan, short-eared owl, snowy owl, gyrfalcon and white-tailed eagle.[97] Politics[edit] Main article: Politics of Greenland See also: 2018 Greenlandic general election, Greenland–European Union relations, and Politics of Denmark Margrethe II, Queen of Denmark Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen Premier Kim Kielsen The special territories of the European Union Nuuk is Greenland's capital and the seat of the government. The Greenlandic government holds executive power in local government affairs. The head of the government is called Naalakkersuisut Siulittaasuat ("Premier") and serves as head of Greenlandic Government. Any other member of the cabinet is called a Naalakkersuisoq ("Minister"). The Greenlandic parliament – the Inatsisartut ("Legislators"). The parliament currently has 31 members.[102] In contemporary times, elections are held at municipal, national (Inatsisartut), and kingdom (Folketing) levels. Greenland is a self-governing entity within the constitutional monarchy of the Kingdom of Denmark, in which Queen Margrethe II is the head of state. The monarch officially retains executive power and presides over the Council of State (privy council).[103][104] However, following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch have since become strictly representative and ceremonial,[105] such as the formal appointment and dismissal of the prime minister and other ministers in the executive government. The monarch is not answerable for his or her actions, and the monarch's person is sacrosanct.[106] Political system[edit] The party system is dominated by the social-democratic Forward Party, and the democratic socialist Inuit Community Party, both of which broadly argue for greater independence from Denmark. While the 2009 election saw the unionist Democrat Party (two MPs) decline greatly, the 2013 election consolidated the power of the two main parties at the expense of the smaller groups, and saw the eco-socialist Inuit Party elected to the Parliament for the first time. The dominance of the Forward and Inuit Community parties began to wane after the snap 2014 and 2018 elections. The non-binding 2008 referendum on self-governance favoured increased self-governance by 21,355 votes to 6,663. In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC), unlike Denmark, which remains a member. The EEC later became the European Union (EU, renamed and expanded in scope in 1992). Greenland retains some ties through its associated relationship with the EU. However, EU law largely does not apply to Greenland except in the area of trade. Greenland is designated as a member of the Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT) and is thus officially not a part of the European Union, though Greenland can and does receive support from the European Development Fund, Multiannual Financial Framework, European Investment Bank and EU Programs.[107][108] Government[edit] Main article: Politics of Greenland Municipalities of Greenland Greenland's head of state is Queen Margrethe II of Denmark. The Queen's government in Denmark appoints a high commissioner (Rigsombudsmand) to represent it on the island. The commissioner is Mikaela Engell. The Greenland constituency elect two MP representatives to the Kingdom Parliament (Folketinget) in Denmark, out of a total of 179. The current representatives are Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam of the Siumut Party and Aaja Chemnitz Larsen of the Inuit Community Party.[109] Greenland has national Parliament that consists of 31 representatives. The government is the Naalakkersuisut whose members are appointed by the premier. The head of government is the premier, usually the leader of the majority party in Parliament. The premier is Kim Kielsen of the Siumut party. Military[edit] Main article: Military of Greenland Several American and Danish military bases are located in Greenland, including Thule Air Base, which is home to the United States Space Force's 21st Space Wing's global network of sensors providing missile warning, space surveillance and space control to North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD).[110] In 1995, a political scandal resulted in Denmark after a report revealed the government had given tacit permission for nuclear weapons to be located in Greenland, in contravention of Denmark's 1957 nuclear-free zone policy.[111][63] The United States built a secret nuclear powered base, called Camp Century, in the Greenland ice sheet.[112] On 21 January 1968, a B-52G, with four nuclear bombs aboard as part of Operation Chrome Dome, crashed on the ice of the North Star Bay while attempting an emergency landing at Thule Air Base.[113] The resulting fire caused extensive radioactive contamination.[114] One of the H-bombs remains lost.[115][116] Administrative divisions[edit] Main article: Administrative divisions of Greenland Formerly consisting of three counties comprising a total of 18 municipalities, Greenland abolished these in 2009 and has since been divided into large territories known as "municipalities" (Greenlandic: kommuneqarfiit, Danish: kommuner): Sermersooq ("Much Ice") around the capital Nuuk and also including all East Coast communities; Kujalleq ("South") around Cape Farewell; Qeqqata ("Centre") north of the capital along the Davis Strait; Qeqertalik ("The one with islands") surrounding Disko Bay; and Avannaata ("Northern") in the northwest; the latter two having come into being as a result of the Qaasuitsup municipality, one of the original four, being partitioned in 2018. The northeast of the island composes the unincorporated Northeast Greenland National Park. Thule Air Base is also unincorporated, an enclave within Avannaata municipality administered by the United States Air Force. During its construction, there were as many as 12,000 American residents but in recent years the number has been below 1,000. Economy[edit] Main article: Economy of Greenland Graphical depiction of Greenland's product exports in 28 colour-coded categories Greenland electricity production by source The Greenlandic economy is highly dependent on fishing. Fishing accounts for more than 90% of Greenland's exports.[117] The shrimp and fish industry is by far the largest income earner.[118] Greenland is abundant in minerals.[117] Mining of ruby deposits began in 2007. Other mineral prospects are improving as prices are increasing. These include iron, uranium, aluminium, nickel, platinum, tungsten, titanium, and copper. Despite resumption[when?] of several hydrocarbon and mineral exploration activities, it will take several years before hydrocarbon production can materialize. The state oil company Nunaoil was created to help develop the hydrocarbon industry in Greenland. The state company Nunamineral has been launched on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange to raise more capital to increase the production of gold, started in 2007. Electricity has traditionally been generated by oil or diesel power plants, even if there is a large surplus of potential hydropower. There is a programme to build hydro power plants. The first, and still the largest, is Buksefjord hydroelectric power plant. There are also plans to build a large aluminium smelter, using hydropower to create an exportable product. It is expected that much of the labour needed will be imported.[119] The European Union has urged Greenland to restrict People's Republic of China development of rare-earth projects, as China accounts for 95% of the world's current supply. In early 2013, the Greenland government said that it had no plans to impose such restrictions.[120] The public sector, including publicly owned enterprises and the municipalities, plays a dominant role in Greenland's economy. About half the government revenues come from grants from the Danish government, an important supplement to the gross domestic product (GDP). Gross domestic product per capita is equivalent to that of the average economies of Europe. Greenland suffered an economic contraction in the early 1990s. But, since 1993, the economy has improved. The Greenland Home Rule Government (GHRG) has pursued a tight fiscal policy since the late 1980s, which has helped create surpluses in the public budget and low inflation. Since 1990, Greenland has registered a foreign-trade deficit following the closure of the last remaining lead and zinc mine that year. In 2017, new sources of ruby in Greenland have been discovered, promising to bring new industry and a new export from the country.[121] (See Gemstone industry in Greenland). Transport[edit] Main articles: Transport in Greenland and List of airports in Greenland Air Greenland operates passenger and cargo freight services by air from, to and across Greenland. Arctic Umiaq Line operates passenger and freight services by sea across Greenland. There is air transport both within Greenland and between the island and other nations. There is also scheduled boat traffic, but the long distances lead to long travel times and low frequency. There are virtually no roads between cities because the coast has many fjords that would require ferry service to connect a road network. The only exception is a gravel road of 5 km (3 mi) length between Kangilinnguit and the now abandoned former cryolite mining town of Ivittuut.[122] In addition, the lack of agriculture, forestry and similar countryside activities has meant that very few country roads have been built. Kangerlussuaq Airport (SFJ) [123] is the largest airport and the main aviation hub for international passenger transport. It serves international and domestic airline operated flight.[124] SFJ is far from the vicinity of the larger metropolitan capital areas, 317 km (197 mi) to the capital Nuuk, and airline passenger services are available.[125] Greenland has no passenger railways. Nuuk Airport (GOH) [126] is the second-largest airport located just 6.0 km (3.7 mi) from the centre of the capital. GOH serves general aviation traffic and has daily- or regular domestic flights within Greenland. GOH also serves international flights to Iceland, business and private airplanes. Ilulissat Airport (JAV) [127] is a domestic airport that also serves international flights to Iceland. There are a total of 13 registered civil airports and 47 helipads in Greenland; most of them are unpaved and located in rural areas. The second longest runway is at Narsarsuaq, a domestic airport with limited international service in south Greenland. All civil aviation matters are handled by the Danish Transport Authority. Most airports including Nuuk Airport have short runways and can only be served by special fairly small aircraft on fairly short flights. Kangerlussuaq Airport around 100 kilometres (62 miles) inland from the west coast is the major airport of Greenland and the hub for domestic flights. Intercontinental flights connect mainly to Copenhagen. Travel between international destinations (except Iceland) and any city in Greenland requires a plane change. Icelandair operates flights from Reykjavík to a number of airports in Greenland, and the company promotes the service as a day-trip option from Iceland for tourists.[128] There are no direct flights to the United States or Canada, although there have been flights Kangerlussuaq – Baltimore,[129] and Nuuk – Iqaluit,[130] which were cancelled because of too few passengers and financial losses.[131] An alternative between Greenland and the United States/Canada is Icelandair with a plane change in Iceland.[132] Sea passenger transport is served by several coastal ferries. Arctic Umiaq Line makes a single round trip per week, taking 80 hours each direction.[133] Cargo freight by sea is handled by the shipping company Royal Arctic Line from, to and across Greenland. It provides trade and transport opportunities between Greenland, Europe and North America. Population[edit] Demographics[edit] For statistics on demographics, see Demographics of Greenland. See also: List of Greenlanders, Greenlandic Inuit, and Danes in Greenland Tunumiit Inuit couple from Kulusuk Ethnic groups of Greenland[6] Ethnic groups percent Greenlandic   89.7% Danish   7.8% Other   1.4% Nordic   1.1% Greenland has a population of 56,081 (January 2020 Estimate).[7] In terms of country of birth, the population is estimated to be of 89.7% Greenlandic (Inuit including European-Inuit multi-ethnic), 7.8% Danish, 1.1% Nordic and 1.4% other. The multi-ethnic population of European-Inuit represent people of Danish, Faroese, Icelandic, Norwegian, Dutch (whalers), German (Herrnhuters), Czech (Jednota bratrská) descent and others. The Inuit are indigenous to the Arctic and have traditionally inhabited Greenland, as well as areas in Canada and in Alaska in the United States. A 2015 wide genetic study of Greenlanders found modern-day Inuit in Greenland are direct descendants of the first Inuit pioneers of the Thule culture with ∼25% admixture of the European colonizers from the 16th century. Despite previous speculations, no evidence of Viking settlers predecessors has been found.[134] The majority of the population is Lutheran. Nearly all Greenlanders live along the fjords in the south-west of the main island, which has a relatively mild climate.[135] In 2020, 18,326 people reside in Nuuk, the capital city. Greenland's warmest climates such as the vegetated area around Narsarsuaq are sparsely populated, whereas the majority of the population lives north of 64°N in colder coastal climates.   v t e Largest cities or towns in Greenland 2020 Estimate[136] Rank Name Municipality Pop. Rank Name Municipality Pop. Nuuk Sisimiut 1 Nuuk Sermersooq 18,326 11 Nanortalik Kujalleq 1,185 Ilulissat Aasiaat 2 Sisimiut Qeqqata 5,582 12 Upernavik Avannaata 1,092 3 Ilulissat Avannaata 4,670 13 Qasigiannguit Qeqertalik 1,081 4 Aasiaat Qeqertalik 3,069 14 Qeqertarsuaq Qeqertalik 839 5 Qaqortoq Kujalleq 3,050 15 Qaanaaq Avannaata 646 6 Maniitsoq Qeqqata 2,534 16 Kangaatsiaq Qeqertalik 520 7 Tasiilaq Sermersooq 2,063 17 Kangerlussuaq Qeqqata 508 8 Uummannaq Avannaata 1,407 18 Kullorsuaq Avannaata 453 9 Narsaq Kujalleq 1,346 19 Ittoqqortoormiit Sermersooq 345 10 Paamiut Sermersooq 1,308 20 Kangaamiut Qeqqata 293 Languages[edit] A bilingual sign in Nuuk, displaying the Danish and Kalaallisut for "Parking forbidden for all vehicles" Both Greenlandic (an Inuit-Yupik-Unangan language) and Danish have been used in public affairs since the establishment of home rule in 1979; the majority of the population can speak both languages. Greenlandic became the sole official language in June 2009,[137] In practice, Danish is still widely used in the administration and in higher education, as well as remaining the first or only language for some Danish immigrants in Nuuk and other larger towns. Debate about the roles of Greenlandic and Danish in the country's future is ongoing. The orthography of Greenlandic was established in 1851[138] and revised in 1973. The country has a 100% literacy rate.[118] A majority of the population speaks Greenlandic, most of them bilingually. It is spoken by about 50,000 people, making it the most populous of the Inuit-Yupik-Unangan language family, spoken by more people than all the other languages of the family combined. Kalaallisut is the Greenlandic dialect of West Greenland, which has long been the most populous area of the island. This has led to its de facto status as the official "Greenlandic" language, although the northern dialect Inuktun remains spoken by 1,000 or so people around Qaanaaq, and the eastern dialect Tunumiisut by around 3,000.[139] Each of these dialects is almost unintelligible to the speakers of the other and are considered by some linguists to be separate languages.[citation needed] A UNESCO report has labelled the other dialects as endangered, and measures are now being considered to protect the East Greenlandic dialects.[140] About 12% of the population speak Danish as a first or sole language, particularly Danish immigrants in Greenland, many of whom fill positions such as administrators, professionals, academics, or skilled tradesmen. While Greenlandic is dominant in all smaller settlements, a part of the population of Inuit or multi-ethnic ancestry, especially in towns, speaks Danish. Most of the Inuit population speaks Danish as a second language. In larger towns, especially Nuuk and in the higher social strata, this is still a large group. English is another important language for Greenland, taught in schools from the first school year.[141] Education[edit] Ilimmarfik university Campus in Nuuk Education is organised in a similar way to Denmark. There is ten year mandatory primary school. There is also a secondary school, with either work education or preparatory for university education. There is one university, the University of Greenland (Greenlandic: Ilisimatusarfik) in Nuuk. Many Greenlanders attend universities in Denmark or elsewhere. Religion[edit] Main article: Religion in Greenland Religion in Greenland (2010):[142][143]   Protestantism (95.5%)   Roman Catholicism (0.2%)   Other Christian (0.4%)   Inuit spiritual beliefs (0.8%)   Agnostic (2.3%)   Atheist (0.2%)   Other Religion (0.6%) Most Greenlandic villages, including Nanortalik, have their own church. The nomadic Inuit people were traditionally shamanistic, with a well-developed mythology primarily concerned with appeasing a vengeful and fingerless sea goddess who controlled the success of the seal and whale hunts. The first Norse colonists worshipped the Norse gods, but Erik the Red's son Leif was converted to Christianity by King Olaf Trygvesson on a trip to Norway in 999 and sent missionaries back to Greenland. These swiftly established sixteen parishes, some monasteries, and a bishopric at Garðar. Rediscovering these colonists and spreading ideas of the Protestant Reformation among them was one of the primary reasons for the Danish recolonization in the 18th century. Under the patronage of the Royal Mission College in Copenhagen, Norwegian and Danish Lutherans and German Moravian missionaries searched for the missing Norse settlements, but no Norse were found, and instead they began preaching to the Inuit. The principal figures in the Christianization of Greenland were Hans and Poul Egede and Matthias Stach. The New Testament was translated piecemeal from the time of the very first settlement on Kangeq Island, but the first translation of the whole Bible was not completed until 1900. An improved translation using the modern orthography was completed in 2000.[144] Today, the major religion is Protestant Christianity, represented mainly by the Church of Denmark, which is Lutheran in orientation. While there are no official census data on religion in Greenland, the Bishop of Greenland Sofie Petersen[145] estimates that 85% of the Greenlandic population are members of her congregation.[146] The Church of Denmark is the established church through the Constitution of Denmark.[147] The Roman Catholic minority is pastorally served by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Copenhagen. There are still Christian missionaries on the island, but mainly from charismatic movements proselytizing fellow Christians.[148] According to Operation World, just 4.7% of Greenlanders are Evangelical Christian, although the Evangelical population is growing at an annual rate of 8.4%.[149] Social issues[edit] The rate of suicide in Greenland is very high. According to a 2010 census, Greenland holds the highest suicide rate in the world.[150][151] Another significant social issue faced by Greenland is a high rate of alcoholism.[152] Alcohol consumption rates in Greenland reached their height in the 1980s, when it was twice as high as in Denmark, and had by 2010 fallen slightly below the average level of consumption in Denmark (which at the time were 12th highest in the world, but has since fallen). However, at the same time, alcohol prices are far higher, meaning that consumption has a large social impact.[153][154] Prevalence of HIV/AIDS used to be high in Greenland and peaked in the 1990s when the fatality rate also was relatively high. Through a number of initiatives the prevalence (along with the fatality rate through efficient treatment) has fallen and is now low, c. 0.13%,[155][156] below most other countries. In recent decades, the unemployment rates have generally been somewhat above those in Denmark;[157] in 2017, the rate was 6.8% in Greenland,[158] compared to 5.6% in Denmark.[159] Culture[edit] Main articles: Culture of Greenland and Music of Greenland See also: Human rights in Denmark § Indigenous rights Nive Nielsen, Greenlandic singer and songwriter Panel discussion with Greenlandic movie maker Inuk Silis Høegh at the launch of his movie about groundbreaking Greenlandic band Sumé Today Greenlandic culture is a blending of traditional Inuit (Kalaallit, Tunumiit, Inughuit) and Scandinavian culture. Inuit, or Kalaallit, culture has a strong artistic tradition, dating back thousands of years. The Kalaallit are known for an art form of figures called tupilak or a "spirit object." Traditional art-making practices thrive in the Ammassalik.[160] Sperm whale ivory remains a valued medium for carving.[161] Greenland also has a successful, albeit small, music culture. Some popular Greenlandic bands and artists include Sume (classic rock), Chilly Friday (rock), Nanook (rock), Siissisoq (rock), Nuuk Posse (hip hop) and Rasmus Lyberth (folk), who performed in the Danish national final for the 1979 Eurovision Song Contest, performing in Greenlandic. The singer-songwriter Simon Lynge is the first musical artist from Greenland to have an album released across the United Kingdom, and to perform at the UK's Glastonbury Festival. The music culture of Greenland also includes traditional Inuit music, largely revolving around singing and drums. Sport[edit] Main article: Sport in Greenland Sport is an important part of Greenlandic culture, as the population is generally quite active.[162] Popular sports include association football, track and field, handball and skiing. Handball is often referred to as the national sport,[163] and Greenland's men's national team was ranked among the top 20 in the world in 2001. Greenland has excellent conditions for skiing, fishing, snowboarding, ice climbing and rock climbing, although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred by the general public. Although the environment is generally ill-suited for golf, there is a golf course in Nuuk. Cuisine[edit] Main article: Greenlandic cuisine The national dish of Greenland is suaasat, a soup made from seal meat. Meat from marine mammals, game, birds, and fish play a large role in the Greenlandic diet. Due to the glacial landscape, most ingredients come from the ocean.[164] Spices are seldom used besides salt and pepper.[165] Greenlandic coffee is a "flaming" dessert coffee (set alight before serving) made with coffee, whiskey, Kahlúa, Grand Marnier, and whipped cream. It is stronger than the familiar Irish dessert coffee.[166] See also[edit] Index of Greenland-related articles Outline of Greenland The Unity of the Realm The Faroe Islands Other similar territories[edit] The Åland Islands (Finland) Svalbard (Norway) Notes[edit] ^ Nuna asiilasooq has equal status as a regional anthem but is generally used only on the self-government of Greenland.[1] ^ a b Greenlandic has been the sole official language of Greenland since 2009.[2][4] ^ As of 2000: 410,449 km2 (158,475 sq mi) ice-free; 1,755,637 km2 (677,855 sq mi) ice-covered. Density: 0.14/km2 (0.36 /sq. mi) for ice-free areas. ^ Australia and Antarctica, both larger than Greenland, are generally considered to be continental landmasses rather than islands.[10] References[edit] ^ "03EM/01.25.01-50 Spørgsmål til Landsstyret: Hvornår fremsætter Landsstyret beslutning om Grønlands" [03EM/01.25.01-50 Questions to the Home Rule Government: When does the Home Rule Government make a decision on Greenland]. Government of Greenland. 7 October 2003. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014. Retrieved 13 December 2014. ^ a b c (in Danish) TV 2 Nyhederne – "Grønland går over til selvstyre" TV 2 Nyhederne (TV 2 News) – Ved overgangen til selvstyre, er grønlandsk nu det officielle sprog. Retrieved 22 January 2012. ^ "Self-rule introduced in Greenland". BBC News. 21 June 2009. Archived from the original on 25 April 2010. Retrieved 4 May 2010. ^ a b (in Danish) Law of Greenlandic Selfrule Archived 8 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine (see chapter 7) ^ "Bekendtgørelse af ILO-konvention nr. 169 af 28. juni 1989 vedrørende oprindelige folk og stammefolk i selvstændige stater". Retsinformation.dk. 9 October 1997. ^ a b "The World Factbook – Central Intelligence Agency". cia.gov. Retrieved 3 October 2020. ^ a b c "Population and Population Growth 1901-2020". Statistical Greenland. Retrieved 7 April 2020. ^ Greenland in Figures 2013 (PDF). Greenland in Figures. Statistics Greenland. ISBN 978-87-986787-7-9. ISSN 1602-5709. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. ^ Avakov, Aleksandr Vladimirovich (2012). Quality of Life, Balance of Powers, and Nuclear Weapons (2012): A Statistical Yearbook for Statesmen and Citizens. Algora Publishing. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-87586-892-9. ^ "Joshua Calder's World Island Information". Worldislandinfo.com. Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ * Benedikter, Thomas (19 June 2006). "The working autonomies in Europe". Society for Threatened Peoples. Denmark has established very specific territorial autonomies with its two island territories Ackrén, Maria (November 2017). "Greenland". Autonomy Arrangements in the World. Faroese and Greenlandic are seen as official regional languages in the self-governing territories belonging to Denmark. "Greenland". International Cooperation and Development. European Commission. 3 June 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2019. Greenland [...] is an autonomous territory within the Kingdom of Denmark ^ a b c The Fate of Greenland's Vikings Archived 11 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine, by Dale Mackenzie Brown, Archaeological Institute of America, 28 February 2000 ^ Mcghee, Robert (3 April 2015). "Thule Culture". Canadian Encyclopedia. Historica Canada. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 1 June 2015. ^ "Qaasuitsup kommunia". www.qaasuitsup.gl. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2018. ^ "Population density (people per sq. km of land area)". The World Bank. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2012. ^ "Saqqaq-kulturen kronologi". National Museum of Denmark. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. ^ Saillard J, Forster P, Lynnerup N, Bandelt HJ, Nørby S (2000). "mtDNA variation among Greenland Eskimos: the edge of the Beringian expansion". American Journal of Human Genetics. 67 (3): 718–26. doi:10.1086/303038. PMC 1287530. PMID 10924403. ^ The Portuguese Explorers Archived 8 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Heritage.nf.ca. Retrieved on 21 June 2016. ^ "OVERSEAS COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES (OCTS)" (Website). Eur-lex.europa.eu. Retrieved 14 September 2020. ^ Greenland in Figures 2012 (PDF). Greenland in Figures. stat.gl. ISBN 978-87-986787-6-2. ISSN 1602-5709. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 10 February 2013. ^ Nordic Investment Bank. "Hydropower creates clean energy and jobs in Greenland". NIB. Nordic Investment Bank. Archived from the original on 3 November 2016. Retrieved 2 October 2016. ^ Eirik the Red's Saga. Gutenberg.org. 8 March 2006. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ "How Greenland got its name" Archived 19 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine. The Ancient Standard. 17 December 2010. ^ a b Grove, Jonathan (2009). "The place of Greenland in medieval Icelandic saga narrative". Journal of the North Atlantic. 2: 30–51. doi:10.3721/037.002.s206. S2CID 163032041. Archived from the original on 11 April 2012. ^ Evans, Andrew. "Is Iceland Really Green and Greenland Really Icy?" Archived 4 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine, National Geographic (30 June 2016). ^ Stern, p. 89 ^ Grønnow, B. (1988). "Prehistory in permafrost: Investigations at the Saqqaq site, Qeqertasussuk, Disco Bay, West Greenland". Journal of Danish Archaeology. 7 (1): 24–39. doi:10.1080/0108464X.1988.10589995. ^ Møbjerg, T. (1999). "New adaptive strategies in the Saqqaq culture of Greenland, c. 1600–1400 BC". World Archaeology. 30 (3): 452–65. doi:10.1080/00438243.1999.9980423. JSTOR 124963. ^ "The history of Greenland – From dog sled to snowmobile". Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011. ^ "Migration to Greenland – the history of Greenland". Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 5 September 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011. ^ Rasch, M.; Jensen, J. F. (1997). "Ancient Inuit dwelling sites and Holocene relative sea‐level changes in southern Disko Bugt, central West Greenland". Polar Research. 16 (2): 101–15. Bibcode:1997PolRe..16..101R. doi:10.1111/j.1751-8369.1997.tb00252.x. ^ Ramsden, P.; Tuck, J. A. (2001). "A Comment on the Pre-Dorset/Dorset Transition in the Eastern Arctic". Anthropological Papers of the University of Alaska. New Series. 1: 7–11. ^ Grønnow, B. (1986). "Recent archaeological investigations of West Greenland caribou hunting". Arctic Anthropology. 23 (1/2): 57–80. JSTOR 40316103. ^ Rowley, G. (1940). "The Dorset culture of the eastern Arctic". American Anthropologist. 42 (3): 490–99. doi:10.1525/aa.1940.42.3.02a00080. ^ Gulløv, H. C.; Appelt, M. (2001). "Social bonding and shamanism among Late Dorset groups in High Arctic Greenland". The archaeology of shamanism. Routledge. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-415-25255-3. ^ Gulløv, H. C. (1996). In search of the Dorset culture in the Thule culture. The Paleoo Cultures of Greenland. Copenhagen: Danish Polar Center (Publication No. 1). pp. 201–14. ^ Kudeba, N. (19 April 2014). "Chapter 5 – Norse Explorers from Erik the Red to Leif Erikson", in Canadian Explorers. ^ Boraas, Tracey (2002). Sweden. Capstone Press. p. 24. ISBN 978-0-7368-0939-9. ^ a b c d Diamond, Jared (2006). Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. Harmondsworth [Eng.]: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303655-5. ^ a b Arnold C. (June 2010) "Cold did in the Norse," Earth Magazine. p. 9. ^ Behringer, Wolfgang (9 September 2009). Kulturgeschichte des Klimas: Von der Eiszeit zur globalen Erwärmung: Amazon.de: Wolfgang Behringer: Bücher. ISBN 9783406528668. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ Alley, R.; Mayewski, P.; Peel, D.; Stauffer, B. (1996). "Twin ice cores from Greenland reveal history of climate change, more". Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union. 77 (22): 209–10. Bibcode:1996EOSTr..77R.209A. doi:10.1029/96EO00142. Archived from the original on 14 April 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2019. ^ "Why societies collapse Archived 2 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine". ABC Science. ^ Patterson, W. P.; Dietrich, K. A.; Holmden, C.; Andrews, J. T. (23 March 2010). "Two millennia of North Atlantic seasonality and implications for Norse colonies". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (12): 5306–5310. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107.5306P. doi:10.1073/pnas.0902522107. PMC 2851789. PMID 20212157. ^ a b Ingstad, Helge; Stine Ingstad, Anne (2000). The Viking Discovery of America: The Excavation of a Norse Settlement in L'Anse Aux Meadows, Newfoundland. Breakwater Books. pp. 28–. ISBN 978-1-55081-158-2. ^ Bishop, Rosie R., et al. "A charcoal-rich horizon at Ø69, Greenland: evidence for vegetation burning during the Norse landnám?." Journal of Archaeological Science 40.11 (2013): 3890–902 ^ Leone, Mark P.; Knauf, Jocelyn E. (2015). Historical Archaeologies of Capitalism. Springer. p. 211. ISBN 978-3-319-12760-6. ^ Folger, Tim. "Why Did Greenland's Vikings Vanish?". Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2017. ^ Trigger, Bruce G.; Washburn, Wilcomb E.; Adams, Richard E. W. (1996). The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas. Cambridge University Press. p. 331. ISBN 978-0-521-57393-1. ^ "Inuit were not the first people to settle in the Arctic" Archived 9 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine, CBC News (Canada), 28 August 2014 ^ Nebenzahl, Kenneth. Rand McNally Atlas of Columbus and The Great Discoveries (Rand McNally & Company; Genoa, Italy; 1990); The Cantino Planisphere, Lisbon, 1502, pp. 34–37. ^ Legal Status of Eastern Greenland Archived 11 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine, PCIJ Series A/B No. 53 (1933) ^ Doenecke, Justus D. (8 July 1941). In Danger Undaunted: The Anti-Interventionist Movement of 1940–1941. Hoover Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-8841-8. ^ Speer, Albert. Inside the Third Reich, 1971 ^ "Deepfreeze Defense". Time. 27 January 1947. Archived from the original on 21 February 2009. Retrieved 14 May 2008. ^ Miller, John J. (7 May 2001). "Let's Buy Greenland! — A complete missile-defense plan". National Review. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. ^ "Robert J. Walker on Acquiring Greenland and Iceland" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2019. ^ Keil, Kathrin (29 August 2011) "U.S. Interests in Greenland – On a Path Towards Full Independence?", The Arctic Institute ^ Andrews Kurth LLP, "Oil and Gas in Greenland – Still on Ice?" Archived 19 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Andrewskurth.com. Retrieved on 21 June 2016. ^ Selsoe Sorensen, Martin (16 August 2019). "'Greenland Is Not for Sale': Trump's Talk of a Purchase Draws Derision". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 August 2019. ^ Petersen, Nikolaj (17 December 2007). "The Iceman That Never Came". Scandinavian Journal of History. Scandinavian Journal of History Volume 33, 2008 - Issue 1. 33: 75–98. doi:10.1080/03468750701449554. S2CID 142526881. Retrieved 15 August 2020. ^ "A Radioactive Cold War Military Base Will Soon Emerge From Greenland's Melting Ice". Smithsonian. 5 August 2016. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. ^ a b "Cataclysmic cargo: The hunt for four missing nuclear bombs after a B-52 crash". The Washington Post. 21 January 2018. ^ Loukacheva, Natalia (2007). The Arctic Promise: Legal and Political Autonomy of Greenland and Nunavut Archived 13 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine. University of Toronto Press, p. 25 ISBN 9780802094865 ^ Stern, pp. 55–56 ^ Cowell, Alan (26 November 2008). "Greenland Vote Favors Independence". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2010. ^ "Vejledende folkeafstemning om selvstyre ? 25-11-2008" (in Kalaallisut). SermitValg. 26 November 2008. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. Retrieved 26 November 2008. ^ "CIDOB – Secession and Counter-secession. An International Relations Perspective". CIDOB. p. 70. Archived from the original on 27 January 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. ^ Description of the Greenlandic Self-Government Act on the webpage of the Danish Ministry of State Archived 22 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine"The Self-Government Act provides for the Self-Government authorities to assume a number of new fields of responsibility, such as administration of justice, including the establishment of courts of law; the prison and probation service; the police; the field relating to company law, accounting and auditing; mineral resource activities; aviation; law of legal capacity, family law and succession law; aliens and border controls; the working environment; as well as financial regulation and supervision, cf. Schedule I and II in the Annex to the Self-Government Act." ^ Greenland takes step toward independence from Denmark Archived 18 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine. The Daily Telegraph (21 June 2009). Retrieved 29 September 2012. ^ "Nearly independent day". The Economist. 20 June 2009. Archived from the original on 25 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009. ^ "Greenland set for self-rule". The Australian. 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009. ^ Boswell, Randy (19 June 2009). "Greenland takes big step towards full independence". Canwest News Services. Canada.com. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009. ^ "Greenland's Economy Autumn 2020, Summary" (PDF). Retrieved 27 March 2021. ^ "Greenland's economy is poised to rebound in 2021, 2 June 2020". Retrieved 27 March 2021. ^ "Greenland Is Approaching Tourism Slowly—And Taking Lessons from Iceland, 24 March 2021". Retrieved 27 March 2021. ^ "The Island of Greenland". Hidden Journeys – explore the world from the air. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 8 July 2014. ^ "Demographic Yearbook – Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area, and density" (PDF). United Nations Statistics Division. 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2010. Retrieved 24 September 2010. ^ "WMO verifies -69.6°C Greenland temperature as Northern hemisphere record". World Meteorological Organization. 22 September 2020. ^ d.o.o, Yu Media Group. "Nuuk, Greenland - Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast". Weather Atlas. Archived from the original on 17 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. ^ "IPCC Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientific Basis". Grida.no. Archived from the original on 16 December 2007. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ "map (map on p. 4)". Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ DK Atlas, 2001. ^ Schneider, D. (2003). "American Scientist Online – Greenland or Whiteland?". Sigma Xi. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 3 March 2008. ^ "Find Greenland Icecap Bridges Three Islands Archived 12 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine", Ellensburg Daily Record, 24 October 1951, p. 6. Retrieved 13 May 2012. ^ "The National Park". Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013. ^ "Greenland Melt May Swamp LA, Other Cities, Study Says". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ McCarthy, Michael (24 April 2007). "An island made by global warming". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2008. Retrieved 4 May 2010. ^ "Place of the Year". Blog.oup.com. 3 December 2007. Archived from the original on 15 October 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ Publications, Usa Int'L Business. Denmark Company Laws and Regulations Handbook: Strategic Information and Basic Laws. Place of Publication Not Identified: Intl Business Pubns Usa, 2015. 20–21. Print. ^ Revkin, Andrew C. (28 April 2008). "Arctic Explorer Rebuts 'Warming Island' Critique". New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 September 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ Alley, Richard B. The Two-Mile Time Machine: Ice Cores, Abrupt Climate Change, and Our Future. Princeton University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-691-00493-5. ^ Roach, John (16 February 2006). "Greenland Glaciers Losing Ice Much Faster, Study Says". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 10 September 2006. Retrieved 13 September 2006. ^ Climate variability and trends along the western slope of the Greenland ice sheet during 1991–2004 Archived 14 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Konrad Steffen, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA Nicloas Cullen, and Russell Huff University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. ^ Satellite shows Greenland's ice sheets getting thicker Archived 1 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Register, 7 November 2005. ^ Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; Vynne, Carly; Burgess, Neil D.; Wikramanayake, Eric; Hahn, Nathan; Palminteri, Suzanne; Hedao, Prashant; Noss, Reed; Hansen, Matt; Locke, Harvey; Ellis, Erle C; Jones, Benjamin; Barber, Charles Victor; Hayes, Randy; Kormos, Cyril; Martin, Vance; Crist, Eileen; Sechrest, Wes; Price, Lori; Baillie, Jonathan E. M.; Weeden, Don; Suckling, Kierán; Davis, Crystal; Sizer, Nigel; Moore, Rebecca; Thau, David; Birch, Tanya; Potapov, Peter; Turubanova, Svetlana; Tyukavina, Alexandra; de Souza, Nadia; Pintea, Lilian; Brito, José C.; Llewellyn, Othman A.; Miller, Anthony G.; Patzelt, Annette; Ghazanfar, Shahina A.; Timberlake, Jonathan; Klöser, Heinz; Shennan-Farpón, Yara; Kindt, Roeland; Lillesø, Jens-Peter Barnekow; van Breugel, Paulo; Graudal, Lars; Voge, Maianna; Al-Shammari, Khalaf F.; Saleem, Muhammad (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869. ^ a b "Greenland Wildlife". Redaction. The Great Danish Encyclopedia. 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2015. ^ "Greenland". Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition. ^ "Animal life in Greenland – an introduction by the tourist board". Greenland Guide. Narsaq Tourist Office. n.d. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2012. ^ Møller, P. R.; Nielsen, J.; Knudsen, S. W.; Poulsen, J. Y.; Sünksen, K.; Jørgensen, O. A. (2010). "A checklist of the fish fauna of Greenland waters". Zootaxa. 2378 (1): 1–84. ISBN 978-1-86977-468-4. OCLC 551668689. ^ "Economy and Industry in Greenland - Naalakkersuisut". naalakkersuisut.gl. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. ^ "Inatsisartut" (in Kalaallisut). Inatsisartut.gl. Retrieved 29 December 2020. ^ "The executive power is vested in the King." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 3. Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The body of Ministers shall form the Council of State, in which the Successor to the Throne shall have a seat when he is of age. The Council of State shall be presided over by the King..." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 17. Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Monarchy today Archived 15 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine – The Danish Monarchy (kongehuset.dk). Access date: 16 June 2012 ^ "The King shall not be answerable for his actions; his person shall be sacrosanct." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 13. Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "EU Relations with Greenland". European Union. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2020. ^ "Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT)". European Union. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2020. ^ Folketinget – Folketinget.dk Archived 28 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Ft.dk. Retrieved on 21 June 2016. ^ "Trump reportedly wants to 'buy' Greenland. This is what it's like at the US's Arctic base there". Business Insider. 16 August 2019. Archived from the original on 19 August 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2019. ^ Hansen, H. C. (16 November 1957). "Danish Prime Minister Gives Tacit Go-Ahead For U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Greenland". The Nautilus Institute. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007. Retrieved 20 March 2009. ^ "A Top-Secret US Military Base Will Melt Out of the Greenland Ice Sheet". VICE Magazine. 9 March 2019. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. ^ "The Cold War's Missing Atom Bombs". Der Spiegel. 14 November 2008. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. ^ "US B-52 nuclear bomber crash in Greenland 51 years ago has ill Danes seeking compensation". Fox News. 3 June 2019. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. ^ Corera, Gordon (10 November 2008). "Mystery of lost US nuclear bomb". BBC News. ^ "US left nuclear weapon under ice in Greenland". The Daily Telegraph. 11 November 2008. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. ^ a b Walsh, Maurice (28 January 2017). "'You can't live in a museum': the battle for Greenland's uranium". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2017. ^ a b "Greenland". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 15 May 2007. ^ "Greenland's red hot labour market". Nordic Labour Journal. 12 October 2011. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 10 February 2013. ^ Chinese Workers—in Greenland? Archived 13 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine 10 February 2013 BusinessWeek. ^ "Greenland Rubies: What We Know At This Point | National Jeweler". www.nationaljeweler.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. ^ "Greenland – Transportation". www.iexplore.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. ^ "Mittarfeqarfiit, Grønlands Lufthavne, Greenland Airports Today's Flights Airports Kangerlussuaq airport – mit.gl". www.mit.gl. ^ "tripsta". Archived from the original on 21 September 2019. Retrieved 3 January 2020. ^ "City, high-rise apartments, cosy atmosphere, culture, rock, gourmet restaurants, cafés, fashion outlets, art, the national museum and the university – all the ingredients of a capital - Nuuk - airgreenland.com". www.airgreenland.gl. ^ "Nuuk Airport". www.mit.gl. ^ "Ilulissat Airport". www.mit.gl. ^ Perrin, Wendy (21 July 2015). "Greenland Day Trip from Iceland: Is it Worth It?". Wendy Perrin. Archived from the original on 26 December 2017. Retrieved 25 December 2017. ^ "Historical Maiden Flight US-Greenland – Official national guide by Greenland Tourism and Business Council". Greenland.com. 24 May 2007. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ "Air Greenland teams with First Air for Iqaluit flights". CBC News. 7 June 2012. Archived from the original on 10 June 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2012. ^ "The Baltimore route is to close". Air Greenland. 12 June 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. ^ "4 Ways to Get to Greenland". Fodor's. 26 February 2014. Archived from the original on 26 December 2017. Retrieved 25 December 2017. ^ PhD, Georg Woodman, Dr MSc & (18 October 2017). 2033-The Century After: How the World Would Look/Be If Nazi Germany & Empire Japan Had Won World War II. Strategic Book Publishing & Rights Agency. ISBN 978-1-68181-946-4. ^ Moltke, Ida; Fumagalli, Matteo; Korneliussen, Thorfinn (2015). "Uncovering the Genetic History of the Present-Day Greenlandic Population". American Journal of Human Genetics. 96 (1): 54–69. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.012. PMC 4289681. PMID 25557782. ^ "Greenland". Stalvik.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ http://citypopulation.de/Greenland.html ^ "Danish doubts over Greenland vote". BBC News. 27 November 2008. Archived from the original on 7 December 2012. Retrieved 10 February 2013. ^ Kleinschmidt, Samuel 1968 (1851): Grammatik der grønlændischen Sprache : mit teilweisem Einschluss des Labradordialekts. Hildesheim : Olms, 1968. ^ Mennecier, Philippe (1978). Le tunumiisut, dialecte inuit du Groenland oriental: description et analyse, Collection linguistique, 78, Societé de linguistique de Paris. ^ "Sermersooq will secure Eastern Greenlandic" (in Danish). Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa. 6 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2010. ^ "Travelling in Greenland". Greenland Representation to the EU, Greenland Home Rule Government. Archived from the original on 16 May 2014. ^ "Greenland, Religion and Social Profile | National Profiles | International Data". Thearda.com. 21 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2016. ^ "Table: Christian Population as Percentages of Total Population by Country | Pew Research Center". 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2017. ^ Sørensen, Leif Kiil (29 November 2000). "Grønlandsk bibel præsenteret | Kristeligt Dagblad". Kristeligt-dagblad.dk. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 6 September 2010. ^ "Bells ring a wake-up call for climate justice." World Council of Churches. 14 December 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2010 ^ "Grønland, Grundloven og Gejstligheden" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2012. ^ "Constitution of Denmark – Section IV" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. The Evangelical Lutheran Church shall be the Established Church of Denmark, and, as such, it shall be supported by the State. ^ "The only Muslim in Greenland who fasts for 21 hours". The Jazba Blog. 8 August 2011. Retrieved 26 January 2020. ^ "Greenland | Operation World". Operation World. Retrieved 10 September 2020. ^ "The Suicide Capital of the World". Slate. 9 October 2009. Archived from the original on 4 March 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2013. ^ "Rising suicide rate baffles Greenland". Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2013. ^ "Greenland profile – Overview" Archived 18 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. ^ Aage, H. (2012). "Alcohol in Greenland 1951–2010: consumption, mortality, prices". International Journal of Circumpolar Health. 71: 18444. doi:10.3402/ijch.v71i0.18444. PMC 3525923. PMID 23256091. ^ Madsen, M. H.; Grønbæk, M.; Bjerregaard, P.; Becker, U. (2005). "Urbanization, migration and alcohol use in a population of Greenland Inuit". International Journal of Circumpolar Health. 64 (3): 234–45. doi:10.3402/ijch.v64i3.17987. PMID 16050317. ^ Bjorn-Mortensen, K.; Ladefoged, K; Obel, N.; Helleberg, M. (2013). "The HIV epidemic in Greenland – a slow spreading infection among adult heterosexual Greenlanders". Int J Circumpolar Health. 7232: 19558. doi:10.3402/ijch.v72i0.19558. PMC 3577920. PMID 23431117. ^ "Nye tilfælde af HIV blandt unge". Naalakkersuisut. 13 October 2019. Retrieved 22 November 2019. ^ "Arbejde". europas-lande.dk. Retrieved 22 November 2019. ^ "Unemployment rate". Statistics Greenland. 2017. Retrieved 22 November 2019. ^ "Euro area unemployment at 8.7%, December 2017" (PDF). Eurostat. Retrieved 22 November 2019. ^ Hessel, p. 20 ^ Hessel, p. 21 ^ Wilcox and Latif, p. 109 ^ Wilcox and Latif, p. 110 ^ "Greenland - Greenlandic cuisine - Official Greenland Travel Guide". 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 16 July 2019. ^ "Greenland - Traditional Greenlandic food - Official Greenland Travel Guide". 27 March 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 16 July 2019. ^ "Greenland - Greenlandic coffee - Official Greenland Travel Guide". 30 March 2010. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 28 July 2019. Bibliography[edit] Hessel, Ingo (2006). Arctic Spirit. Vancouver, BC: Douglas and McIntyre. ISBN 978-1-55365-189-5. Stern, Pamela (2004). Historical Dictionary of the Inuit. Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8108-5058-3. OCLC 54768167. Wilcox, Jonathan; Latif, Zawiah Abdul (2007). Cultures of the World: Iceland. Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 978-0-7614-2074-3. Works cited[edit] Bardarson, I. (ed. Jónsson, F.) "Det gamle Grønlands beskrivelse af Ívar Bárðarson (Ivar Bårdssön)", (Copenhagen, 1930). CIA World Factbook, 2000. Conkling, P. W. et al. 2011. The Fate of Greenland: Lessons from Abrupt Climate Change, co-authored with Richard Alley, Wallace Broecker and George Denton, with photographs by Gary Comer, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Lund, S (1959). "The Marine Algae of East Greenland. 1. Taxonomical Part". Meddr Gronland. 156 (1): 1–245. Lund, S (1959). "The Marine Algae of East Greenland. 11. Geographic Distribution". Meddr Gronland. 156: 1–70. Steffen, Konrad, N. Cullen, and R. Huff (2005). "Climate variability and trends along the western slope of the Greenland Ice Sheet during 1991–2004", Proceedings of the 85th American Meteorological Society Annual Meeting (San Diego). Sowa, F (2013). "Indigenous Peoples and the Institutionalization of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Greenland". Arctic Anthropology. 50 (1): 72–88. doi:10.3368/aa.50.1.72. S2CID 143294645. Sowa, F. 2013. Relations of Power & Domination in a World Polity: The Politics of Indigeneity & National Identity in Greenland. In: Heininen, L. Arctic Yearbook 2013. The Arctic of regions vs. the globalized Arctic. Akureyri: Northern Research Forum, pp. 184–198.www.arcticyearbook.com/ay2013 Sowa, F. 2014. Greenland. in: Hund, A. Antarctica and the Arctic Circle: A Geographic Encyclopedia of the Earth's Polar Regions. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, pp. 312–316. External links[edit] Greenlandat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Travel guide from Wikivoyage Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Greenland entry at Denmark.dk. API at Curlie The Government of Greenland Offices official website Visit Greenland – the official Greenlandic Tourist Board Inuit Circumpolar Council Greenland Coordinates: 72°00′N 40°00′W﻿ / ﻿72.000°N 40.000°W﻿ / 72.000; -40.000 v t e Greenland articles Greenland is an autonomous constituent country of the Kingdom of Denmark History Timeline Paleo-Eskimo Dorset culture Thule people Norse Colonization Eastern Settlement Western Settlement Language Skræling Hans Egede Treaty of Kiel Erik the Red's Land World War II Thule accident Home rule Autonomy (self-rule) Cartographic expeditions Geography Climate change Fjords Geology Glaciers Ice sheet Islands Mountains National park Rivers Straits Towns and villages Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Elections Independence movement Foreign relations High Commissioner Parliament Law enforcement LGBT rights Military Political parties Ruling monarchs Political leader Governor (1728-1730, 1925-1979) Inspector (1782-1924) Prime Minister (1979-current) Economy Bank Companies Krone (currency) Fishing industry Mining National Bank Caribou hunting Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Demographics Inuit Inughuit Kalaallit Tunumiit Danes Danish Notable individuals artists Intuit Suicide Culture Art Cuisine Jante Law Mythology Language Music Public holidays Religion Sports Symbols Coat of arms Flag National (civic) anthem Royal anthem Outline Index Category Links to related articles v t e Administrative divisions of Greenland (since 2018) Municipalities Avannaata Kujalleq Qeqertalik Qeqqata Sermersooq Unincorporated Areas Pituffik (Thule Air Base) Northeast Greenland National Park v t e Nordic Council Full members  Denmark  Finland  Iceland  Norway  Sweden Associate members  Åland Islands  Faroe Islands  Greenland Observer / offices  Sápmi  Estonia (identity)  Latvia  Lithuania  Schleswig-Holstein v t e Nordic countries States  Denmark  Finland  Iceland  Norway  Sweden Autonomous countries  Åland Islands  Faroe Islands  Greenland Special status/Cultural area  Svalbard  Sápmi Related Climate of the Nordic countries Comparison of the Nordic countries Nordic Council Nordic Cross flag Subdivisions of the Nordic countries LGBT in the Nordic countries Nordic diplomatic missions See also Norsemen Old Norse Nordic identity in Estonia Scandinavia Category v t e Dependencies of European Union states Denmark Faroe Islands Greenland France Clipperton Island French Polynesia French Southern and Antarctic Lands Adélie Land Île Amsterdam Crozet Islands Îles Éparses Kerguelen Islands Île Saint-Paul New Caledonia Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Wallis and Futuna Netherlands Aruba Caribbean Netherlands Curaçao Sint Maarten v t e Outlying territories of European countries Territories under European sovereignty but closer to or on continents other than Europe (see inclusion criteria for further information). Denmark Greenland France Clipperton Island French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern and Antarctic Lands Adélie Land Crozet Islands Île Amsterdam Île Saint-Paul Kerguelen Islands Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean Guadeloupe Martinique Mayotte New Caledonia Réunion Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Wallis and Futuna Italy Pantelleria Pelagie Islands Lampedusa Lampione Linosa Netherlands Aruba Caribbean Netherlands Bonaire Saba Sint Eustatius Curaçao Sint Maarten Norway Bouvet Island Peter I Island Queen Maud Land Portugal Azores Madeira Spain Canary Islands Ceuta Melilla Plazas de soberanía Chafarinas Islands Peñón de Alhucemas Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera United Kingdom Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands v t e Countries and dependencies of North America Sovereign states Entire Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States In part Colombia San Andrés and Providencia France Guadeloupe Martinique Caribbean Netherlands Bonaire Saba Sint Eustatius Venezuela Nueva Esparta Federal Dependencies Dependencies Denmark Greenland France Clipperton Island St. Barthélemy St. Martin St. Pierre and Miquelon Netherlands Aruba Curaçao Sint Maarten United Kingdom Anguilla Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Montserrat Turks and Caicos Islands United States Puerto Rico United States Virgin Islands  North America portal v t e Polar exploration Arctic Ocean History Expeditions Research stations Farthest North North Pole Barentsz Hudson Marmaduke Carolus Parry North magnetic pole J. Ross J. C. Ross Abernethy Kane Hayes Polaris expedition Polaris C. F. Hall Bessels British Arctic Expedition HMS Alert Nares HMS Discovery Stephenson Markham Lady Franklin Bay Expedition Greely Lockwood Brainard Nansen's Fram expedition Fram Nansen Johansen Sverdrup Jason Amedeo Andrée's balloon expedition S. A. Andrée F. Cook Peary SS Roosevelt Sedov Byrd Norge Amundsen Nobile Wisting Riiser-Larsen Ellsworth] Italia Nautilus Wilkins ANT-25 Chkalov Baydukov Belyakov Drifting ice stations NP-1 Papanin Shirshov E. Fyodorov Krenkel NP-36 NP-37 Georgiy Sedov Badygin Wiese USS Nautilus USS Skate Plaisted Herbert NS Arktika Barneo Arktika 2007 Mir submersibles Sagalevich Chilingarov Iceland Greenland Pytheas Brendan Papar Vikings Naddodd Garðar Ingólfr Norse colonization of North America Gunnbjörn Snæbjörn galti Erik the Red Christian IV's expeditions J. Hall Cunningham Lindenov C. Richardson Danish colonization Egede Scoresby Jason Nansen Sverdrup Peary Rasmussen Northwest Passage Northern Canada Cabot G. Corte-Real M. Corte-Real Frobisher Gilbert Davis Hudson Discovery Bylot Baffin Munk I. Fyodorov Gvozdev HMS Resolution J. Cook HMS Discovery Clerke Mackenzie Kotzebue J. Ross HMS Griper Parry HMS Hecla Lyon HMS Fury Hoppner Crozier J. C. Ross Coppermine expedition Franklin Back Dease Simpson HMS Blossom Beechey Franklin's lost expedition HMS Erebus HMS Terror Collinson Rae–Richardson expedition Rae J. Richardson Austin McClure expedition HMS Investigator McClure HMS Resolute Kellett Belcher Kennedy Bellot Isabel Inglefield 2nd Grinnell expedition USS Advance Kane Fox McClintock HMS Pandora Young Fram Sverdrup Gjøa Amundsen Rasmussen Karluk Stefansson Bartlett St. Roch H. Larsen Cowper North East Passage Russian Arctic Pomors Koch boats Willoughby Chancellor Barentsz Mangazeya Hudson Poole Siberian Cossacks Perfilyev Stadukhin Dezhnev Popov Ivanov Vagin Permyakov Great Northern Expedition Bering Chirikov Malygin Ovtsyn Minin V. Pronchishchev M. Pronchishcheva Chelyuskin Kh. Laptev D. Laptev Chichagov Lyakhov Billings Sannikov Gedenschtrom Wrangel Matyushkin Anjou Litke Lavrov Pakhtusov Tsivolko Middendorff Austro-Hungarian Expedition Weyprecht Payer Vega Expedition A. E. Nordenskiöld Palander Jeannette expedition USS Jeannette De Long Melville Yermak Makarov Zarya Toll Kolomeitsev Matisen Kolchak Sedov Rusanov expedition Rusanov Kuchin Brusilov expedition Sv. Anna Brusilov Albanov Konrad Wiese Nagórski Taymyr / Vaygach Vilkitsky Maud Amundsen AARI Samoylovich Begichev Urvantsev Sadko Ushakov Glavsevmorput Schmidt Aviaarktika Shevelev A. Sibiryakov Voronin Chelyuskin Krassin Gakkel Nuclear-powered icebreakers Lenin Arktika-class icebreaker Antarctic Continent History Expeditions Southern Ocean Roché Bouvet Kerguelen HMS Resolution J. Cook HMS Adventure Furneaux Smith San Telmo Vostok Bellingshausen Mirny Lazarev Bransfield Palmer Davis Weddell Morrell Astrolabe Dumont d'Urville United States Exploring Expedition USS Vincennes Wilkes USS Porpoise Ringgold Ross expedition HMS Erebus (J. C. Ross Abernethy) HMS Terror (Crozier) Cooper Challenger expedition HMS Challenger Nares Murray Jason C. A. Larsen "Heroic Age " Belgian Antarctic Expedition Belgica de Gerlache Lecointe Amundsen Cook Arctowski Racoviță Dobrowolski Southern Cross Southern Cross Borchgrevink Discovery Discovery Discovery Hut Gauss Gauss Drygalski Swedish Antarctic Expedition Antarctic O. Nordenskjöld C. A. Larsen Scottish Antarctic Expedition Bruce Scotia Orcadas Base Nimrod Expedition Nimrod French Antarctic Expeditions Pourquoi-Pas Charcot Japanese Antarctic Expedition Shirase Amundsen's South Pole expedition Fram Amundsen Framheim Polheim Terra Nova Terra Nova Scott Wilson E. R. Evans Crean Lashly Filchner Australasian Antarctic Expedition SY Aurora Mawson Far Eastern Party Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition Endurance Ernest Shackleton Wild James Caird Ross Sea party Mackintosh Shackleton–Rowett Expedition Quest IPY · IGY Modern research Christensen Byrd BANZARE BGLE Rymill New Swabia Ritscher Operation Tabarin Marr Operation Highjump Captain Arturo Prat Base British Antarctic Survey Operation Windmill Ketchum Ronne Expedition F. Ronne E. Ronne Schlossbach Operation Deep Freeze McMurdo Station Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition Hillary V. Fuchs Soviet Antarctic Expeditions 1st Somov Klenova Mirny 2nd Tryoshnikov 3rd Tolstikov Antarctic Treaty System Transglobe Expedition Fiennes Burton Lake Vostok Kapitsa Farthest South South Pole HMS Resolution J. Cook HMS Adventure Furneaux Weddell HMS Erebus J. C. Ross HMS Terror Crozier Southern Cross Borchgrevink Discovery Barne Nimrod Shackleton Wild Marshall Adams South magnetic pole Mawson David Mackay Amundsen's South Pole expedition Fram Amundsen Bjaaland Helmer Hassel Wisting Polheim Terra Nova Scott E. Evans Oates Wilson Bowers Byrd Balchen McKinley Dufek Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station Hillary V. Fuchs Pole of Cold Vostok Station Pole of inaccessibility Pole of Inaccessibility Station Tolstikov Crary A. Fuchs Messner v t e Danish overseas empire Colonies and trading posts of the Danish East India Company (1620–1777) East Indies Governorate General Fort Dansborg Settlements Frederiksnagore (Serampore) Danmarksnagore (Gondalpara) Oddeway Torre (Malabar Coast) Frederiksøerne (Nicobar Islands) Factories Calicut (Kozhikode) Colachel Masulipatnam Trading posts Balasore Oddeway Torre (Malabar Coast) Pipli Colonies and trading posts of the Danish West India Company (1668–1776) West Indies Colonies in the Caribbean St. Thomas St. John St. Croix Colonies and trading posts of the Crown (1658–1850) Gold Coast Trading posts in Africa Augustaborg Carlsborg Christiansborg Frederiksborg Fredensborg Kongensten Prinsensten William Settlements of the Bergen Greenland Company (1721–1727) Settlements Haabets Colonie Colonies and trading posts of Hans Egede (1727-1747?), Claus Paarss (1728-1730), the Moravian missions (1733-1900), Jacob Severin (1734-1949) and the General Trade Company (1747–1774) North Greenland and South Greenland Trading posts Egede and Paarss Godt-Haab Haabets Ø Moravian missions Lichtenfels Neu-Herrnhut Severin Christianshaab Frederikshaab Jacobshavn General Trade Company Christianshaab Claushavn Egedesminde Fiskenæsset Frederikshaab Godhavn Godt-Haab Holsteinsborg Jacobshavn Julianehaab Lichtenfels Neu-Herrnhut Ritenbenck Sukkertoppen Umanak Upernavik Colonies of the Kingdom of Denmark (1536–1953) Until 1850 Gold Coast Until 1869 East Indies Until 1874 Iceland3 Until 1917 West Indies Until 1948 Faroe Islands3 Until 1953 Greenland3 3 Became autonomous countries of the Kingdom of Denmark; Iceland gained full independence in 1944.  Kingdom of Denmark (1948–present) The unity of the Realm  Denmark  Faroe Islands  Greenland v t e World's largest islands 100,000 km2 (39,000 sq mi) and greater Greenland New Guinea Borneo Madagascar Baffin Island Sumatra Honshu Victoria Island (Canada) Great Britain Ellesmere Island Sulawesi South Island Java North Island Luzon Newfoundland Cuba Iceland Islands portal 20,000–99,999 km2 (7,722–38,610 sq mi) Mindanao Ireland Hokkaido Hispaniola Sakhalin Banks Island Sri Lanka (main island) Tasmania Devon Island Alexander Island Severny Island Isla Grande de Tierra del Fuego Axel Heiberg Island Melville Island Southampton Island Marajó Spitsbergen Kyushu Taiwan New Britain Prince of Wales Island Yuzhny Island Hainan Vancouver Island Timor Sicily Somerset Island Kotelny Island Sardinia Bananal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 Denmark portal North America portal Europe portal Islands portal