For the Greek language used during particular eras, see Proto-Greek language, Mycenaean Greek, Ancient Greek, Koine Greek, Medieval Greek, and Modern Greek. Indo-European language of Greece, Cyprus and other regions Greek ελληνικά Pronunciation [eliniˈka] Region Greece Cyprus Anatolia Balkans Black Sea coast Eastern Mediterranean Southern Italy Ethnicity Greeks Native speakers 13.5 million (2012)[1] Language family Indo-European Hellenic Greek Early form Proto-Greek Dialects Ancient dialects Modern dialects Writing system Greek alphabet Official status Official language in  Cyprus  Greece  European Union Language codes ISO 639-1 el ISO 639-2 gre (B) ell (T) ISO 639-3 Variously: ell – Modern Greek grc – Ancient Greek cpg – Cappadocian Greek gmy – Mycenaean Greek pnt – Pontic tsd – Tsakonian yej – Yevanic Glottolog gree1276 Linguasphere 56-AAA-a 56-AAA-aa to -am (varieties) Areas where Modern Greek is spoken (in dark blue those areas where it is the official language). This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA. Greek (modern Ελληνικά, romanized: Elliniká, ancient Ἑλληνική, Hellēnikḗ) is an independent branch of the Indo-European family of languages, native to Greece, Cyprus, Albania, other parts of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea. It has the longest documented history of any living Indo-European language, spanning at least 3,400 years of written records.[2] Its writing system is the Greek alphabet, which has been used for over 2,600 years; previously, Greek was recorded in writing systems such as Linear B and the Cypriot syllabary.[3] The alphabet arose from the Phoenician script and was in turn the basis of the Latin, Cyrillic, Armenian, Coptic, Gothic, and many other writing systems. The Greek language holds an important place in the history of the Western world.[4] Beginning with the epics of Homer, ancient Greek literature includes many works of lasting importance in the European canon. Greek is also the language in which many of the foundational texts in science and philosophy were originally composed. The New Testament of the Christian Bible was also originally written in Greek.[5][6] Together with the Latin texts and traditions of the Roman world, the Greek texts and Greek societies of antiquity constitute the objects of study of the discipline of Classics. During antiquity, Greek was the by far most widely spoken lingua franca in the Mediterranean world. It eventually became the official language of the Byzantine Empire and developed into Medieval Greek.[7] In its modern form, Greek is the official language of Greece and Cyprus and one of the 24 official languages of the European Union. It is spoken by at least 13.5 million people today in Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Albania, Turkey, and the many other countries of the Greek diaspora. Greek roots have been widely used for centuries and continue to be widely used to coin new words in other languages; Greek and Latin are the predominant sources of international scientific vocabulary. Idealised portrayal of the author Homer Contents 1 History 1.1 Periods 1.2 Diglossia 1.3 Historical unity 2 Geographic distribution 2.1 Official status 3 Characteristics 3.1 Phonology 3.2 Morphology 3.2.1 Nouns and adjectives 3.2.2 Verbs 3.3 Syntax 3.4 Vocabulary 3.5 Greek loanwords in other languages 4 Classification 5 Writing system 5.1 Linear B 5.2 Cypriot syllabary 5.3 Greek alphabet 5.3.1 Diacritics 5.3.2 Punctuation 5.4 Latin alphabet 5.5 Hebrew alphabet 5.6 Arabic alphabet 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links History[edit] Main article: History of Greek Greek has been spoken in the Balkan peninsula since around the 3rd millennium BC,[8] or possibly earlier.[9] The earliest written evidence is a Linear B clay tablet found in Messenia that dates to between 1450 and 1350 BC,[10] making Greek the world's oldest recorded living language. Among the Indo-European languages, its date of earliest written attestation is matched only by the now-extinct Anatolian languages. Periods[edit] Proto-Greek-speaking area according to linguist Vladimir I. Georgiev The Greek language is conventionally divided into the following periods: Proto-Greek: the unrecorded but assumed last ancestor of all known varieties of Greek. The unity of Proto-Greek would have ended as Hellenic migrants entered the Greek peninsula sometime in the Neolithic era or the Bronze Age. [note 1] Mycenaean Greek: the language of the Mycenaean civilization. It is recorded in the Linear B script on tablets dating from the 15th century BC onwards. Ancient Greek: in its various dialects, the language of the Archaic and Classical periods of the ancient Greek civilization. It was widely known throughout the Roman Empire. Ancient Greek fell into disuse in western Europe in the Middle Ages, but remained officially in use in the Byzantine world and was reintroduced to the rest of Europe with the Fall of Constantinople and Greek migration to western Europe. Koine Greek: The fusion of Ionian with Attic, the dialect of Athens, began the process that resulted in the creation of the first common Greek dialect, which became a lingua franca across the Eastern Mediterranean and Near East. Koine Greek can be initially traced within the armies and conquered territories of Alexander the Great and after the Hellenistic colonization of the known world, it was spoken from Egypt to the fringes of India. After the Roman conquest of Greece, an unofficial bilingualism of Greek and Latin was established in the city of Rome and Koine Greek became a first or second language in the Roman Empire. The origin of Christianity can also be traced through Koine Greek, because the Apostles used this form of the language to spread Christianity. It is also known as Hellenistic Greek, New Testament Greek, and sometimes Biblical Greek because it was the original language of the New Testament and the Old Testament was translated into the same language via the Septuagint. Distribution of varieties of Greek in Anatolia, 1910. Demotic in yellow. Pontic in orange. Cappadocian Greek in green, with green dots indicating individual Cappadocian Greek villages.[11] Medieval Greek, also known as Byzantine Greek: the continuation of Koine Greek, up to the demise of the Byzantine Empire in the 15th century. Medieval Greek is a cover phrase for a whole continuum of different speech and writing styles, ranging from vernacular continuations of spoken Koine that were already approaching Modern Greek in many respects, to highly learned forms imitating classical Attic. Much of the written Greek that was used as the official language of the Byzantine Empire was an eclectic middle-ground variety based on the tradition of written Koine. Modern Greek (Neo-Hellenic):[12] Stemming from Medieval Greek, Modern Greek usages can be traced in the Byzantine period, as early as the 11th century. It is the language used by the modern Greeks, and, apart from Standard Modern Greek, there are several dialects of it. Diglossia[edit] Main article: Greek language question In the modern era, the Greek language entered a state of diglossia: the coexistence of vernacular and archaizing written forms of the language. What came to be known as the Greek language question was a polarization between two competing varieties of Modern Greek: Dimotiki, the vernacular form of Modern Greek proper, and Katharevousa, meaning 'purified', a compromise between Dimotiki and Ancient Greek, which was developed in the early 19th century, and was used for literary and official purposes in the newly formed Greek state. In 1976, Dimotiki was declared the official language of Greece, having incorporated features of Katharevousa and giving birth to Standard Modern Greek, which is used today for all official purposes and in education.[13] Historical unity[edit] The distribution of major modern Greek dialect areas The historical unity and continuing identity between the various stages of the Greek language are often emphasized. Although Greek has undergone morphological and phonological changes comparable to those seen in other languages, never since classical antiquity has its cultural, literary, and orthographic tradition been interrupted to the extent that one can speak of a new language emerging. Greek speakers today still tend to regard literary works of ancient Greek as part of their own rather than a foreign language.[14] It is also often stated that the historical changes have been relatively slight compared with some other languages. According to one estimation, "Homeric Greek is probably closer to Demotic than 12-century Middle English is to modern spoken English".[15] Geographic distribution[edit] Further information: Greeks and Greek diaspora Geographic distribution of Greek language in the Russian Empire (1897 census) Greek is spoken today by at least 13 million people, principally in Greece and Cyprus along with a sizable Greek-speaking minority in Albania near the Greek-Albanian border.[12] A significant percentage of Albania's population has some basic knowledge of the Greek language due in part to the Albanian wave of immigration to Greece in the 1980s and '90s. Prior to the Greco-Turkish War and the resulting population exchange in 1923 a very large population of Greek-speakers also existed in Turkey, though very few remain today.[2] A small Greek-speaking community is also found in Bulgaria near the Greek-Bulgarian border. Greek is also spoken worldwide by the sizable Greek diaspora which as notable communities in the United States, Australia, Canada, South Africa, Chile, Brazil, Argentina, Russia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and throughout the European Union, especially in Germany. Historically, significant Greek-speaking communities and regions were found throughout the Eastern Mediterranean, in what are today Southern Italy, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, and Libya; in the area of the Black Sea, in what are today Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan; and, to a lesser extent, in the Western Mediterranean in and around colonies such as Massalia, Monoikos, and Mainake. It was also used as a liturgical language in Christian Nubian kingdom of Makuria which was in modern day Sudan.[16] Official status[edit] Greek, in its modern form, is the official language of Greece, where it is spoken by almost the entire population.[17] It is also the official language of Cyprus (nominally alongside Turkish).[18] Because of the membership of Greece and Cyprus in the European Union, Greek is one of the organization's 24 official languages.[19] Furthermore, Greek is officially recognized as official in Dropull and Himara (Albania), and as a minority language all over Albania,[20] as well as in parts of Italy, Armenia, Romania, and Ukraine as a regional or minority language in the framework of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.[21] Greeks are also a recognized ethnic minority in Hungary.[22] Characteristics[edit] See also: Ancient Greek grammar, Koine Greek grammar, and Modern Greek grammar The phonology, morphology, syntax, and vocabulary of the language show both conservative and innovative tendencies across the entire attestation of the language from the ancient to the modern period. The division into conventional periods is, as with all such periodizations, relatively arbitrary, especially because at all periods, Ancient Greek has enjoyed high prestige, and the literate borrowed heavily from it. Phonology[edit] Main articles: Modern Greek phonology, Koine Greek phonology, and Ancient Greek phonology Spoken Modern Greek Across its history, the syllabic structure of Greek has varied little: Greek shows a mixed syllable structure, permitting complex syllabic onsets but very restricted codas. It has only oral vowels and a fairly stable set of consonantal contrasts. The main phonological changes occurred during the Hellenistic and Roman period (see Koine Greek phonology for details): replacement of the pitch accent with a stress accent. simplification of the system of vowels and diphthongs: loss of vowel length distinction, monophthongisation of most diphthongs and several steps in a chain shift of vowels towards /i/ (iotacism). development of the voiceless aspirated plosives /pʰ/ and /tʰ/ to the voiceless fricatives /f/ and /θ/, respectively; the similar development of /kʰ/ to /x/ may have taken place later (the phonological changes are not reflected in the orthography, and both earlier and later phonemes are written with φ, θ, and χ). development of the voiced plosives /b/, /d/, and /ɡ/ to their voiced fricative counterparts /β/ (later /v/), /ð/, and /ɣ/. Morphology[edit] In all its stages, the morphology of Greek shows an extensive set of productive derivational affixes, a limited but productive system of compounding[23] and a rich inflectional system. Although its morphological categories have been fairly stable over time, morphological changes are present throughout, particularly in the nominal and verbal systems. The major change in the nominal morphology since the classical stage was the disuse of the dative case (its functions being largely taken over by the genitive). The verbal system has lost the infinitive, the synthetically-formed future, and perfect tenses and the optative mood. Many have been replaced by periphrastic (analytical) forms. Nouns and adjectives[edit] Pronouns show distinctions in person (1st, 2nd, and 3rd), number (singular, dual, and plural in the ancient language; singular and plural alone in later stages), and gender (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and decline for case (from six cases in the earliest forms attested to four in the modern language).[note 2] Nouns, articles, and adjectives show all the distinctions except for a person. Both attributive and predicative adjectives agree with the noun. Verbs[edit] The inflectional categories of the Greek verb have likewise remained largely the same over the course of the language's history but with significant changes in the number of distinctions within each category and their morphological expression. Greek verbs have synthetic inflectional forms for: Ancient Greek Modern Greek Person first, second and third also second person formal Number singular, dual and plural singular and plural tense present, past and future past and non-past (future is expressed by a periphrastic construction) aspect imperfective, perfective (traditionally called aorist) and perfect (sometimes also called perfective; see note about terminology) imperfective and perfective/aorist (perfect is expressed by a periphrastic construction) mood indicative, subjunctive, imperative and optative indicative, subjunctive,[note 3] and imperative (other modal functions are expressed by periphrastic constructions) Voice active, middle, and passive active and medio-passive Syntax[edit] Many aspects of the syntax of Greek have remained constant: verbs agree with their subject only, the use of the surviving cases is largely intact (nominative for subjects and predicates, accusative for objects of most verbs and many prepositions, genitive for possessors), articles precede nouns, adpositions are largely prepositional, relative clauses follow the noun they modify and relative pronouns are clause-initial. However, the morphological changes also have their counterparts in the syntax, and there are also significant differences between the syntax of the ancient and that of the modern form of the language. Ancient Greek made great use of participial constructions and of constructions involving the infinitive, and the modern variety lacks the infinitive entirely (instead of having a raft of new periphrastic constructions) and uses participles more restrictively. The loss of the dative led to a rise of prepositional indirect objects (and the use of the genitive to directly mark these as well). Ancient Greek tended to be verb-final, but neutral word order in the modern language is VSO or SVO. Vocabulary[edit] Modern Greek inherits most of its vocabulary from Ancient Greek, which in turn is an Indo-European language, but also includes a number of borrowings from the languages of the populations that inhabited Greece before the arrival of Proto-Greeks,[24] some documented in Mycenaean texts; they include a large number of Greek toponyms. The form and meaning of many words have evolved. Loanwords (words of foreign origin) have entered the language, mainly from Latin, Venetian, and Turkish. During the older periods of Greek, loanwords into Greek acquired Greek inflections, thus leaving only a foreign root word. Modern borrowings (from the 20th century on), especially from French and English, are typically not inflected; other modern borrowings are derived from South Slavic (Macedonian/Bulgarian) and Eastern Romance languages (Aromanian and Megleno-Romanian). Greek loanwords in other languages[edit] Further information: English words of Greek origin Further information: Greek and Latin roots in English Greek words have been widely borrowed into other languages, including English: mathematics, physics, astronomy, democracy, philosophy, athletics, theatre, rhetoric, baptism, evangelist, etc. Moreover, Greek words and word elements continue to be productive as a basis for coinages: anthropology, photography, telephony, isomer, biomechanics, cinematography, etc. and form, with Latin words, the foundation of international scientific and technical vocabulary like all words ending with –logy ("discourse"). There are many English words of Greek origin.[25][26] Classification[edit] Greek is an independent branch of the Indo-European language family. The ancient language most closely related to it may be ancient Macedonian,[27] which most scholars suggest may have been a dialect of Greek itself,[28][29][30] but it is poorly attested and it is difficult to conclude. Independently of the Macedonian question, some scholars have grouped Greek into Graeco-Phrygian, as Greek and the extinct Phrygian share features that are not found in other Indo-European languages.[31] Among living languages, some Indo-Europeanists suggest that Greek may be most closely related to Armenian (see Graeco-Armenian) or the Indo-Iranian languages (see Graeco-Aryan), but little definitive evidence has been found for grouping the living branches of the family.[32] In addition, Albanian has also been considered somewhat related to Greek and Armenian by some linguists. If proven and recognized, the three languages would form a new Balkan sub-branch with other dead European languages.[33] Writing system[edit] Greek alphabet Αα Alpha Νν Nu Ββ Beta Ξξ Xi Γγ Gamma Οο Omicron Δδ Delta Ππ Pi Εε Epsilon Ρρ Rho Ζζ Zeta Σσς Sigma Ηη Eta Ττ Tau Θθ Theta Υυ Upsilon Ιι Iota Φφ Phi Κκ Kappa Χχ Chi Λλ Lambda Ψψ Psi Μμ Mu Ωω Omega History Archaic local variants Diacritics Ligatures Numerals ϛ (6) ϟ (90) ϡ (900) Use in other languages Bactrian Coptic Albanian Related topics Use as scientific symbols Category v t e See also: Greek Braille Linear B[edit] Main article: Linear B Linear B, attested as early as the late 15th century BC, was the first script used to write Greek.[34] It is basically a syllabary, which was finally deciphered by Michael Ventris and John Chadwick in the 1950s (its precursor, Linear A, has not been deciphered and most likely encodes a non-Greek language).[34] The language of the Linear B texts, Mycenaean Greek, is the earliest known form of Greek.[34] Cypriot syllabary[edit] Main article: Cypriot syllabary Greek inscription in Cypriot syllabic script Another similar system used to write the Greek language was the Cypriot syllabary (also a descendant of Linear A via the intermediate Cypro-Minoan syllabary), which is closely related to Linear B but uses somewhat different syllabic conventions to represent phoneme sequences. The Cypriot syllabary is attested in Cyprus from the 11th century BC until its gradual abandonment in the late Classical period, in favor of the standard Greek alphabet.[35] Greek alphabet[edit] Main articles: Greek alphabet and Greek orthography Ancient epichoric variants of the Greek alphabet from Euboea, Ionia, Athens, and Corinth comparing to modern Greek Greek has been written in the Greek alphabet since approximately the 9th century BC. It was created by modifying the Phoenician alphabet, with the innovation of adopting certain letters to represent the vowels. The variant of the alphabet in use today is essentially the late Ionic variant, introduced for writing classical Attic in 403 BC. In classical Greek, as in classical Latin, only upper-case letters existed. The lower-case Greek letters were developed much later by medieval scribes to permit a faster, more convenient cursive writing style with the use of ink and quill. The Greek alphabet consists of 24 letters, each with an uppercase (majuscule) and lowercase (minuscule) form. The letter sigma has an additional lowercase form (ς) used in the final position: upper case Α Β Γ Δ Ε Ζ Η Θ Ι Κ Λ Μ Ν Ξ Ο Π Ρ Σ Τ Υ Φ Χ Ψ Ω lower case α β γ δ ε ζ η θ ι κ λ μ ν ξ ο π ρ σ ς τ υ φ χ ψ ω Diacritics[edit] Main article: Greek diacritics In addition to the letters, the Greek alphabet features a number of diacritical signs: three different accent marks (acute, grave, and circumflex), originally denoting different shapes of pitch accent on the stressed vowel; the so-called breathing marks (rough and smooth breathing), originally used to signal presence or absence of word-initial /h/; and the diaeresis, used to mark the full syllabic value of a vowel that would otherwise be read as part of a diphthong. These marks were introduced during the course of the Hellenistic period. Actual usage of the grave in handwriting saw a rapid decline in favor of uniform usage of the acute during the late 20th century, and it has only been retained in typography. After the writing reform of 1982, most diacritics are no longer used. Since then, Greek has been written mostly in the simplified monotonic orthography (or monotonic system), which employs only the acute accent and the diaeresis. The traditional system, now called the polytonic orthography (or polytonic system), is still used internationally for the writing of Ancient Greek. Punctuation[edit] In Greek, the question mark is written as the English semicolon, while the functions of the colon and semicolon are performed by a raised point (•), known as the ano teleia (άνω τελεία). In Greek the comma also functions as a silent letter in a handful of Greek words, principally distinguishing ό,τι (ó,ti, 'whatever') from ότι (óti, 'that').[36] Ancient Greek texts often used scriptio continua ('continuous writing'), which means that ancient authors and scribes would write word after word with no spaces or punctuation between words to differentiate or mark boundaries.[37] Boustrophedon, or bi-directional text, was also used in Ancient Greek. Latin alphabet[edit] Greek has occasionally been written in the Latin script, especially in areas under Venetian rule or by Greek Catholics. The term Frankolevantinika / Φραγκολεβαντίνικα applies when the Latin script is used to write Greek in the cultural ambit of Catholicism (because Frankos / Φράγκος is an older Greek term for West-European dating to when most of (Roman Catholic Christian) West Europe was under the control of the Frankish Empire). Frankochiotika / Φραγκοχιώτικα (meaning 'Catholic Chiot') alludes to the significant presence of Catholic missionaries based on the island of Chios. Additionally, the term Greeklish is often used when the Greek language is written in a Latin script in online communications.[38] The Latin script is nowadays used by the Greek-speaking communities of Southern Italy. Hebrew alphabet[edit] The Yevanic dialect was written by Romaniote and Constantinopolitan Karaite Jews using the Hebrew Alphabet.[39] Arabic alphabet[edit] Some Greek Muslims from Crete wrote their Cretan Greek in the Arabic alphabet. The same happened among Epirote Muslims in Ioannina. This usage is sometimes called aljamiado as when Romance languages are written in the Arabic alphabet.[40] See also[edit] Greece portal Language portal Modern Greek Varieties of Modern Greek Medieval Greek Ancient Greek Ancient Greek dialects Hellenic languages List of Greek and Latin roots in English List of medical roots, suffixes and prefixes Notes[edit] ^ A comprehensive overview in J.T. Hooker's Mycenaean Greece (Hooker 1976, Chapter 2: "Before the Mycenaean Age", pp. 11–33 and passim harvnb error: no target: CITEREFHooker1976 (help)); for a different hypothesis excluding massive migrations and favoring an autochthonous scenario, see Colin Renfrew's "Problems in the General Correlation of Archaeological and Linguistic Strata in Prehistoric Greece: The Model of Autochthonous Origin" (Renfrew 1973, pp. 263–276, especially p. 267 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFRenfrew1973 (help)) in Bronze Age Migrations by R.A. Crossland and A. Birchall, eds. (1973). ^ The four cases that are found in all stages of Greek are the nominative, genitive, accusative, and vocative. The dative/locative of Ancient Greek disappeared in the late Hellenistic period, and the instrumental case of Mycenaean Greek disappeared in the Archaic period. ^ There is no particular morphological form that can be identified as 'subjunctive' in the modern language, but the term is sometimes encountered in descriptions even if the most complete modern grammar (Holton et al. 1997) does not use it and calls certain traditionally-'subjunctive' forms 'dependent'. Most Greek linguists advocate abandoning the traditional terminology (Anna Roussou and Tasos Tsangalidis 2009, in Meletes gia tin Elliniki Glossa, Thessaloniki, Anastasia Giannakidou 2009 "Temporal semantics and polarity: The dependency of the subjunctive revisited", Lingua); see Modern Greek grammar for explanation. References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ Greek at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) Ancient Greek at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) Cappadocian Greek at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) Mycenaean Greek at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) Pontic at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) Tsakonian at Ethnologue (18th ed., 2015) (Additional references under 'Language codes' in the information box) ^ a b "Greek language". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 29 April 2014. ^ 1922-, Adrados, Francisco Rodríguez (2005). A history of the Greek language : from its origins to the present. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-12835-4. OCLC 59712402.CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) ^ A history of ancient Greek by Maria Chritē, Maria Arapopoulou, Centre for the Greek Language (Thessalonikē, Greece) pg 436 ISBN 0-521-83307-8 ^ Kurt Aland, Barbara Aland The text of the New Testament: an introduction to the critical 1995 p52 ^ Archibald Macbride Hunter Introducing the New Testament 1972 p9 ^ Manuel, Germaine Catherine (1989). A study of the preservation of the classical tradition in the education, language, and literature of the Byzantine Empire. HVD ALEPH. ^ Renfrew 2003, p. 35 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFRenfrew2003 (help); Georgiev 1981, p. 192 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFGeorgiev1981 (help). ^ Gray & Atkinson 2003, pp. 437–438 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFGrayAtkinson2003 (help); Atkinson & Gray 2006, p. 102 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAtkinsonGray2006 (help). ^ "Ancient Tablet Found: Oldest Readable Writing in Europe". National Geographic Society. 30 March 2011. Retrieved 22 November 2013. ^ Dawkins & Halliday 1916 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFDawkinsHalliday1916 (help). ^ a b "Greek". Ethnologue. Retrieved 12 April 2020. ^ Peter, Mackridge (1985). The modern Greek language : a descriptive analysis of standard modern Greek. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-815770-0. OCLC 11134463. ^ Browning 1983 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBrowning1983 (help). ^ Alexiou 1982, p. 161 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAlexiou1982 (help). ^ Welsby 2002, p. 239. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWelsby2002 (help) ^ "Greece". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 23 January 2010. ^ "The Constitution of Cyprus, App. D., Part 1, Art. 3". Archived from the original on 7 April 2012. states that The official languages of the Republic are Greek and Turkish. However, the official status of Turkish is only nominal in the Greek-dominated Republic of Cyprus; in practice, outside Turkish-dominated Northern Cyprus, Turkish is little used; see A. Arvaniti (2006): Erasure as a Means of Maintaining Diglossia in Cyprus, San Diego Linguistics Papers 2: pp. 25–38 [27]. ^ "The EU at a Glance – Languages in the EU". Europa. European Union. Retrieved 30 July 2010. ^ "Greek". Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Archived from the original on 18 November 2008. Retrieved 8 December 2008. ^ "List of Declarations Made with Respect to Treaty No. 148". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 10 April 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2008. ^ "Self-Government in Hungary". Project on Ethnic Relations. 27 September 2006. Archived from the original on 27 September 2006. Retrieved 12 April 2020. ^ Ralli 2001, pp. 164–203 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFRalli2001 (help). ^ Beekes 2009 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBeekes2009 (help). ^ Scheler 1977 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFScheler1977 (help). ^ "Πόσο "ελληνικές" είναι οι ξένες γλώσσες". NewsIt. 18 November 2019. ^ Hamp 2013, pp. 8–10, 13 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFHamp2013 (help). ^ Crespo, Emilio (2018). "The Softening of Obstruent Consonants in the Macedonian Dialect". In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.). Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea. Walter de Gruyter. p. 329. ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0. ^ Hatzopoulos, Miltiades B. (2018). "Recent Research in the Ancient Macedonian Dialect: Consolidation and New Perspectives". In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.). Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea. Walter de Gruyter. p. 299. ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0. ^ Babiniotis 1992, pp. 29–40 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBabiniotis1992 (help); Dosuna 2012, pp. 65–78 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFDosuna2012 (help). ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017). "Graeco-Phrygian". Glottolog 3.0. Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History. ^ Renfrew 1990 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFRenfrew1990 (help); Gamkrelidze & Ivanov 1990, pp. 110–116 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFGamkrelidzeIvanov1990 (help); Renfrew 2003, pp. 17–48 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFRenfrew2003 (help); Gray & Atkinson 2003, pp. 435–439 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFGrayAtkinson2003 (help). ^ Holm 2008, pp. 628–636 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFHolm2008 (help). ^ a b c T., Hooker, J. (1980). Linear B : an introduction. Bristol: Bristol Classical Press. ISBN 978-0-906515-69-3. OCLC 7326206. ^ "Cypriot syllabary". Britannica Academic. Retrieved 1 August 2017. ^ Nicolas, Nick (2005). "Greek Unicode Issues: Punctuation". Archived from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 7 October 2014. ^ Hugoe, Matthews Peter (March 2014). The concise Oxford dictionary of linguistics. Oxford University Press. (Third ed.). Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19-967512-8. OCLC 881847972. ^ Androutsopoulos 2009, pp. 221–249 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFAndroutsopoulos2009 (help). ^ "Yevanic alphabet, pronunciation and language". www.omniglot.com. Retrieved 18 April 2020. ^ Kotzageorgis, Phokion (2010). Gruber, Christiane J.; Colby, Frederick Stephen (eds.). The Prophet's Ascension: Cross-cultural Encounters with the Islamic Mi'rāj Tales. Indiana University Press. p. 297. ISBN 978-0-253-35361-0. The element that makes this text a unicum is that it is written in Greek script. In the Ottoman Empire, the primary criterion for the selection of an alphabet in which to write was religion. Thus, people who did not speak—or even know—the official language of their religion used to write their religious texts in the languages that they knew, though in the alphabet where the sacred texts of that religion were written. Thus, the Grecophone Catholics of Chios wrote using the Latin alphabet, but in the Greek language (frangochiotika); the Turcophone Orthodox Christians of Cappadocia wrote their Turkish texts using the Greek alphabet (karamanlidika); and the Grecophone Muslims of the Greek peninsula wrote in Greek language using the Arabic alphabet (tourkogianniotika, tourkokretika). Our case is much stranger, since it is a quite early example for that kind of literature and because it is largely concerned with religious themes."; p. 306. The audience for the Greek Mi'rājnāma was most certainly Greek-speaking Muslims, in particular the so-called Tourkogianniotes (literally, the Turks of Jannina). Although few examples have been discovered as yet, it seems that these people developed a religious literature mainly composed in verse form. This literary form constituted the mainstream of Greek Aljamiado literature from the middle of the seventeenth century until the population exchange between Greece and Turkey in 1923. Tourkogianniotes were probably of Christian origin and were Islamized sometime during the seventeenth century. They did not speak any language other than Greek. Thus, even their frequency in attending mosque services did not provide them with the necessary knowledge about their faith. Given their low level of literacy, one important way that they could learn about their faith was to listen to religiously edifying texts such as the Greek Mi'rājnāma. Sources[edit] Alexiou, Margaret (1982). "Diglossia in Greece". In Haas, William (ed.). Standard Languages: Spoken and Written. Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp. 156–192. ISBN 978-0-389-20291-2. Androutsopoulos, Jannis (2009). "'Greeklish': Transliteration Practice and Discourse in a Setting of Computer-Mediated Digraphia" (PDF). In Georgakopoulou, Alexandra; Silk, Michael (eds.). Standard Languages and Language Standards: Greek, Past and Present. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Limited. pp. 221–249.[permanent dead link] Atkinson, Quentin D.; Gray, Russel D. (2006). "Chapter 8: How Old is the Indo-European Language Family? Illumination or More Moths to the Flame?". In Forster, Peter; Renfrew, Colin (eds.). Phylogenetic Methods and the Prehistory of Languages. Cambridge, England: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research. pp. 91–109. ISBN 978-1-902937-33-5. Babiniotis, George (1992). "The Question of Mediae in Ancient Macedonian Greek Reconsidered". In Brogyanyi, Bela; Lipp, Reiner (eds.). Historical Philology: Greek, Latin and Romance. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 29–40. ISBN 9789027277473. Beekes, Robert Stephen Paul (2009). Etymological Dictionary of Greek. Leiden and Boston: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-17418-4. Browning, Robert (1983) [1969]. Medieval and Modern Greek. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-23488-7. Dawkins, Richard McGillivray; Halliday, William Reginald (1916). Modern Greek in Asia Minor: A Study of Dialect of Silly, Cappadocia and Pharasa with Grammar, Texts, Translations and Glossary. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Dosuna, Julián Víctor Méndez (2012). "Ancient Macedonian as a Greek Dialect: A Critical Survey on Recent Work". In Giannakis, Georgios K. (ed.). Ancient Macedonia: Language, History and Culture (in Greek). Thessaloniki: Centre for the Greek Language. pp. 65–78. Gamkrelidze, Tamaz V.; Ivanov, Vyacheslav (March 1990). "The Early History of Indo-European Languages". Scientific American. 262 (3): 110–116. Bibcode:1990SciAm.262c.110G. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0390-110. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Georgiev, Vladimir Ivanov (1981). Introduction to the History of the Indo-European Languages. Sofia: Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. Gray, Russel D.; Atkinson, Quentin D. (2003). "Language-tree Divergence Times Support the Anatolian Theory of Indo-European Origin". Nature. 426 (6965): 435–439. Bibcode:2003Natur.426..435G. doi:10.1038/nature02029. PMID 14647380. S2CID 42340. Hamp, Eric P. (August 2013). "The Expansion of the Indo-European Languages: An Indo-Europeanist's Evolving View" (PDF). Sino-Platonic Papers. 239. Holm, Hans J. (2008). "The Distribution of Data in Word Lists and its Impact on the Subgrouping of Languages". In Preisach, Christine; Burkhardt, Hans; Schmidt-Thieme, Lars; Decker, Reinhold (eds.). Data Analysis, Machine Learning, and Applications. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Gesellschaft für Klassifikation e.V., Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, March 7–9, 2007. Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. pp. 628–636. ISBN 978-3-540-78246-9. Hooker, J.T. (1976). Mycenaean Greece. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. ISBN 9780710083791. Jeffries, Ian (2002). Eastern Europe at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century: A Guide to the Economies in Transition. London and New York: Routledge (Taylor & Francis). ISBN 978-0-415-23671-3. Ralli, Angeliki (2001). Μορφολογία [Morphology] (in Greek). Athens: Ekdoseis Pataki. Renfrew, Colin (1973). "Problems in the General Correlation of Archaeological and Linguistic Strata in Prehistoric Greece: The Model of Autochthonous Origin". In Crossland, R. A.; Birchall, Ann (eds.). Bronze Age Migrations in the Aegean; Archaeological and Linguistic Problems in Greek Prehistory: Proceedings of the first International Colloquium on Aegean Prehistory, Sheffield. London: Gerald Duckworth and Company Limited. pp. 263–276. ISBN 978-0-7156-0580-6. Renfrew, Colin (2003). "Time Depth, Convergence Theory, and Innovation in Proto-Indo-European: 'Old Europe' as a PIE Linguistic Area". In Bammesberger, Alfred; Vennemann, Theo (eds.). Languages in Prehistoric Europe. Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag Winter GmBH. pp. 17–48. ISBN 978-3-8253-1449-1. Renfrew, Colin (1990) [1987]. Archaeology and Language: The Puzzle of Indo-European Origins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-38675-3. Scheler, Manfred (1977). Der englische Wortschatz [English Vocabulary] (in German). Berlin: E. Schmidt. ISBN 978-3-503-01250-3. Tsitselikis, Konstantinos (2013). "A Surviving Treaty: The Lausanne Minority Protection in Greece and Turkey". In Henrard, Kristin (ed.). The Interrelation between the Right to Identity of Minorities and their Socio-economic Participation. Leiden and Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp. 287–315. ISBN 9789004244740. Further reading[edit] Allen, W. Sidney (1968). Vox Graeca – A Guide to the Pronunciation of Classical Greek. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-20626-6. Crosby, Henry Lamar; Schaeffer, John Nevin (1928). An Introduction to Greek. Boston, MA; New York, NY: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. Dionysius of Thrace (c. 100 BC). Τέχνη Γραμματική [Art of Grammar] (in Greek). Check date values in: |date= (help) Holton, David; Mackridge, Peter; Philippaki-Warburton, Irene (1997). Greek: A Comprehensive Grammar of the Modern Language. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-10002-1. Horrocks, Geoffrey (1997). Greek: A History of the Language and Its Speakers. London and New York: Longman Linguistics Library (Addison Wesley Longman Limited). ISBN 978-0-582-30709-4. Krill, Richard M. (1990). Greek and Latin in English Today. Wauconda, IL: Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers. ISBN 978-0-86516-241-9. Mallory, James P. (1997). "Greek Language". In Mallory, James P.; Adams, Douglas Q. (eds.). Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture. Chicago, IL: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers. pp. 240–246. ISBN 9781884964985. Newton, Brian (1972). The Generative Interpretation of Dialect: A Study of Modern Greek Phonology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-08497-0. Sihler, Andrew L. (1995). New Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-508345-3. Smyth, Herbert Weir; Messing, Gordon (1956) [1920]. Greek Grammar. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-36250-5. External links[edit] Standard Greek edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pontic Greek edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wikibooks has more on the topic of: API For a list of words relating to API, see the API category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Ancient Greek test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Greek. General background Greek Language, Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia. The Greek Language and Linguistics Gateway, useful information on the history of the Greek language, application of modern Linguistics to the study of Greek, and tools for learning Greek. Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, The Greek Language Portal, a portal for Greek language and linguistic education. The Perseus Project has many useful pages for the study of classical languages and literatures, including dictionaries. Ancient Greek Tutorials, Berkeley Language Center of the University of California, Berkeley Language learning Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Hellenistic Greek Lessons Greek-Language.com provides a free online grammar of Hellenistic Greek. komvos.edu.gr, a website for the support of people who are being taught the Greek language. New Testament Greek Three graduated courses designed to help students learn to read the Greek New Testament Books on Greek language that are taught at schools in Greece (page in Greek) Greek Swadesh list of basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh list appendix) USA Foreign Service Institute Modern Greek basic course Aversa, Alan. "Greek Inflector". University of Arizona. Identifies the grammatical functions of all the words in sentences entered, using Perseus. Dictionaries Greek Lexical Aids, descriptions of both online lexicons (with appropriate links) and Greek Lexicons in Print. The Greek Language Portal, dictionaries of all forms of Greek (Ancient, Hellenistic, Medieval, Modern) scanned images from S. C. Woodhouse's English–Greek dictionary, 1910 Literature Center for Neo-Hellenic Studies, a non-profit organization that promotes modern Greek literature and culture Research lab of modern Greek philosophy, a large e-library of modern Greek texts/books v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Proto-Greek Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Armenian Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Mycenaean Greek (c. 1600–1100 BC) Ancient Greek (c. 800–300 BC) Koine Greek (c. 300 BC–AD 330) Medieval Greek (c. 330–1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic and Ionic Doric (Epirote) Homeric Locrian Pamphylian Macedonian Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Istanbul Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Tsakonian Yevanic Phonology Ancient (accent/teaching) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Other Greek language question Exonyms Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Greek Language Day Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries v t e Languages of Greece Official language Greek Greek varieties Cretan Cappadocian Pontic Maniot Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Sign languages Greek Sign Language Other languages Aromanian Arvanitika Balkan Romani Macedonian Slavic Megleno-Romanian Pomak Bulgarian Turkish Vlax Romani v t e Languages of Cyprus Official languages Greek Turkish Semiofficial language English Vernacular languages Cypriot Greek Cypriot Turkish Minority languages Armenian Cypriot Maronite Arabic Russian Sign languages Cypriot Sign Language v t e Languages of Albania Official language Albanian (Tosk) Minority languages Aromanian Greek (Himariote) Macedonian Romani Serbian Sign languages Albanian Sign Language v t e Languages of Turkey Official language Turkish Minority languages Arabic Armenian Bulgarian Georgian Greek Kurdish (Kurmanji) Laz Zaza(ki) Sign languages Turkish Sign Language Mardin Sign Language Central Taurus Sign Language  Turkey portal Category v t e Languages of Italy Historical linguistic minorities: Albanian, Catalan, Croatian, French, Franco-Provençal, Friulian, Germanic, Greek, Ladin, Occitan, Sardinian, Slovene Italo-Dalmatian Venetian[a] Venetian Fiuman Triestine Central Italian Italian Italian Sign Language Regional Italian Tuscan Florentine Corsican Gallurese Sassarese Central Marchigiano Sabino Romanesco Southern Italian Neapolitan Beneventano Barese Irpinian Molisan Cosentino Tarantino Sicilian Salentino Manduriano Southern Calabrese Pantesco Cilentan Others Judaeo-Italian Sardinian Sardinian Sardinian Campidanese Logudorese Occitano-Romance Catalan Algherese Occitan Vivaro-Alpine Mentonasc Niçard Gallo-Romance French Aostan Franco-Provençal Valdôtain Faetar Savoyard Gallo-Italic Ligurian Brigasc Genoese Intemelio Monégasque Royasc Lombard Western Lombard Brianzöö dialects Canzés Bustocco and Legnanese Comasco-Lecchese dialects Comasco Laghée Vallassinese Lecchese Milanese Ticinese Ossolano Varesino Southwestern Lombard Pavese Novarese Cremunés Eastern Lombard Bergamasque Emilian-Romagnol Emilian Bolognese Parmigiano Romagnol Forlivese Various Gallo-Italic Piedmontese Judeo-Piedmontese Gallo-Italic of Basilicata Gallo-Italic of Sicily Rhaeto-Romance Rhaeto-Romance Friulian Ladin Cadorino Fornes Nones Italy portal Albanian Arbëresh language Arbëresh Vaccarizzo Albanian South Slavic Croatian Slavomolisano Slovene Brda Gail Valley Inner Carniolan Istrian Karst Natisone Valley Resian Torre Valley Serbian Triestine Serbian Greek Italiot Greek Calabrian Greek Griko German Bavarian Cimbrian Mòcheno Southern Bavarian Other German dialects Austrian German Walser Yiddish Others Romani ^ Venetian is either grouped with the rest of the Italo-Dalmatian or the Gallo-Italic languages, depending on the linguist. v t e Languages of Ukraine Official languages Ukrainian dialects Minority languages Armenian Azerbaijani Belarusian Bulgarian Crimean Tatar Gagauz German Zipser Greek Pontic Mariupol Hungarian Karaim Krymchak Lezgian Polish Lwów Plautdietsch Romanian Moldavian Romani Carpathian Russian Rusyn Tatar Slovak Urum Yiddish Sign languages Ukrainian Sign Language See Also: Language policy in Ukraine v t e Greece topics Basic topics Alphabetical index of topics History Prehistory (pre-1100 BC) Neolithic Age Bronze Age Pelasgians Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Helladic period Mycenaean period Bronze Age collapse Antiquity (1100 BC-330 AD) Greek Dark Ages Iron Age migrations Archaic period Greco-Persian Wars Classical period Delian and Peloponnesian League Peloponnesian War League of Corinth Wars of Alexander the Great Hellenistic period Wars of the Diadochi Roman–Greek wars Roman era Foundation of Constantinople Middle Ages (330-1453) Byzantine period Persecution of paganism Migration period Plague of Justinian Arab–Byzantine wars Iconoclasm Macedonian Renaissance East–West Schism Fourth Crusade Frankokratia Empire of Nicaea, Despotate of Epirus and Despotate of the Morea Fall of Constantinople Early modern and Modern era (post-1453) Stato da Màr (Venetian Ionian islands, Kingdom of Candia) Ottoman Greece Modern Greek Enlightenment Septinsular Republic War of Independence First Republic Kingdom Balkan Wars World War I National Schism Greco-Turkish War Second Republic 4th of August Regime World War II Civil war Military junta Democratization Third Republic By topic Ancient regions and tribes Byzantine and Ottoman Greeks Christianization Colonization Coups d'état Demographic (Modern) Economic Geographical name changes Greek countries and regions Greek Muslims Renaissance scholars Hellenic languages and Proto-Greek Inventions and discoveries Language question Military Monarchy (Kings and royal family) Phanariotes Polis Population exchange of 1923 Geography Overview Borders Cities (capital and co-capital) Extreme points Place names Regions Central Greece (Aetolia-Acarnania (Aetolia, Acarnania), Attica, Boeotia, Euboea, Evrytania, Phocis, Phthiotis, Saronic Islands) Crete (Chania, Heraklion, Rethymno, Lasithi) Cyclades (Andros, Delos, Kea, Kythnos, Milos, Mykonos, Naxos, Paros, Santorini, Syros, Tinos) Dodecanese (Agathonisi, Astypalaia, Chalki, Kalymnos, Karpathos, Kasos, Kos, Leipsoi, Leros, Nisyros, Patmos, Rhodes, Symi, Tilos, Kastellorizo) Epirus (Arta, Ioannina, Preveza, Thesprotia) Ionian Islands (Corfu, Ithaca, Kefalonia, Kythira, Lefkada, Paxi, Zakynthos) Macedonia (Chalkidiki, Drama, Florina, Grevena, Imathia, Kastoria, Kavala, Kilkis, Kozani, Pella, Pieria, Serres, Thasos, Thessaloniki) North Aegean islands (Chios, Ikaria, Lemnos, Lesbos, Samos) Peloponnese (Arcadia, Argolis, Corinthia, Laconia, Messenia, Achaea, Elis) Thessaly (Karditsa, Larissa, Magnesia, Trikala, Sporades) Thrace (Evros, Rhodope, Xanthi) Terrain Canyons and gorges Caves Geology Islands (Aegean, Ionian, Crete) Mountains (Olympus, Pindus, Rhodopes) Peninsulas Plains Volcanoes Water Coasts Lakes Rivers Mediterranean Sea Aegean Sea (Sea of Crete, Icarian Sea, Myrtoan Sea, Thracian Sea) Ionian Sea Libyan Sea Environment Climate Natural disasters (earthquakes) Ecoregions Environmental issues Forests Mammals and birds National Parks Protected areas Politics Constitution Constitutional amendments (1986, 2001, 2008) Constitutions (1822, 1827, 1844, 1864, 1911) Supreme Special Court Executive Cabinet Government (Government Gazette) President (Presidential Mansion) Prime Minister (Maximos Mansion) Legislature Conference of Presidents Hellenic Parliament (Speaker) Parliamentary Committees Presidium Elections Nationality law Parataxis Parliamentary constituencies Pasokification Political parties Judicial system Council of State Court of Audit Supreme Court Security Police Capital punishment Corruption Crime (Greek mafia) Life imprisonment Terrorism Coast Guard Foreign relations Aegean dispute Council of Europe Cyprus dispute European Union Macedonia naming dispute (Language naming dispute) NATO Passport Treaties United Nations Military Air Force Alliances Army Conscription Military ranks Navy Evzones (Presidential Guard) National Guard Tomb of the Unknown Soldier Social issues Abortion Cannabis Education (universities) Healthcare (hospitals, obesity, smoking) Human rights Human rights abuses LGBT rights Prostitution Political scandals Racism Ideologies Conservatism (Monarchism) Fascism (Metaxism) Liberalism (Republicanism, Venizelism) Nationalism (Hellenocentrism, Megali Idea, Enosis) New Social Movements (Environmentalism, Feminism, Pacifism) Socialism (Laocracy, Trotskyism) Anarchism Administrative divisions Municipalities and communities Administrative regions Regional units Decentralized administrations Economy Agriculture Airports Athens Stock Exchange (companies) Banking (Central bank) Central bank Brands Companies (electric power) Debt crisis (Grexit) Drachma Energy (renewable, nuclear) Euro coins Greece and the International Monetary Fund Greek economic miracle Highways Laiki agora Ports Public pensions Railways (history) Rankings Science and technology Shipping (Merchant Marine) Space Agency Subdivisions by GDP Taxation Telecommunications Thessaloniki International Fair Tourism Trade unions Transportation (Rio–Antirrio bridge, Athens Metro, Thessaloniki Metro) Water supply and sanitation Society Demographics Diaspora Greeks (names of Greece and the Greeks) Immigration Minorities (Muslim minority, Jews, Arvanites, Aromanians (Aromanian Question), Slavophones, Roma) Women Culture Anastenaria Caryatid Clean Monday Concept of kingship Dress (Chiton, Chlamys, Exomis, Fustanella, Himation, Mariner's cap, Peplos, Perizoma, Tsarouchi, Vraka) Eastern Party Festivals Greek East and Latin West Greektown Hellenization Hospitality Carols (Christmas, New Year's, Theophany's) Mangas Mountza Naming customs Paideia Philhellenism and Hellenophobia Plate smashing Philosophy Philotimo Public holidays (Independence Day, Ohi Day) Rouketopolemos Souliotic songs Theophany Tsiknopempti Units of measurement Worry beads Art Architecture (Castles) Cretan and Heptanese School Modern art (19th century) Theatre (Ancient) Religious art Cuisine Breads (Daktyla, Kritsini, Lagana, Paximadi, Tsoureki) Desserts (Diples, Halva, Koulourakia, Kourabiedes, Loukoumades, Melomakarona, Pasteli, Spoon sweets, Vasilopita) List of dishes Drinks (Mastika, Metaxa, Ouzo, Rakomelo, Sideritis, Tentura, Tsipouro, Tsikoudia, Frappé coffee) Cheeses (Anthotyros, Feta, Graviera, Kasseri, Kefalotyri, Ladotyri, Manouri, Metsovone, Mizithra) Filo (Amygdalopita, Bougatsa, Galaktoboureko, Karydopita, Spanakopita, Tiropita) Greek salad (Dakos) Meze Pasta (Gogges, Flomaria, Hilopites) Restaurants (Kafenio, Ouzeri, Taverna) Sauces (Skordalia, Taramosalata, Tirokafteri, Tzatziki) Souvlaki Varieties (Heptanesean, Cretan, Epirote, Macedonian) Wine (Agiorgitiko, Aidini, Assyrtiko, Athiri, Kotsifali, Lesbian, Limnio, Mavrodafni, Mandilaria, Malagousia, Malvasia, Moschofilero, Retsina, Robola, Savatiano, Vilana, Xinomavro) Languages Greek alphabet (History, Orthography, Diacritics, Braille, Cyrillization, Romanization (Greeklish)) and numerals Greek language (Demotic, Katharevousa) and dialects (Cappadocian, Cretan, Cypriot, Maniot, Pontic, Tsakonian, Yevanic) Greek Sign Language History (Mycenaean Greek, Ancient Greek, Koine Greek, Medieval Greek, Modern Greek) Literature (Ancient, Medieval, Modern) Minority Languages (Albanian language (Arvanitika), Aromanian, Balkan Romani, Bulgarian, Ladino, Macedonian, Turkish) Place names and exonyms Proverbs Words for love Media Cinema Internet Newspapers Television Media freedom Corruption Music Church music Dances (Ai Georgis, Angaliastos, Antikristos, Ballos, Dionysiakos, Fisounis, Gaitanaki, Geranos, Hasapiko, Ikariotikos, Kalamatianos, Kangeli, Kastorianos, Kerkiraikos, Kleistos, Koftos, Pidikhtos, Leventikos, Maniatikos, Metsovitikos, Ntames, Palamakia, Partalos, Pentozali, Proskinitos, Pyrrhichios, Rougatsiarikos, Sirtaki, Sousta, Syrtos, Trata, Tsakonikos, Tsamikos, Zeibekiko, Zervos) Éntekhno Folk music (Cretan, Epirote, Heptanesian, Macedonian, Nisiotika, Peloponnesian, Pontic, Thessalian, Thracian) Hip Hop Ionian School Laïko (Skyladiko) Musical instruments (Askomandoura, Aulos, Bouzouki, Byzantine lyra (Cretan, Macedonian, Politiki, Pontic), Crotala, Floghera, Gaida, Harp, Laouto, Lyre, Organo, Pan flute, Phorminx, Psaltery, Salpinx, Santouri, Souravli, Tambouras, Tambourine, Trigono, Tsampouna, Tympano, Zilia) Rebetiko Rock (Punk) Religion and lore Ancient religion (Origins, Modern Revival) Aerico Buddhism Catholicism Drosoulites Eastern Orthodox Church (Timeline: Antiquity, Early Middle Ages, Late Middle Ages, Early Modern Era, 19th century, Early 20th century, Late 20th century, Contemporary) Fairy tales Gello Greek Orthodox Church (Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, Church of Greece, Flag) Greek Old Calendarists Hinduism Hypertimos Islam Judaism (History) Kallikantzaros Lamia Mormo Mount Athos Mythology (Primordial deities, Titans, Twelve Olympians, Heracles, Odysseus, Jason, Oedipus, Perseus, Daedalus, Orpheus, Theseus, Bellerephon, Satyr, Centaur) Nymph Protestantism Psychai Sikhism Thymiaterion Name days Vrykolakas Wayside shrine Sport Ancient Olympics Baseball Basketball Cricket Football Hockey Ice hockey Modern Olympics (1896, 1906, 2004) Rugby league Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag and national colours Flags Motto Orders and decorations World Heritage Sites Category Portal v t e Ages of Greek C. 3rd millennium BC C. 1600–1100 BC C. 800–300 BC C. 300 BC – AD 330 C. 330–1453 Since 1453 Proto-Greek Mycenaean Ancient Koine Medieval Modern Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125