Tabletop role-playing game supplement for Dungeons & Dragons Dungeons & Dragons Supplement I: Greyhawk The original Greyhawk booklet by Gygax and Kuntz Authors Gary Gygax Robert J. Kuntz Genre Role-playing game Publisher TSR, Inc. Publication date 1975 Pages 68 Greyhawk is a supplementary rulebook written by Gary Gygax and Robert J. Kuntz for the original edition of the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game. It has been called "the first and most important supplement" to the original D&D rules. By adding a combat system, it severed all ties with Chainmail, making D&D a truly stand-alone game system. Although the name of the book was taken from the home campaign supervised by Gygax and Kuntz based on Gygax's imagined Castle Greyhawk and the lands surrounding it, Greyhawk did not give any details of the castle or the campaign world; instead, it explained the rules that Gygax and Kuntz used in their home campaign, and introduced a number of character classes, spells, concepts and monsters used in all subsequent editions of D&D. Contents 1 Contents 2 Publication history 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Contents[edit] The original rules for Dungeons & Dragons were published by TSR in 1974, but were limited in scope: the character classes and monsters listed were small in number; and for combat rules, players needed to have a copy of Chainmail, a rulebook for miniatures wargames published by Guidon Games in 1971. Over the next two years, TSR bolstered the original rules with five supplemental books. Greyhawk was the first of these supplements, named after Gary Gygax's home campaign. The 2004 publication 30 Years of Adventure: A Celebration of Dungeons & Dragons suggested that details of Gygax's Greyhawk campaign were published in this booklet.[1] However Gygax had no plans in 1975 to publish details of the Greyhawk world, since he believed that new players of Dungeons & Dragons would rather create their own worlds than use someone else's.[2] In addition, he didn't want to publish all the material he had created for his players; he thought he would be unlikely to recoup a fair investment for the thousands of hours he had spent on it, and since his secrets would be revealed to his players, he would be forced to recreate a new world for them afterward.[3] In fact the only two references to the Greyhawk campaign were an illustration of a large stone head in a dungeon corridor titled The Great Stone Face, Enigma of Greyhawk and mention of a fountain on the second level of the dungeons that continuously issued an endless number of snakes. Greyhawk instead focused on new game rules that had been developed by Gygax and Kuntz during long hours of home play. The 68-page supplement also introduced new character classes (thief and paladin),[4][5] as well as new combat rules, spells, monsters, and treasures.[4] Greyhawk included new rules on weapon damage varying by weapon. The supplement added new treasure and magic items, and new spells, including 7th, 8th, and 9th level spells. The supplement also included a section on monsters, introducing the lizard men, beholders, displacer beasts, blink dogs, carrion crawlers, and many others.[4] Publication history[edit] Greyhawk was already in process at the time of TSR co-founder Don Kaye's death in January 1975, and was published in early March.[6]:7 [7]:502 It was designated Supplement I and given a product designation of TSR 2003.[8] Many of the new rules presented in the supplement eventually became standard parts of the AD&D game. A second supplement, Blackmoor, followed later the same year. Illustrations for the supplement were provided by Greg Bell,[9]:39 who had previously met Gygax while playing wargames, and had already provided some illustrations for the original Dungeons & Dragons boxed set. Gygax often contacted Bell at the last minute for artwork; as a result, Bell sometimes responded by copying figures from the pages of comic books. His illustration of a sword-wielding warrior on the cover of the Greyhawk supplement is a copy of "Dax the Damned" by Esteban Maroto from a 1974 issue of Eerie.[9] Judges Guild's Ready Ref Sheets (1977) collected together 20 pages of charts from the original D&D box, Chainmail, and Greyhawk.[6]:66 Material from Greyhawk, along with the original D&D and the Blackmoor and Eldritch Wizardry supplements, was revised for J. Eric Holmes' Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set (1977).[6]:10 In 2013, the Greyhawk supplement was reproduced as a premium reprint of the original "White Box" D&D rules. Each booklet features new cover art but otherwise is a faithful reproduction of the original.[10] Reception[edit] Lawrence Schick, in his 1991 book Heroic Worlds, calls Greyhawk "The first and most important supplement to Original D&D".[4] Shannon Appelcline, in his 2011 book Designers & Dragons, considers Greyhawk an "innovation" because at the time "supplements were largely unheard of in the wargaming industry. Though games were frequently revised and reprinted, continually expanding a game was something new."[6]:7 See also[edit] World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting References[edit] ^ 30 Years of Adventure: A Celebration of Dungeons & Dragons. Renton WA: Wizards of the Coast. 2004. p. 55. ISBN 0-7869-3498-0. ^ Gygax: "When I initially began creating adventure material I assumed that the GMs utilizing the work would prefer substance without window dressing, the latter being properly the realm of the GM so as to suit the campaign world and player group." "Gary Gygax: Q & A (Part XII, Page 40)". EN World. 2007-03-28. Archived from the original on 2012-10-04. Retrieved 2009-03-15. ^ Gygax: "As I was running a game with a large number of players involved, I really didn't want to supply them with the whole world on a platter." "Gary Gygax: Q & A (Part IV, Page 11)". EN World. 2003-11-05. Archived from the original on 2011-06-15. Retrieved 2009-03-15. ^ a b c d Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. p. 143. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ "Original D&D Supplements". The Acaeum. Retrieved 2009-01-17. ^ a b c d Shannon Appelcline (2011). Designers & Dragons. Mongoose Publishing. ISBN 978-1-907702-58-7. ^ Peterson, Jon (2012). Playing at the World: A History of Simulating Wars, People and Fantastic Adventures, from Chess to Role-playing Games. San Diego, CA: Unreason Press. ISBN 978-0615642048. ^ "The History of TSR". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on 2008-10-04. Retrieved 2005-08-20. ^ a b Witwer, Michael; Newman, Kyle; Witwer, Sam (2018). Dungeons & Dragons Art & Arcana: A Visual History. Ten Speed Press. ISBN 9780399580949. ^ "Original Dungeons & Dragons RPG". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 24, 2013. External links[edit] http://www.rpg.net/reviews/archive/10/10468.phtml v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond v t e Dungeons & Dragons rulebooks and accessories Original Dungeons & Dragons Core Dungeons & Dragons Chainmail Supplements Supplement I: Greyhawk Supplement II: Blackmoor Supplement III: Eldritch Wizardry Supplement IV: Gods, Demi-Gods, and Heroes Swords & Spells Basic Dungeons & Dragons Core Basic Set Expert Set Companion Set Master Rules Immortals Rules Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Creature Catalogue The Shady Dragon Inn Wrath of the Immortals Modules Adventures in Blackmoor Castle Amber Castle Caldwell and Beyond City of the Gods Combat Shield and Mini-adventure Curse of Xanathon Death's Ride The Duchy of Ten Earthshaker! The Endless Stair The Gem and the Staff Ghost of Lion Castle Horror on the Hill In Search of Adventure In Search of the Unknown The Isle of Dread The Jade Hare The Keep on the Borderlands The Kidnapping of Princess Arelina Legacy of Blood The Lost City Master Player Screen Mystery of the Snow Pearls Night's Dark Terror Palace of the Silver Princess Queen's Harvest Rahasia The Revenge of Rusak Sabre River Temple of the Frog Test of the Warlords The Tree of Life The Veiled Society War Rafts of Kron Where Chaos Reigns Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Core Players Handbook Dungeon Masters Guide Monster Manual Supplements Deities & Demigods Dragonlance Adventures Dungeoneer's Survival Guide Empires of the Sands Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Set Greyhawk Adventures Lords of Darkness The Magister Manual of the Planes Monster Manual II Moonshae Oriental Adventures The Savage Frontier Unearthed Arcana Waterdeep and the North Wilderness Survival Guide World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting Modules Against the Cult of the Reptile God Against the Giants The Assassin's Knot Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords The Bane of Llywelyn Beyond the Crystal Cave Blood of the Yakuza Bloodstone Pass The Bloodstone Wars Castle Greyhawk Conan Against Darkness! Conan Unchained! Danger at Dunwater Day of Al'Akbar Deep Dwarven Delve Descent into the Depths of the Earth Dragonlance modules Dragons of Despair Dungeonland Dwellers of the Forbidden City The Final Enemy The Forest Oracle Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun The Gauntlet The Ghost Tower of Inverness Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl Hall of the Fire Giant King The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan Isle of the Ape The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth The Lost Island of Castanamir Lost Tomb of Martek The Mines of Bloodstone Oasis of the White Palm Pharaoh Queen of the Demonweb Pits Queen of the Spiders Ravager of Time Ravenloft Ravenloft II: The House on Gryphon Hill Red Sonja Unconquered Ruins of Adventure Scourge of the Slave Lords The Secret of Bone Hill The Sentinel Shrine of the Kuo-Toa Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh Swords of Deceit Swords of the Undercity The Temple of Elemental Evil The Throne of Bloodstone To Find a King Tomb of Horrors Tomb of the Lizard King Treasure Hunt Under Illefarn Vault of the Drow The Village of Hommlet White Plume Mountain Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monstrous Compendium/Monstrous Manual Supplements Anauroch Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Artifacts The Code of the Harpers The Complete Book of Dwarves The Complete Book of Humanoids The Complete Fighter's Handbook The Complete Psionics Handbook The Dalelands Demihuman Deities Draconomicon Drow of the Underdark Dwarves Deep Earth, Air, Fire, and Water Faiths & Avatars Forgotten Realms Adventures The Forgotten Realms Atlas Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting From the Ashes Greyhawk: The Adventure Begins A Guide to the Astral Plane Hall of Heroes Heroes' Lorebook Iuz the Evil Jungles of Chult Legends & Lore The Marklands Monster Mythology Old Empires The Ruins of Undermountain The Shining South Tome of Magic Villains' Lorebook Adventures Against the Giants: The Liberation of Geoff The Bloodstone Lands Border Watch The City of Skulls Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad Die Vecna Die! The Doomgrinder Doom of Daggerdale Fate of Istus Five Shall Be One Gargoyle Greyhawk Ruins Halls of the High King House of Strahd Howl from the North Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure Night Below Patriots of Ulek Rary the Traitor Return of the Eight Return to the Keep on the Borderlands Return to the Tomb of Horrors Return to White Plume Mountain Slavers The Star Cairns Treasures of Greyhawk Vecna Lives! Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Challenges Book of Vile Darkness Defenders of the Faith Deities and Demigods Enemies and Allies Epic Level Handbook Faiths and Pantheons Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Ghostwalk Hero Builder's Guidebook Living Greyhawk Gazetteer Lords of Darkness Magic of Faerûn Monsters of Faerûn Manual of the Planes Masters of the Wild Monster Manual II Oriental Adventures Psionics Handbook Races of Faerûn Savage Species Song and Silence Stronghold Builder's Guidebook Sword and Fist Tome and Blood Adventures Bastion of Broken Souls City of the Spider Queen Deep Horizon The Forge of Fury The Fright at Tristor Heart of Nightfang Spire Lord of the Iron Fortress Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil The Speaker in Dreams The Standing Stone The Sunless Citadel Dungeons & Dragons v3.5 Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Dungeons & Dragons Basic Game Supplements An Adventurer's Guide to Eberron Book of Exalted Deeds City of Splendors: Waterdeep City of Stormreach Cityscape Complete Adventurer Complete Arcane Complete Champion Complete Divine Complete Mage Complete Psionic Complete Scoundrel Complete Warrior Draconomicon Dragon Magic Dragonmarked Dragons of Eberron Dragons of Faerûn Drow of the Underdark Dungeon Master's Guide II Dungeonscape Eberron Campaign Setting Elder Evils Exemplars of Evil Expanded Psionics Handbook Faiths of Eberron Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss Fiendish Codex II: Tyrants of the Nine Hells Five Nations The Forge of War Frostburn The Grand History of the Realms Heroes of Battle Heroes of Horror Libris Mortis Lords of Madness Lost Empires of Faerûn Magic Item Compendium Magic of Incarnum Miniatures Handbook Monster Manual III Monster Manual IV Monster Manual V Planar Handbook Player's Handbook II Races of Destiny Races of the Dragon Races of Stone Races of the Wild Rules Compendium Sandstorm Spell Compendium Stormwrack Tome of Battle: The Book of Nine Swords Tome of Magic Underdark Unearthed Arcana Weapons of Legacy Adventures Eberron Eyes of the Lich Queen Grasp of the Emerald Claw Shadows of the Last War Voyage of the Golden Dragon Whispers of the Vampire's Blade Expedition series Expedition to Castle Ravenloft Expedition to the Demonweb Pits Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk Expedition to Undermountain Fantastic Locations City of Peril Dragondown Grotto Fane of the Drow Fields of Ruin The Frostfell Rift Hellspike Prison Other adventures Barrow of the Forgotten King Fortress of the Yuan-Ti Red Hand of Doom Scourge of the Howling Horde The Shattered Gates of Slaughtergarde The Sinister Spire Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arcane Power Divine Power Dark Sun Campaign Setting Dungeon Master's Guide 2 Draconomicon: Chromatic Dragons Draconomicon: Metallic Dragons Eberron Campaign Guide Eberron Player's Guide Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide Forgotten Realms Player's Guide Manual of the Planes Martial Power Martial Power 2 Monster Manual 2 Monster Manual 3 Player's Handbook 2 Player's Handbook 3 Primal Power Psionic Power Adventures Assault on Nightwyrm Fortress Demon Queen's Enclave Keep on the Shadowfell King of the Trollhaunt Warrens Madness at Gardmore Abbey Marauders of the Dune Sea Orcs of Stonefang Pass Prince of Undeath Pyramid of Shadows Thunderspire Labyrinth Tomb of Horrors Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Elemental Evil Player's Companion Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide Volo's Guide to Monsters Xanathar's Guide to Everything Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica Acquisitions Incorporated Eberron: Rising from the Last War Explorer's Guide to Wildemount Mythic Odysseys of Theros Tasha's Cauldron of Everything Adventures Hoard of the Dragon Queen The Rise of Tiamat Princes of the Apocalypse Out of the Abyss Curse of Strahd Storm King's Thunder Tomb of Annihilation Waterdeep: Dragon Heist Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage Baldur's Gate: Descent Into Avernus Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden Anthologies Tales from the Yawning Portal Ghosts of Saltmarsh Candlekeep Mysteries Magazines Dragon Dungeon