This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (September 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may fail to make a clear distinction between fact and fiction. Please help improve this article so that it meets Wikipedia's fiction guidelines and quality standards. (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) API Hangul 귀신 Hanja 鬼神 Revised Romanization Gwisin McCune–Reischauer Kwisin Gwisin (Korean: 귀신) are a type of spirit or ghost in Korean folklore. They are considered similar to a Yogoe (Korean: 요괴);, and Mamul (Korean: 마물); they are people who have died, not monsters or creatures such as Dokkaebi.[1] These spirits may be found in many places, but most commonly in abandoned buildings, houses, cemeteries, forests, and schools. When a person dies without completing something that they must do (e.g. revenge or staying longer with their family), their spirit remains on earth to complete the task before going on to the underworld.[1] However, very strong gwisin do not go to the underground world if they want to remain on earth, and over time these gain strength. Contents 1 Legends 2 Physical characteristics 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Legends[edit] There are a lot of legends about Gwisin. Because they are a common form of ghost, children often make them up to scare others or parents tell stories to their children to teach them a lesson. Most legends are about revenge,[1] revenge for their families or about men who cheated on their wives, or murdered the victim. Appearances of Gwisin often occur in high schools, a concept popularized with the release of Whispering Corridors, a Korean horror movie released in 1998. Physical characteristics[edit] Gwisin are usually transparent, legless and float in mid-air.[1] Female Gwisin usually have white Hanbok (한복) which are worn for funerals.[1] They have long, drooping black hair and sometimes they are faceless, depending on their personality. Male Gwisin are somewhat rare, and may appear different. See also[edit] White Lady Oh My Ghost (TV series) Hotel del Luna (TV series) References[edit] ^ a b c d e Jon Dunbar (December 15, 2011). "Supernatural Creatures of Korean Mythology". Archived from the original on March 20, 2012. Retrieved July 15, 2012. External links[edit] World of Human and Gwisin, Korea Creative Content Agency (in Korean) v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category