Science of the treatment of diseases of the female sexual organs and reproductive tract Look up gynecology or gynaecology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Gynecology A dilating vaginal speculum, a tool for examining the vagina, in a model of the female reproductive system System Female reproductive system Subdivisions Oncology, Maternal medicine, Maternal-fetal medicine Significant diseases Gynaecological cancers, infertility, dysmenorrhea Significant tests Laparoscopy Specialist Gynaecologist Gynaecology or gynecology (see spelling differences) is the medical practice dealing with the health of the female reproductive system. Almost all modern gynaecologists are also obstetricians (see obstetrics and gynaecology). In many areas, the specialities of gynaecology and obstetrics overlap. The term means "the science of women". [1] Its counterpart is andrology, which deals with medical issues specific to the male reproductive system. Contents 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Examination 4 Diseases 5 Therapies 6 Specialist training 7 Gender of physicians 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources 11 External links Etymology[edit] The word "gynaecology" comes from the oblique stem (γυναικ-) of the Greek word γυνή (gyne) semantically attached to "woman", and -logia, with the semantic attachment "study". History[edit] The Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus, dated to about 1800 BC, deals with women's health —gynaecological diseases, fertility, pregnancy, contraception, etc. The text is divided into thirty-four sections, each section dealing with a specific problem and containing diagnosis and treatment; no prognosis is suggested. Treatments are non surgical, comprising applying medicines to the affected body part or swallowing them. The womb is at times seen as the source of complaints manifesting themselves in other body parts.[2] Texts of Ayurveda, an Indian traditional medical system, also provides details about concepts and techniques related to Gynaecology.[3][4] The Hippocratic Corpus contains several gynaecological treatises dating to the 5th/4th centuries BC. Aristotle is another strong source for medical texts from the 4th century BC with his descriptions of biology primarily found in History of Animals, Parts of Animals, Generation of Animals. [5] The gynaecological treatise Gynaikeia by Soranus of Ephesus (1st/2nd century AD) is extant (together with a 6th-century Latin paraphrase by Muscio, a physician of the same school). He was the chief representative of the school of physicians known as the "Methodists". J. Marion Sims is widely considered the father of modern gynaecology.[6] Now criticized for his practices, Sims developed some of his techniques by operating on slaves, many of whom were not given anaesthesia.[7][8] Sims performed surgeries on 12 enslaved women in his homemade backyard hospital for four years. While performing these surgeries he invited men physicians and students to watch invasive and painful procedures while the women were exposed. On one of the women, named Anarcha, he performed 30 surgeries without anesthesia.[9] Due to having so many enslaved women, he would rotate from one to another, continuously trying to perfect the repair of their fistulas. Physicians and students lost interest in assisting Sims over the course of his backyard practice, and he recruited other enslaved women, who were healing from their own surgeries, to assist him. In 1855 Sims went on to found the Woman's Hospital in New York, the first hospital specifically for female disorders.[10] Examination[edit] The historic taboo associated with the examination of female genitalia has long inhibited the science of gynaecology. This 1822 drawing by Jacques-Pierre Maygrier shows a "compromise" procedure, in which the physician is kneeling before the woman but cannot see her genitalia. Modern gynaecology no longer uses such a position. In some countries, women must first see a general practitioner (GP; also known as a family practitioner (FP)) prior to seeing a gynaecologist. If their condition requires training, knowledge, surgical procedure, or equipment unavailable to the GP, the patient is then referred to a gynaecologist. In the United States, however, law and many health insurance plans allow gynaecologists to provide primary care in addition to aspects of their own specialty. With this option available, some women opt to see a gynaecological surgeon for non-gynaecological problems without another physician's referral. As in all of medicine, the main tools of diagnosis are clinical history and examination. Gynaecological examination is quite intimate, more so than a routine physical exam. It also requires unique instrumentation such as the speculum. The speculum consists of two hinged blades of concave metal or plastic which are used to retract the tissues of the vagina and permit examination of the cervix, the lower part of the uterus located within the upper portion of the vagina. Gynaecologists typically do a bimanual examination (one hand on the abdomen and one or two fingers in the vagina) to palpate the cervix, uterus, ovaries and bony pelvis. It is not uncommon to do a rectovaginal examination for complete evaluation of the pelvis, particularly if any suspicious masses are appreciated. Male gynaecologists may have a female chaperone for their examination. An abdominal or vaginal ultrasound can be used to confirm any abnormalities appreciated with the bimanual examination or when indicated by the patient's history. Diseases[edit] Examples of conditions dealt with by a gynaecologist are: Cancer and pre-cancerous diseases of the reproductive organs including ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina, and vulva Incontinence of urine Amenorrhoea (absent menstrual periods) Dysmenorrhoea (painful menstrual periods) Infertility Menorrhagia (heavy menstrual periods); a common indication for hysterectomy Prolapse of pelvic organs Infections of the vagina (vaginitis), cervix and uterus (including fungal, bacterial, viral, and protozoal) UTI and Pelvic Inflammatory Disease Premenstrual Syndrome Other vaginal diseases There is some crossover in these areas. For example, a woman with urinary incontinence may be referred to a urologist. Therapies[edit] As with all surgical specialties, gynaecologists may employ medical or surgical therapies (or many times, both), depending on the exact nature of the problem that they are treating. Pre- and post-operative medical management will often employ many standard drug therapies, such as antibiotics, diuretics, antihypertensives, and antiemetics. Additionally, gynaecologists make frequent use of specialized hormone-modulating therapies (such as Clomifene citrate and hormonal contraception) to treat disorders of the female genital tract that are responsive to pituitary or gonadal signals. For lists of gynaecological drugs (by the ATC classification system), see ATC code G01 and ATC code G02. Surgery, however, is the mainstay of gynaecological therapy. For historical and political reasons, gynaecologists were previously not considered "surgeons", although this point has always been the source of some controversy. Modern advancements in both general surgery and gynaecology, however, have blurred many of the once rigid lines of distinction. The rise of sub-specialties within gynaecology which are primarily surgical in nature (for example urogynaecology and gynaecological oncology) have strengthened the reputations of gynaecologists as surgical practitioners, and many surgeons and surgical societies have come to view gynaecologists as comrades of sorts. As proof of this changing attitude, gynaecologists are now eligible for fellowship in both the American College of Surgeons and Royal Colleges of Surgeons, and many newer surgical textbooks include chapters on (at least basic) gynaecological surgery. Some of the more common operations that gynaecologists perform include:[11] Dilation and curettage (removal of the uterine contents for various reasons, including completing a partial miscarriage and diagnostic sampling for dysfunctional uterine bleeding refractive to medical therapy) Hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) Oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries) Tubal ligation (a type of permanent sterilization) Hysteroscopy (inspection of the uterine cavity) Diagnostic laparoscopy – used to diagnose and treat sources of pelvic and abdominal pain; perhaps most famously used to provide a definitive diagnosis of endometriosis. Exploratory laparotomy – may be used to investigate the level of progression of benign or malignant disease, or to assess and repair damage to the pelvic organs. Various surgical treatments for urinary incontinence, including cystoscopy and sub-urethral slings. Surgical treatment of pelvic organ prolapse, including correction of cystocele and rectocele. Appendectomy – often performed to remove site of painful endometriosis implantation or prophylactically (against future acute appendicitis) at the time of hysterectomy or Caesarean section. May also be performed as part of a staging operation for ovarian cancer. Cervical Excision Procedures (including cryosurgery) – removal of the surface of the cervix containing pre-cancerous cells which have been previously identified on Pap smear. Specialist training[edit] Gynaecologist Occupation Names Physician Surgeon Occupation type Specialty Activity sectors Medicine, Surgery Description Education required Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) Doctor of Osteopathic medicine (D.O.) Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (M.B.B.S.) Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBChB) Fields of employment Hospitals, Clinics In the UK the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, based in London, encourages the study and advancement of both the science and practice of obstetrics and gynaecology. This is done through postgraduate medical education and training development, and the publication of clinical guidelines and reports on aspects of the specialty and service provision. The RCOG International Office works with other international organisations to help lower maternal morbidity and mortality in under-resourced countries. Gynaecologic oncology is a subspecialty of gynaecology, dealing with gynaecology-related cancer. Gender of physicians[edit] Improved access to education and the professions in recent decades has seen women gynecologists outnumber men in the once male-dominated medical field of gynecology.[12] In some gynecological sub-specialties, where an over-representation of males persists, income discrepancies appear to show male practitioners earning higher averages.[13] Speculations on the decreased numbers of male gynecologist practitioners report a perceived lack of respect from within the medical profession, limited future employment opportunities and even questions to the motivations and character of men who choose the medical field concerned with female sexual organs.[14][15][16] Some high profile cases of prosecutions of male gynecologists for sex assault of patients may act as a deterrent for some considering whether to enter the field.[17][18] Surveys of women's views on the issue of male doctors conducting intimate examinations show a large and consistent majority found it uncomfortable, were more likely to be embarrassed and less likely to talk openly or in detail about personal information, or discuss their sexual history with a man. The findings raised questions about the ability of male gynaecologists to offer quality care to patients.[19] This, when coupled with more women choosing female physicians[20] has decreased the employment opportunities for men choosing to become gynaecologists.[21] In the United States, it has been reported that 4 in 5 students choosing a residency in gynaecology are now female.[22] In several places in Sweden, to comply with discrimination laws, patients may not choose a doctor—regardless of specialty—based on factors such as ethnicity or gender and declining to see a doctor solely because of preference regarding e.g. the practitioner's skin color or gender may legally be viewed as refusing care.[23][24] In Turkey, due to patient preference to be seen by another female, there are now few male gynaecologists working in the field.[25] There have been a number of legal challenges in the US against healthcare providers who have started hiring based on the gender of physicians. Dr Mircea Veleanu argued, in part, that his former employers discriminated against him by accommodating the wishes of female patients who had requested female doctors for intimate exams.[26] A male nurse complained about an advert for an all-female obstetrics and gynaecology practice in Columbia, Maryland claiming this was a form of sexual discrimination.[27] Dr David Garfinkel, a New Jersey-based ob-gyn sued his former employer after being fired due to, as he claimed, "because I was male, I wasn't drawing as many patients as they'd expected".[26] So far, all legal challenges by male gynaecologists to remove patient choice have failed due to there being protection in law for 'bona fide occupational qualification' which in previous cases involving wash-room attendants and male nurses have recognized justification for gender-based requirements for certain jobs.[citation needed] See also[edit] Obstetrics and gynaecology Howard Atwood Kelly Childbirth and obstetrics in antiquity Genital schistosomiasis Hydatidiform mole Gynography List of bacterial vaginosis microbiota Pediatric gynecology References[edit] ^ R .Porter (1991), reviews Ornella Moscucci, The science of women: gynaecology and gender in England, 1800-1929, Cambridge History of Medicine, Cambridge University Press, 1990, 8vo, pp. x, 278 retrieved 2021-March-07 ^ Laurinda S. Dixon. Perilous Chastity: Women and Illness in Pre-Enlightenment Art and Medicine, Cornell University Press 1995, pp.15f. ^ S. V. Govindan (November 2002). Fundamental Maxims of Ayurveda: Prepared for the Common People. Abhinav Publications. pp. 142–143. ISBN 978-81-7017-417-2. ^ Md. Nazrul Islam (4 April 2017). Chinese and Indian Medicine Today: Branding Asia. Springer Singapore. p. 134. ISBN 978-981-10-3962-1. ^ Lesley Dean-Jones, "The Cultural Construct of the Female Body" In Women’s History and Ancient History, ed. Susan B. Pomeroy (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1991), 113. ^ Semple, Henry Churchill (1923). J. Marion Sims, the Father of Modern Gynecology. Retrieved 11 October 2013. ^ Daly, Mary (1990). Gyn/ecology: The Metaethics of Radical Feminism. Beacon Press. pp. 225–. ISBN 9780807014134. Retrieved 11 October 2013. ^ Adekunle, Julius O.; Williams, Hettie V. (2010-02-24). Color Struck: Essays on Race and Ethnicity in Global Perspective. University Press of America. pp. 397–. ISBN 9780761850922. Retrieved 11 October 2013. ^ Wall, L. Lewis (2006-11-02). "Did J. Marion Sims Deliberately Addict His First Fistula Patients to Opium?". Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences. 62 (3): 336–356. doi:10.1093/jhmas/jrl045. PMID 17082217. Retrieved 2019-09-23. ^ Wallace-Sanders, Kimberly (2002). Skin Deep, Spirit Strong (PDF). Mastering the Female Pelvis. ^ "Obstetrics and Gynecology Specialty Description". American Medical Association. Retrieved 24 October 2020. ^ "From Past to Present: The Changing Demographics of Women in Medicine". 2008-02-01. Archived from the original on 2014-07-03. Retrieved 2014-06-24. ^ "Women dominate ob/gyn field but make less money than male counterparts: Gender gap in pay extends to reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialists". ScienceDaily. Retrieved 2019-11-23. ^ "Why Are Men Gynaecologists?". 2013-12-04. Retrieved 2014-06-24.[permanent dead link] ^ "Are Male Gynecologists Creepy?". 2013-12-09. Archived from the original on 2014-06-27. Retrieved 2014-06-24. ^ Gerber, Susan E.; Lo Sasso, Anthony T. (2006-11-01). "The evolving gender gap in general obstetrics and gynecology". American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 195 (5): 1427–1430. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2006.07.043. ISSN 0002-9378. PMID 17074550. ^ "New York OB/GYN Robert Hadden indicted on federal charges ." 2020-09-09. Retrieved 2020-10-22. ^ "Gynecologist Loses License After Having Sex With Patients Who Asked About G-Spots Dr. Kurt Froelich assaulted patients in his office and the hospital". 2015-02-10. Retrieved 2020-10-22. ^ Hall Judith A, Roter Debra L (2002-12-02). "Do patients talk differently to male and female physicians?: A meta-analytic review". Patient Education and Counseling. 48 (3): 217–224. doi:10.1016/S0738-3991(02)00174-X. PMID 12477606. ^ "Patient choice: comparing criteria for selecting an obstetrician-gynaecologist based on image, gender, and professional attributes". 2007-03-15. Retrieved 2014-06-24. ^ "Career Trends for OB/GYN Physician Jobs". Archived from the original on 2014-12-17. Retrieved 2014-06-24. ^ "Enhancing the Representation of Women as Senior Leaders in Obstetrics and Gynaecology" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-12-17. Retrieved 2014-06-24. ^ "Discrimination against male gynaecologists? Swedish clinics ban women from choosing female doctors". 2007-01-29. Retrieved 2014-06-24. ^ Trysell, Katrin (11 April 2018). "Byta doktor ingen rättighet" [Switching Doctor Not a Right]. Läkartidningen (in Swedish). Retrieved 25 April 2018. ^ "Male Gynaecologist in Turkey: Dying profession?". 2014-05-22. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2014-06-25. ^ a b "Women's Health Is No Longer a Man's World". 2001-02-07. Retrieved 2014-07-14. ^ "Nurse questions all-female OB-GYN practice". 2014-02-02. Retrieved 2014-07-14. Sources[edit] The Female Reproductive System Britannica External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gynaecology. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Ingenious: archive of historical images related to obstetrics, gynaecology, and contraception. U.S. Federal Government Website for Women's Health Information. v t e Medicine Specialties and subspecialties Surgery Cardiac surgery Cardiothoracic surgery Colorectal surgery Eye surgery General surgery Neurosurgery Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopedic surgery Hand surgery Otolaryngology ENT Pediatric surgery Plastic surgery Reproductive surgery Surgical oncology Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Urology Andrology Vascular surgery Internal medicine Allergy / Immunology Angiology Cardiology Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hepatology Geriatrics Hematology Hospital medicine Infectious disease Nephrology Oncology Pulmonology Rheumatology Obstetrics and gynaecology Gynaecology Gynecologic oncology Maternal–fetal medicine Obstetrics Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Urogynecology Diagnostic Radiology Interventional radiology Nuclear medicine Pathology Anatomical Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Cytopathology Medical microbiology Transfusion medicine Other Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesiology Dermatology Disaster medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Mass gathering medicine Family medicine / General practice Hospital medicine Intensive care medicine Medical genetics Narcology Neurology Clinical neurophysiology Occupational medicine Ophthalmology Oral medicine Pain management Palliative care Pediatrics Neonatology Physical medicine and rehabilitation PM&R Preventive medicine Psychiatry Addiction psychiatry Radiation oncology Reproductive medicine Sexual medicine Sleep medicine Sports medicine Transplantation medicine Tropical medicine Travel medicine Venereology Medical education Medical school Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery Bachelor of Medical Sciences Master of Medicine Master of Surgery Doctor of Medicine Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine MD–PhD Related topics Alternative medicine Allied health Dentistry Podiatry Pharmacy Physiotherapy Molecular oncology Nanomedicine Personalized medicine Public health Rural health Therapy Traditional medicine Veterinary medicine Physician Chief physician History of medicine Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Outline v t e Reproductive health Rights Compulsory sterilization Contraceptive security Genital integrity Circumcision controversies Genital modification and mutilation Intersex Education Genetic counseling Pre-conception counseling Sex education Planning Assisted reproductive technology Birth control Childfree/Childlessness Parenting Adoption Childbirth Foster care Safe sex Health Men's Women's Vulvovaginal Research Self-report sexual risk behaviors Pregnancy Abortion Birth spacing Maternal health Obstetrics Options counseling Pregnancy from rape Pregnant patients' rights Prenatal care Teenage pregnancy Preteen pregnancy Unintended pregnancy Medicine Andrology Genitourinary medicine Gynaecology Obstetrics and gynaecology Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Sexual medicine Disorder Disorders of sex development Infertility Reproductive system disease Sexual dysfunction Sexually transmitted infection Clinic By country China India Iran Ireland Pakistan Philippines Singapore United Kingdom Teen United States Teen pregnancy Birth control History Birth control movement in the United States History of condoms Social hygiene movement Timeline of reproductive rights legislation Policy One-child policy Two-child policy Financial Baby bonus Bachelor tax Child benefit Tax on childlessness v t e Outline of human sexuality Physiology and biology Erection Insemination Intersex Libido Nocturnal emission Orgasm Female and male ejaculation Pelvic thrust Pre-ejaculate Pregnancy Sexual arousal Sexual stimulation Health and education Birth control Condom Masters and Johnson Reproductive medicine Andrology Gynaecology Urology Safe sex Sex education Sex therapy (PLISSIT model) Sexology Sexual dysfunction Erectile dysfunction Hypersexuality Hyposexuality Sexual medicine Sexual surrogate Sexually transmitted infection Identity and diversity Gender binary Gender identity Men who have sex with men Sexual identity Sexual orientation Women who have sex with women Law Age of consent Criminal transmission of HIV Child sexual abuse Incest Indecent exposure Obscenity Sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Rape Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual misconduct Sexual slavery Sexual violence History Blue Movie Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist sex wars Golden Age of Porn History of erotic depictions Sexual revolution Relationships and society Anarchism and love/sex Extramarital sex Family planning Flirting Free love Marriage Modesty Polyamory Premarital sex Promiscuity Romance Sex-positive movement Sexual abstinence Sexual addiction Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual objectification Sexual slang By country Ancient Rome China India Japan Philippines South Korea United States Sexual activities Conventional sex Anal sex Bareback BDSM Child sex Creampie Edging Erotic sexual denial Fetishism Fingering Fisting Gang bang Group sex Masturbation Mechanics of sex Nipple stimulation Non-penetrative sex Facial Foot fetishism Footjob Forced orgasm Frot Handjob Mammary intercourse Sumata Oral sex 69 Anilingus Cunnilingus Fellatio Irrumatio Paraphilia Pompoir Quickie Sex in space Sex positions Sexual fantasy Sexual fetishism Sexual intercourse Foreplay Sexual penetration Swinging Tribadism Urethral intercourse Urolagnia Virtual sex Cybersex Erotic talk Wet T-shirt contest Sex industry Red-light district Adult video games Erotica Pornography Film actor Prostitution Survival sex Sex museum Sex shop Sex tourism Child Female Sex worker Sex toy doll Strip club Webcam model Religion and sexuality Buddhism Christian demonology Daoism Islam Mormonism Sex magic  Human sexuality portal v t e Human sexuality and sexology Sexual relationship phenomena Asexuality Gray asexuality Bisexuality Casual relationship Casual sex Celibacy Celibacy syndrome Herbivore men Committed relationship Conventional sex Free love Foreplay Heterosexuality Homosexuality Hypersexuality Marriage One-night stand Polyamory Promiscuity Female Romantic love Romantic orientation Flirting Sex life Sexual abstinence Sexual orientation Sexual partner Single person Swinging Sexual dynamics Hypergamy Physical attractiveness Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual frustration Sociosexuality See also Sexual addiction Sex Addicts Anonymous Sexual jealousy Sex-positive movement Sexual surrogate Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125