"I Am Providence" redirects here. For the 2016 Nick Mamatas novel, see I Am Providence (Mamatas novel). H. P. Lovecraft: A Life Cover of the first edition Author S. T. Joshi Country United States Language English Subject H. P. Lovecraft Publisher Necronomicon Press Publication date 1996 Media type Print (Hardcover and Paperback) Pages 704 pp H. P. Lovecraft: A Life is a biography of H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937) by S. T. Joshi, first published by Necronomicon Press in 1996. The original one-volume edition was reissued in 2004, with a new afterword by Joshi. A new revised/uncut edition (as I Am Providence: The Life and Times of H.P. Lovecraft) (2 vols) has been issued in 2010 (Hippocampus Press); this restores 150,000 words cut for space reasons from the original edition, and is also thoroughly revised and updated in regard to new information on Lovecraft that has come to light since 1996. The book largely supplants earlier efforts such as L. Sprague de Camp's Lovecraft: A Biography (1975). According to his website, Joshi regards this book his most notable achievement to date, followed by his The Weird Tale.[1] Reception[edit] When first published in 1996, H. P. Lovecraft: A Life was regarded as a "meticulously researched"[2] biography of Lovecraft, taking account of all currently known facts about Lovecraft's life and work. It was met with critical praise; it elicited favorable comments from the horror author Ramsey Campbell and literary critic Harold Bloom,[3] and received a long and favorable review in The New York Review of Books from author Joyce Carol Oates, who called it "the definitive biography".[2] Awards[edit] H.P. Lovecraft: A Life was awarded the 1997 Bram Stoker Award for Best Non-Fiction from the Horror Writers Association. Notes[edit] ^ "S.T. Joshi: An Autobiography". Archived from the original on 2008-12-08. Retrieved 2009-02-15. ^ a b Joyce Carol Oates (October 31, 1996). "The King of Weird". The New York Review of Books. 43 (17). Retrieved 2009-02-15. ^ "H.P. Lovecraft: A Life". The H.P. Lovecraft Archive. Retrieved 2009-02-15. v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category This article about a biographical book on writers or poets is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e