H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life Cover artwork to the American and UK edition Author Michel Houellebecq Original title H. P. Lovecraft : Contre le monde, contre la vie Translator Dorna Khazeni Country France Language French Subject H. P. Lovecraft Publication date 1991 Published in English May 2005 Media type Print Pages 150 pp ISBN 1-932416-18-8 OCLC 60350259 H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life (French: H. P. Lovecraft : Contre le monde, contre la vie) is a work of literary criticism by French author Michel Houellebecq regarding the works of H. P. Lovecraft. The English-language edition for the American and UK market was translated by Dorna Khazeni and features an introduction by American novelist Stephen King. In some editions the book also includes[citation needed] two of Lovecraft's best known short stories: "The Call of Cthulhu" and "The Whisperer in Darkness." Overview[edit] In this early published work (which he calls his "first novel"), Houellebecq describes having discovered Lovecraft as a teenager and being struck by how each story was, as he describes, "an open slice of howling fear." He describes a fascination with Lovecraft's anti-modernity,[1] what he supposes is Lovecraft's profound hatred of life and philosophical denial of the real world; Houellebecq notes that his works include "not a single allusion to two of the realities to which we generally ascribe great importance: sex and money." He posits Lovecraft as an American existentialist for whom both life and death are meaningless. He also praises what he sees as Lovecraft's rejection of democracy and progressivism.[2] Also noted is Houellebecq's exegesis of Lovecraft's racial preoccupations, which he traces to a 24-month period during which Lovecraft lived in the comparatively racially mixed New York City of the 1920s,[3] where, Houellebecq says, Lovecraft learned to take "racism back to its essential and most profound core: fear." He notes the recurring image in Lovecraft's fiction of a mammoth, hideous city teeming with terrifying beings.[2] Houellebecq’s acceptance of Schopenhauer's philosophy [4] had a marked influence on his reaction to Lovecraft. References[edit] ^ Gessen, Keith (2005-04-18). "From Beyond: Michel Houellebecq, France's bard of sex and anomie, finds an unlikely kindred spirit in H. P. Lovecraft". New York. Retrieved 2008-05-21. ^ a b Hoberman, J. (2005-05-10). "The Fear: Michel Houellebecq gives the legendary Lovecraft a new platform". The Village Voice. Retrieved 2008-05-21. ^ Wolk, Douglas (2005-04-17). "Houellebecq on Lovecraft". New York Times. Retrieved 2008-05-21. ^ …we should take seriously Houellebecq’s engagement with Schopenhauer if we are to gain a fuller understanding of his diagnosis of our contemporary condition, and his proposed 'solutions'. (Douglas Morrey, Humanity and its Aftermath) v t e Works by Michel Houellebecq Novels Whatever Atomised Platform Lanzarote The Possibility of an Island The Map and the Territory Submission Serotonin Other H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life The Art of Struggle La Possibilité d'une île En présence de Schopenhauer v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category