This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2015) Headfirst Productions Type Private Industry Video games Founded 1998 Founder Mike Woodroffe Simon Woodroffe Defunct 2006 Headquarters Canwell, Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands, UK Website headfirst.co.uk Headfirst Productions was a British video game studio established by father and son Mike and Simon Woodroffe (Adventure Soft) in 1998. The studio was an independent developer of games for both the console and PC market. Contents 1 Games 2 Bankruptcy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Games[edit] Battle of the Planets (cancelled) Call of Cthulhu: Beyond the Mountains of Madness (cancelled) Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth (2005) Call of Cthulhu: Destiny's End (vaporware, cancelled) Call of Cthulhu: Tainted Legacy (cancelled) Deadlands (cancelled) Simon the Sorcerer 3D (2002) Bankruptcy[edit] After having published Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth, Headfirst had problems with publisher Bethesda Softworks regarding finances. Some time after that about half of the company left, so the second project's team (Call of Cthulhu: Destiny's End), along with some people from the Call of Cthulhu: Dark Corners of the Earth production team, stayed on board trying to keep working on the project, porting it to the next-gen consoles, while the directors were trying to secure a publishing deal for the game. After several months of struggle the company went into administration. Most of the staff went on to other West Midlands game companies, namely Codemasters, Eurocom and Sega Racing Studio. In February 2006, Headfirst Productions went into administration in an effort to pay off outstanding debts owed because of production costs associated with the many years of Cthulhu development, and other unsigned projects. Assets were liquidated, employees were laid off, and the company was dissolved less than a month later.[1] See also[edit] Adventure Soft References[edit] ^ "Headfirst Productions Company Profile". GameSpy. Archived from the original on 2007-11-16. Retrieved 2007-01-17. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Headfirst Productions' official website (archived)