Wikimedia disambiguation page For the ancient Greek city, see Helike. For the moon of Jupiter, see Helike (moon). Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e In Greek mythology, Helice (/ˈhɛlɪsiː/ (modern Greek pronunciation: [eˈlici]; Ancient Greek: Ἑλίκη [heˈlikɛː] Helike) means "willow"[1]) was a name of several women: Helice, nurse of the god Zeus and nurtured him in his infancy on Crete.[2] Her name suggests that she was a "willow-nymph", just as there were oak-tree nymphs and ash-nymphs (Dryads and Meliae). It is likely that she is the same as Ide. Helike, a nymph who became the wife of King Oenopion of Chios and mother by him of Melas, Talus, Maron, Euanthes, Salagus, Athamas[3] and Merope (Aero).[4] Helike, wife of Ion and mother of Bura. Ion built the city and named it after his wife. They were wed by her father Selinus. Helike, in antiquity, a common proper name for the constellation Ursa Major.[5] Notes[edit] ^ Robert Graves. The Greek Myths (1960), section 28 s.v. Orpheus ^ Aratus, Phaenomena 27 Archived 2005-04-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio 7.4.8 ^ Parthenius, Erotica Pathemata 20 ^ Aratus, Phaenomena, translation by A. W. Mair, G. R. Loeb References[edit] Aratus Solensis, Phaenomena translated by G. R. Mair. Loeb Classical Library Volume 129. London: William Heinemann, 1921. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Aratus Solensis, Phaenomena. G. R. Mair. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 1921. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. ISBN 0-674-99328-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio. 3 vols. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. This article includes a list of Greek mythological figures with the same or similar names. If an internal link for a specific Greek mythology article referred you to this page, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended Greek mythology article, if one exists.