Part of a series on Heraldic achievement External devices in addition to the central coat of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto  Heraldry portal v t e In heraldic achievements, the helmet or helm is situated above the shield and bears the torse and crest. The style of helmet displayed varies according to rank and social status, and these styles developed over time, in step with the development of actual military helmets.[1][2] In some traditions, especially German and Nordic heraldry, two or three helmets (and sometimes more) may be used in a single achievement of arms, each representing a fief to which the bearer has a right. For this reason, the helmets and crests in German and Nordic arms are considered to be essential to the coat of arms and are never separated from it. Open-visored or barred helmets are typically reserved to the highest ranks of nobility, while lesser nobility and burghers typically assume closed helms.[2] While these classifications remained relatively constant, the specific forms of all these helmets varied and evolved over time.[2] In ecclesiastical heraldry, bishops and other clergy use a mitre or other rank-appropriate ecclesiastical hat in place of a helmet.[3] Contents 1 History 2 By traditions 2.1 General 2.2 United Kingdom 2.3 Russia 2.4 Ecclesiastical 2.5 Canada 2.6 Belgium 3 Notes 4 References History[edit] The evolution of heraldic helmet shaped followed the evolution of helmet design, especially jousting helmets, from the 14th to 16th centuries. The armorials of the second half of the 13th century do not include helmets. Helmets are shown as integral part of coats of in the first half of the 14th century (Codex Manesse, Zürich armorial). These helmets are still of the "great helm" type, without movable visor. Heraldic helmets become diversified with the development of dedicated jousting armour during the 15th and 16th century. The development is halted with the abandonment of jousting as a courtly practice, in the early years of the 17th century. From that period, the various types of heraldic helmet are purely driven by convention, and no longer tied to improvements or fashions in armoury. The practice of indicating rank through the display of barred or open-face helmets appears around 1615.[4] As jousting with lances was supplanted by tourneying with maces, the object being to knock the opponent's crest off his helmet, the fully enclosed helmet gave way to helmets with enlarged visual openings with only a few bars to protect the face. These barred helmets were restricted by the imperial chancellery in Vienna to the nobility and certain doctors of law or theology, while the jousting helm was freely adopted by anyone.[5] The direction a helmet faces and the number of bars on the grille have been ascribed special significance in later manuals, but this is not a period[clarification needed] practice.[6] A king's helmet, a golden helmet shown affronté with the visor raised, crowned with a royal crown, became adopted by the kings of Prussia.[6] Historically[clarification needed], the helmet was not specifically granted in an achievement of arms, but was naturally assumed by appropriate rank as a matter of "inherent right", so a helmet with torse and mantling would not be misplaced even above a shield which had no crest to place above it.[7] When multiple crests need to be depicted, the convention in English heraldry is to draw the crests above a single helmet, each being separated from it, while in German heraldry, where multiple crests appear frequently after the 16th century, each crest is always treated as inseparable from its own helmet and turned in agreement with the helmet.[8] In continental Europe, multiple helmets were usually turned inward, with the center helm (if an odd number) turned affronté; while in Scandinavian heraldry the helmets were usually turned outward.[9] Heraldic combinations were driven to extremes in the 18th century, e.g. the arms of the last margraves of Brandenburg-Ansbach (Charles Alexander, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach, r. 1737–1791) consist of a shield with 21 quarterings topped with a record thirteen helmets and crests.[10] By traditions[edit] General[edit] Open or barred helmet, reserved for members of the nobility Closed or tilting helm, used by medieval knights, also adopted by English esquires and gentlemen, as well as on burgher arms United Kingdom[edit] The usage of heraldic helmets in Britain is as follows: gold helmet with bars for the royal family; silver helmet with gold bars for peers; steel helmet with gold bars for the non-peerage Scottish feudal baron; open steel helmet shown affronté for knights and baronets; steel tournament helm for Scottish clan chiefs; closed steel helmet for esquires and gentlemen.[11] Monarch and family Peer Baronet or knight Esquire or gentleman Russia[edit] The norms of Russian heraldry regarding helmets diverge greatly from the Western European tradition. Alongside the traditional Western open helmet (silver with gold details for titled nobility, steel with gold details for everyone else), as well as the closed helmet sometimes granted by the state, "ethnic" helmets were also in use, not found anywhere else. From the 19th century onwards, ancient Russian families began to use the yerikhonka [ru], the "cap of Jericho", a medieval conical Slavic helmet similar to the Middle Eastern shishak. These followed their own colour system, not corresponding with the use of tinctures for Western helmets: non-titled nobles would use a steel yerikhonka with silver details, barons and counts steel with golden details, knyaz families silver with golden details. The House of Romanov itself used a unique yerikhonka called the helmet of Alexander Nevsky [ru], based on the royal helmet of Michael I (once mistakenly believed to have belonged to Alexander Nevsky, hence the name). Asian noble families non-Slavic origin who were integrated in the Empire were also allowed an ethnic helmet, usually a misyurka [ru], similar to the yerikhonka in shape but rounder and with an obtuse tip. [12] In the modern Russian Federation, the Russian Heraldic Council allows both Western and ethnic helmets (called sheloms in modern Russian heraldic language), but only in their simplest forms, and stripped of any details that may be perceived as symbols of nobility. For Western helmets, this means using commoner kettle hats as opposed to the more aristocratic open and close helmets, while sheloms are to be used without nasal bars, cheekpieces or neck guards, which were sometimes found on older "ethnic" helmets. On the other hand, a commoner helmet may be complemented with a mail coif below. All colours except for steel are forbidden, with the exception of the lining, for which other tinctures may be used (purpure is recommended). However, none of these restrictions apply to direct descendants of old Russian aristocracy, who can use the same helmets as their ancestors alongside the rest of their family arms. [13] Both in Imperial and republican Russian heraldry, the direction of the helmet plays no role: whether the helmet is portrayed affronty or turned to the right depends on the shape of the crest. Open Western helmet: coat of arms of the Pushkin family. Closed Western helmet: coat of arms of the Skornyakov family [ru]. Aristocratic yerikhonka: lesser coat of arms of the Russian Empire. Aristocratic misyurka: coat of arms of the Kazakh Chingis family [ru]. Commoner ethnic helmet: coat of arms of Vladimir Kopelev, knight of the For Merit to the Fatherland order. Commoner Western helmet: coat of arms of Nikolai Likhachev, citizen of Peterhof. Ecclesiastical[edit] In the Roman Catholic Church, clerics entitled to a coat of arms use a galero instead of a helmet, which is considered too belligerent for men in holy orders. Galero gules with fifteen tassels per side, used by cardinals in place of a helmet (and patriarchal cross) Galero vert with ten tassels per side, used by archbishops in place of a helmet (and patriarchal cross) Galero vert with six tassels per side, used by bishops in place of a helmet (and single-barred cross) Galero sable with one tassel per side (and blank shield), used by armigerous priests in place of a helmet In the same way, clerics of the Anglican Communion entitled to a coat of arms use a similar black hat in place of a helmet. Hat sable with cords purpure and three tassels per side, used by Anglican archdeacons in place of a helmet Hat sable with cords purpure and three tassels gules per side, used by Anglican deans in place of a helmet Hat sable with three tassels gules per side, used by Anglican canons in place of a helmet Hat sable with one tassel per side, used by Anglican priests in place of a helmet Canada[edit] In Canadian heraldry, helmets play little role and are not blazoned; as such, the armiger can display their helm in whatever style they choose. One notable example of a non-traditional helmet used in Canadian heraldry is the arms of Julie Payette, a former governor general of Canada, which bears an astronaut's helmet as the helm.[14] Other examples include nasal helmets,[15] Corinthian helmets,[16] and parka hoods.[17] The armorial achievement of Julie Payette notably features an astronaut helmet, which would be considered nontraditional in most other heraldic traditions. Belgium[edit] In Belgian heraldry, barred helms are most commonly used, and are not reserved for the nobility like in some jurisdictions. They most often have gold bars, as well as a gold collar and trim. They are often lined and attached.[18] Barred helm with gold bars, collar, and trim. All silver barred helm. Jousting or tourney helms are sometimes also used, but are rarer. They are the only alternative accepted by the Council of Heraldry and Vexillology to the barred helmet.[19] Notes[edit] ^ Woodcock (1988), p. 202. ^ a b c Fox-Davies (1909), p. 303. ^ Woodcock (1988), p. 75. ^ Fox-Davies (1909), p. 319. ^ Neubecker (1976), pp. 148, 162. ^ a b Neubecker (1976), p. 148. ^ Fox-Davies (1909), p. 58. ^ Fox-Davies (1909), pp. 322-323. ^ Fox-Davies (1909), p. 323. ^ Neubecker (1976), p. 165. ^ Iain Moncrieffe and Don Pottinger (1953). Simple Heraldry Cheerfully Illustrated. Thomas Nelson and Sons. p. 58.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ Структура герба: российская практика. Медведев М.Ю. Геральдика // Специальные исторические дисциплины. СПб, 2003. ^ Основные принципы оформления личного герба в современной России. Гражданская геральдика сегодня. ^ Payette, Julie (Individual), Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada ^ Wallace, Stephen Gregory (Individual), Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada ^ Eppich, Helmut Michael (Individual), Public Register of Arms, Flags, and Badges of Canada ^ Irniq, Peter (Individual), Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada ^ Council of Heraldry and Vexillology handbook (Read online) ^ Council of Heraldry and Vexillology handbook (Read online) References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heraldic helmets. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles; Graham Johnston (1909, 2004). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 1-4179-0630-8 Neubecker, Ottfried (1976). Heraldry: Sources, Symbols and Meaning. Maidenhead, England: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-046308-5 Woodcock, Thomas; John Martin Robinson (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-211658-4 v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources v t e Helmets Individual historical helmets Agighiol Agris Benty Grange Broe Canterbury Ciumeşti Coppergate Coțofenești Coventry Sallet Crosby Garrett Emesa Gevninge Gjermundbu Guilden Morden Guisborough Hallaton Hellvi Horncastle Iron Gates Lokrume Meyrick Newstead Nijmegen Peretu Pioneer Ribchester Shorwell Staffordshire Sutton Hoo Tjele Veksø Venetian Waterloo Witcham Gravel Yarm Combat Ancient Attic Boar's tusk Boeotian Chalcidian Coolus Corinthian Galea Illyrian Imperial Kegelhelm Konos Late Roman ridge Montefortino Negau Phrygian Pilos Shmarjet Medieval and Early Modern Armet Aventail Barbute Bascinet Burgonet Cervelliere Close Dragoon Enclosed Falling buffe Frog-mouth Great Hounskull Kabuto Katapu Kettle Kulah khud Lamellenhelm Lobster-tailed pot Mempo Morion Nasal Paseki Pickelhaube Sallet Secrete Spangenhelm Takula tofao Turban Viking 1914–1945 Adrian Brodie Bulgarian M36 Czechoslovakian M32 Danish M1923 German Stahlhelm Greek M1934/39 HSAT Italian M33 M42 Duperite M1 M1C Mk II talker helmet Mk III Netherlands M34 Polish wz. 31 Portuguese M1940 RAC SSh-36 SSh-39 and SSh-40 Spanish M21 Spanish M26 Spanish M34 Spanish M42 SSK 90 Swedish M26 Swedish M37 Swiss L'Eplattenier Swiss M18 Type 92 Tetsubo 1945–1980 CABAL II CCB Czechoslovak Vz. 53 Helmet CG634 GK80 Hungarian M70 JK 96 Mº 44 E.T.A. M59/85 M63 M76 Para Mk IV Mk 6 Modèle 1951 Modèle 1978 MPC-1 OR-201 Paratrooper Polish M50 SSh-60 SSh-68 Swiss M71 Type 66 1980–2000 M92 GOLFO Head Gear System Iraqi M80 Iraqi M90 M59/85 M87 PASGT QGF03 Sfera SPECTRA 2001–Present A2 Helmet Advanced Combat Helmet BK-3 Helmet ECH (Australia) ECH (US) FAST Lightweight Helmet MICH Mk 7 IHPS Athletic Batting Coolflo Bicycle Stackhat Cricket Equestrian Gridiron football Eyeshield Revolution Hockey Lacrosse Motorcycle Racing Scrum cap Ski Work Custodian Diving Firefighter's Hard hat Riot protection Welding Other Flight Helmet cover Mitznefet Heraldic use Horned Mahiole Tarnhelm Pith American fiber Winged Zuckerman