Banners of Knights of the Thistle displayed in St. Giles' Cathedral In heraldry and vexillology, a heraldic flag is a flag containing coats of arms, heraldic badges, or other devices used for personal identification. Heraldic flags include banners, standards, pennons and their variants, gonfalons, guidons, and pinsels. Specifications governing heraldic flags vary from country to country, and have varied over time. Contents 1 Types 1.1 Pennon 1.2 Banner 1.3 Heraldic Standard 1.4 Banderole 1.5 Gonfalone 1.6 Guidon 1.7 Pinsel 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading Types[edit] Pennon[edit] Main article: Pennon The pennon is a small elongated flag, either pointed or swallow-tailed (when swallow-tailed it may be described as a banderole[1]). It was charged with the heraldic badge or some other armorial ensign of the owner, and displayed on his own lance, as a personal ensign. The pennoncelle was a modification of the pennon.[2] In contemporary Scots usage, the pennon is 120 cm (four feet) in length. It tapers either to a point or to a rounded end as the owner chooses. It is assigned by the Lord Lyon King of Arms to any armiger who wishes to apply for it.[3] Banner[edit] Main article: Banner of arms Heraldic banners at the funeral of Elizabeth I. The queen's casket is escorted by mourners bearing the banners of her ancestors' arms marshalled with the arms of their wives.[4] The banner of arms (also simply called banner) is square or oblong and larger than the pennon, bearing the entire coat of arms of the owner, composed precisely as upon a shield but in a square or rectangular shape.[2] In the olden time, when a Knight had distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry, it was the custom to mark his meritorious conduct by prompt advancement on the very field of battle. In such a case, the point or points of the good Knight’s Pennon were rent off, and thus the ... small Flag was reduced to the square form of the Banner, by which thenceforth he was to be distinguished — Charles Boutell, The Handbook to English Heraldry[2] The banners of members of Orders of Chivalry are typically displayed in the Order's chapel. Banners of Knights of the Order of the Thistle are hung in the 1911 chapel of the Order in St Giles High Kirk in Edinburgh.[5] Banners of Knights of the Order of the Garter are displayed in St George's Chapel at Windsor Castle. From Victorian times Garter banners have been approximately 5 feet by 5 feet.[6] Banners became available to all English armigers as a result of a report by Garter to the Earl Marshal dated 29 January 1906. The report stated that the size of banner for Esquires and Gentlemen should be considered in the future.[7] Until that date they were available to all noblemen and knights banneret.[8] In 2011, Garter Woodcock said that the banner for an Esquire or Gentleman should be the same size as a Marquess’s and those of a lower rank down to Knight, that is, 3 feet by 3 feet.[7] In Scotland, the size of personal banners, excluding any fringes, are specified by the Lord Lyon.[3] Scottish Banners Rank Banner Size The Sovereign 1.50 metres square Dukes 1.25 metres square Earls 1.10 metres square Viscounts and Barons 1.00 metres square Baronets and Feudal Barons 0.90 metres square Other Armigers 70 centimetres wide x 85 centimetres high[3] Heraldic Standard[edit] See also: List of royal standards Standard of Sir Henry de Stafford, about 1475, features the Stafford knot and Bohun swan heraldic badges differenced with a crescent gules for cadency. The standard bears the Cross of Saint George for England. Black and red (sable and gules) are Sir Henry's livery colours.[9] The heraldic standard appeared about the middle of the fourteenth century, and was in general use by personages of high rank in the two following centuries. The standard appears to have been adopted for the special purpose of displaying badges. "The badge was worn on his livery by a servant as retainer, and consequently the standard by which he mustered in camp was of the livery colours, and bore the badge, with both of which the retainer was familiar."[2] Heraldic flags that are used by individuals, like a monarch, as a means of identification are often called standards (e.g. royal standard). These flags, more usually banners, however are not standards in a strict heraldic sense but have come to be known as such. A standard is not rectangular: it tapers, usually from 4 feet down to 2 feet, and the fly edge is rounded (lanceolate). In England any armiger who has been granted a badge is entitled to fly a standard. The medieval English standard was larger than the other flags, and its size varied with the owner’s rank. The Cross of St. George usually appeared next to the staff, and the rest of the field was generally divided per fess (horizontally) into two colours, in most cases the livery colours of the owner. "With some principal figure or device occupying a prominent position, various badges are displayed over the whole field, a motto, which is placed bend-wise, having divided the standard into compartments. The edges are fringed throughout, and the extremity is sometimes swallow-tailed, and sometimes rounded."[2] The Royal standards of England were used by the kings of England as a headquarters symbol for their armies. Standard of the Leonese Monarchs during the Middle Ages (until the 13th century). It's one of the oldest heraldic flags; the documentation for the colours dates from c. 1150.[10] The Oriflamme was the royal standard of the King of France during the Middle Ages. In Scotland, a standard requires a separate grant by the Lord Lyon. Such a grant is only made if certain conditions are met. The length of the standard depends upon one’s noble rank.[3] An example of a standard suitable for a Scottish baronet (who is, in this case, also the chief of Clan Macdonald of Sleat). Scottish Standards Rank Standard Length The Sovereign 21 feet Dukes 20 feet Marquises 18 feet Earls 16 feet Viscounts 15 feet Lords of Parliament 13 feet Baronets 12 feet Knights and Feudal Barons 10 feet[3] The modern use of the heraldic standards now used as the flag of the Master Gunner, St James's Park[11] and the flag of the Port of London Authority (used by the Chairman and the Vice Chairman).[12] Banderole[edit] Main article: Banderole A Banderole (Fr. for a "little banner"), has both a literal descriptive meaning for its use by knights and ships, and is also heraldic device for representing bishops.[1] Gonfalone[edit] Royal Banner of the King of Denmark in the 14th century, based on the Royal Arms of Denmark. Main article: Gonfalone A gonfalone or gonfalon is a vertically hung banner emblazoned with a coat of arms. Gonfalons have wide use in civic, religious, and academic heraldry. The term originated in Florence, Italy, where communities, or neighborhoods, traditionally displayed gonfaloni in public ceremonies. Guidon[edit] The Scots guidon is similar in shape to the standard and pennon. At 6.5' long, it is smaller than the standard and twice the size of the pennon. Guidons are assigned by the Lord Lyon to those individuals who qualify for a grant of supporters to their Arms and to other individuals who have a following such as individuals who occupy a position of leadership or a long-term official position commanding the loyalty of more than a handful of people. The Guidon tapers to a round, unsplit end at the fly.[3] A guidon can also refer to a cavalry troop's banner, such as that which survived the Custer massacre.[13] Pinsel[edit] The Scottish pinsel is triangular in shape, 2.5 feet high at the hoist and 4.5 feet in width tapering to a point. This is the flag denoting a person to whom a Clan Chief has delegated authority for a particular occasion, such as a clan gathering when the Chief is absent. This flag is allotted only to Chiefs or very special Chieftain-Barons for practical use, and only upon the specific authority of the Lord Lyon King of Arms.[3] See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heraldic banners. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Heraldic flags. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Banners of the members of the Garter Royal standards of Canada Flag of the Governor General of Canada Flags of the Lieutenant Governors of Canada Royal Standard of Norway Royal Standard of Spain Royal Standard of the United Kingdom Royal standards of England Royal Banner of England Royal Banner of Scotland Oriflamme Personal Command Sign of the Swedish Monarch Queen's Personal Australian Flag Flag of the Governor-General of Australia Flags of the Governors of Australia Queen's Personal New Zealand Flag Flag of the Governor-General of New Zealand Japanese heraldic banners: Fūrinkazan Hata-jirushi Nobori Sashimono Uma-jirushi Notes[edit] ^ a b Chisholm 1911, p. 312. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChisholm1911 (help) ^ a b c d e Boutell 1914, pp. 246–251 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBoutell1914 (help) ^ a b c d e f g lyon-court.org harvnb error: no target: CITEREFlyon-court.org (help) ^ From a manuscript of 1603. ^ Burnett & Hodgson 2001, pp. 6–7. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBurnettHodgson2001 (help) ^ Johnston 2011. sfn error: no target: CITEREFJohnston2011 (help) ^ a b Woodcock 2011 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWoodcock2011 (help) ^ Berry 1830, p. [page needed] harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBerry1830 (help) ^ Boutell 1914, p. 251. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBoutell1914 (help) ^ Lipskey 1972, p. [page needed] harvnb error: no target: CITEREFLipskey1972 (help) ^ "United Kingdom - Army Flags". flags.net. Retrieved 9 January 2020. ^ "United Kingdom - Civilian Marine Services". flags.net. Retrieved 8 January 2020. ^ "Custer's 'Last Flag' sells for $2.2 million". nbcnews.com. 10 December 2010. Retrieved 11 April 2018. References[edit] Berry, W. (1830). Encyclopaedia heraldica or complete dictionary of heraldry. 1. London: Sherwood, Gilbert & Piper. Boutell, Charles (1914). Fox-Davies, A. C. (ed.). The Handbook to English Heraldry (11th ed.). London: Reeves & Turner. Burnett, C.J.; Hodgson, L. (2001). Stall Plates of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle in the Chapel of the Order within St Giles' Cathedral, The High Kirk of Edinburgh. Edinburgh: Heraldry Society of Scotland. ISBN 0-9525258-3-6. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Banderole" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 312.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link) Johnston, L. (2011). "Emperor Akihito and the heraldic achievements of the Garter". Lipskey, Glenn Edgard (1972). "The Chronicle of Alfonso the Emperor, The Poem of Almeria". Retrieved 15 December 2014. "The Court of the Lord Lyon - Further Guidance on Flags". lyon-court.org. Retrieved 3 March 2019. Woodcock, T (2011). "Garter King of Arms". College of Arms. Personal communication dated 23 December 2011.[full citation needed] Attribution This article incorporates text from A. C. Fox-Davies' 1914 edition of Charles Boutell's The Handbook to English Heraldry at Project Gutenberg, which is in the public domain in the United States. Further reading[edit] Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1976) [1904]. The Art of Heraldry (facsimile ed.). Arno Press. Nelson, Phil (1 February 2010). "Banderole". Dictionary of heraldic terms. OED staff (September 2011). "banderol[e] | bandrol | bannerol, n.". Oxford English Dictionary (Second 1989; online version September 2011. ed.). Earlier version first published in New English Dictionary, 1885. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources v t e Vexillology Basic topics Vexillography Glossary of vexillology Heraldry Tincture Vexilloid Design features British ensign Canadian pale Canton Chevron Heraldic flag Nordic cross Pride flag Saltire Southern cross Spanish fess Triband Tricolour Color schemes Pan-African Pan-Arab Pan-Slavic Tinctures in heraldry Organizations Argentina Vexillology Association Australian National Flag Association Croatian Heraldic and Vexillological Association Flag Institute Flags of the World Genealogical Society of Ireland Great Waters Association of Vexillology International Federation of Vexillological Associations Italian Centre of Vexillological Studies Macedonian Heraldry Society Nordic Flag Society North American Vexillological Association Southern African Vexillological Association Spanish Society of Vexillology State Council of Heraldry Ukrainian Heraldry Society William Crampton Library v t e Lists of flags Master list Reference list State-related Arab states Civil flag Country Date of Adoption Formerly independent Heads of state Historical flags State flag State flags and ensigns Sovereign Special and fictional Unrecognized Mobile military Armed Forces Army & Ground Forces Air Forces Air Forces Roundels Air Forces Fin Flashes Border & Coast Guard Forces Maritime Ministry of Defense Naval Ensigns Naval Jack Police Flag Mobile civilian Civil air Civil and Merchant Navy Civil ensign Pilot boat flags and ensigns Yacht flags and ensigns Other entities Active autonomist and secessionist movements Cities Country subdivisions Cultural Dependent territories Ethnic Gay pride and Lesbian Bisexual Transgender flags Micronations Political Religious By design By elements Animals Astronomical Bicolor Borders British ensigns Buildings Canton Circles Color by number by combination Crescents Crosses (Nordic) Devices Diamonds Geographical Headgear Inscriptions Arabic English Latin Russian Spanish Nautical Plants Solids Stars Triangles Tribands Two-sided Weapons By shape Non-quadrilateral Proportions By nations Argentina Armenia Australia state governors Austria states Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada lieutenant governors Chile China Hong Kong Macau Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Dem. Rep. Congo Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France regions Brittany Île-de-France Occitanie French Empire Germany states districts municipalities Georgia Greece Haiti Hungary Iceland India states Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan prefectures municipalities Kazakhstan Kenya Korea North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malaysia Mauritius Mexico Malta Moldova Morocco Montenegro Myanmar Netherlands provinces municipalities New Zealand Nepal North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines provinces Poland naval and maritime voivodeships Portugal Romania Russia federal subjects Sakha Russian Navy Serbia Kosovo Singapore South Africa Soviet Union republics Soviet Navy Spain autonomous communities provinces Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Cornwall Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands British Empire United States states and territories Puerto Rico CSA Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) By continent Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries. v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories  Heraldry portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125