Historical profession This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in French. (October 2017) Click [show] for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated page}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish. (October 2017) Click [show] for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated page}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. This article is about heralds of arms. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Pictures of heralds from the 14th–17th century, from H. Ströhl's Heraldischer Atlas Heralds, wearing tabards, in procession to St. George's Chapel, Windsor Castle for the annual service of the Order of the Garter in 2006. (l-r) Wales Herald of Arms Extraordinary (Michael Siddons), Somerset Herald of Arms in Ordinary (David White), Maltravers Herald of Arms Extraordinary (John Robinson), York Herald of Arms in Ordinary (Henry Paston-Bedingfeld), Windsor Herald of Arms in Ordinary (William Hunt). Herald Gelre of the Duke of Gueldres (around 1380) Bavarian herald Joerg Rugenn wearing a tabard of the Coat of arms of Bavaria, around 1510. A 14th-century illustration showing an English herald approaching a troop of Scottish soldiers – an incident of the Anglo-Scottish Wars. Tabard worn by a herald in the College of Arms A herald, or a herald of arms, is an officer of arms, ranking between pursuivant and king of arms. The title is commonly applied more broadly to all officers of arms. Heralds were originally messengers sent by monarchs or noblemen to convey messages or proclamations—in this sense being the predecessors of modern diplomats. In the Hundred Years' War, French heralds challenged King Henry V to fight. During the Battle of Agincourt, the English herald and the French herald, Montjoie, watched the battle together from a nearby hill; both agreed that the English were the victors, and Montjoie provided King Henry V, who thus earned the right to name the battle, with the name of the nearby castle.[1] Like other officers of arms, a herald would often wear a surcoat, called a tabard, decorated with the coat of arms of his master. It was possibly due to their role in managing the tournaments of the Late Middle Ages that heralds came to be associated with the regulation of the knights' coats of arms. Heralds have been employed by kings and large landowners, principally as messengers and ambassadors. Heralds were required to organise, announce and referee the contestants at a tournament.[2] This practice of heraldry became increasingly important and further regulated over the years, and in several countries around the world it is still overseen by heralds. In the United Kingdom heralds are still called upon at times to read proclamations publicly; for which they still wear tabards emblazoned with the royal coat of arms. There are active official heralds today in several countries, including the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, Canada, and the Republic of South Africa. In England and Scotland most heralds are full-time employees of the sovereign and are called "Heralds of Arms in Ordinary". Temporary appointments can be made of "Heralds of Arms Extraordinary". These are often appointed for a specific major state occasions, such as a coronation. The Canadian Heraldic Authority has created the position of "Herald of Arms Emeritus" with which to honor long-serving or distinguished heraldists. In Scotland, some Scottish clan chiefs, the heads of great noble houses, still appoint private officers of arms to handle cases of heraldic or genealogical importance of clan members, although these are usually pursuivants. In addition, many orders of chivalry have heralds attached to them. These heralds may have some heraldic duties but are more often merely ceremonial in nature. Heralds which were primarily ceremonial in nature, especially after the decline of chivalry, were also appointed in various nations for specific events such as a coronation as additions to the pageantry of these occasions. In the Netherlands, heralds are appointed for the Dutch monarch's inauguration where they wore their tabards until 1948; these heralds proclaim the inauguration ceremony to have been completed to those inside and outside the Nieuwe Kerk. Contents 1 English Heralds 1.1 English Heralds of Arms in Ordinary 1.2 English Heralds of Arms Extraordinary 2 Scottish Heralds 2.1 Scottish Heralds of Arms in Ordinary 2.2 Scottish Heralds of Arms Extraordinary 3 Canadian Heralds 3.1 Canadian Heralds of Arms In Ordinary 3.2 Canadian Heralds of Arms Extraordinary 3.3 Canadian Heralds of Arms Emeritus 4 Indian Empire Herald of Arms Extraordinary 5 See also 6 References 7 External links English Heralds[edit] English Heralds of Arms in Ordinary[edit] Richmond Herald of Arms in Ordinary Chester Herald of Arms in Ordinary Lancaster Herald of Arms in Ordinary York Herald of Arms in Ordinary Somerset Herald of Arms in Ordinary Windsor Herald of Arms in Ordinary English Heralds of Arms Extraordinary[edit] Arundel Herald of Arms Extraordinary Beaumont Herald of Arms Extraordinary Maltravers Herald of Arms Extraordinary New Zealand Herald of Arms Extraordinary Norfolk Herald of Arms Extraordinary Surrey Herald of Arms Extraordinary Wales Herald of Arms Extraordinary Scottish Heralds[edit] Scottish Heralds of Arms in Ordinary[edit] Albany Herald of Arms in Ordinary Marchmont Herald of Arms in Ordinary Rothesay Herald of Arms in Ordinary Snawdoun Herald of Arms in Ordinary Scottish Heralds of Arms Extraordinary[edit] Angus Herald of Arms Extraordinary Islay Herald of Arms in Extraordinary Orkney Herald of Arms Extraordinary Ross Herald of Arms Extraordinary Canadian Heralds[edit] Canadian Heralds of Arms In Ordinary[edit] Chief Herald of Canada Assiniboine Herald of Arms in Ordinary Athabaska Herald of Arms in Ordinary Coppermine Herald of Arms in Ordinary Fraser Herald of Arms in Ordinary Miramichi Herald of Arms in Ordinary Saguenay Herald of Arms in Ordinary Saint-Laurent Herald of Arms in Ordinary Canadian Heralds of Arms Extraordinary[edit] Albion Herald of Arms Extraordinary Capilano Herald of Arms Extraordinary Cowichan Herald of Arms Extraordinary Dauphin Herald of Arms Extraordinary Niagara Herald of Arms Extraordinary Rouge Herald of Arms Extraordinary Canadian Heralds of Arms Emeritus[edit] Outaouais Herald of Arms Emeritus Rideau Herald of Arms Emeritus Indian Empire Herald of Arms Extraordinary[edit] Delhi Herald of Arms Extraordinary See also[edit] The Court of the Lord Lyon Town crier References[edit] ^ Keegan, John. The Face of Battle, 1983, Penguin Classics, ISBN 0-14-004897-9, pp 74, 77, 104–105 ^ The Historical Atlas of Knights and Castles, Ian Barnes, 2007 pp.176&177. External links[edit] Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Herald . The Court of the Lord Lyon The College of Arms The Canadian Heraldic Authority The Office of the Chief Herald of Ireland Genealogy & Heraldry Bill, 2006 Introduced in the Irish Senate to provide a sound legislative basis for Ireland's heraldic authority. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125