For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Hesperus as Personification of the Evening Star by Anton Raphael Mengs (1765). In Greek mythology, Hesperus (/ˈhɛspərəs/; Ancient Greek: Ἕσπερος, romanized: Hésperos) is the Evening Star, the planet Venus in the evening. He is the son of the dawn goddess Eos (Roman Aurora) and is the half-brother of her other son, Phosphorus (also called Eosphorus; the "Morning Star"). Hesperus' Roman equivalent is Vesper (cf. "evening", "supper", "evening star", "west"[1]). By one account Hesperus' father was Cephalus, a mortal, while Phosphorus' was the star god Astraios. Other sources, however, state that Hesperus was the brother of Atlas, and thus the son of Iapetus.[2] Contents 1 Variant names 2 "Hesperus is Phosphorus" 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Variant names[edit] Hesperus is the personification of the "evening star", the planet Venus in the evening. His name is sometimes conflated with the names for his brother, the personification of the planet as the "morning star" Eosphorus (Greek Ἐωσφόρος, "bearer of dawn") or Phosphorus (Ancient Greek: Φωσφόρος, "bearer of light", often translated as "Lucifer" in Latin), since they are all personifications of the same planet Venus. "Heosphoros" in the Greek Septuagint and "Lucifer" in Jerome's Latin Vulgate were used to translate the Hebrew "Helel" (Venus as the brilliant, bright or shining one), "son of Shahar (Dawn)" in the Hebrew version of Isaiah 14:12. Eosphorus/Hesperus was said to be the father of Ceyx[3] and Daedalion.[4] In some sources, he is also said to be the father of the Hesperides.[5] "Hesperus is Phosphorus"[edit] Main article: Frege's Puzzle In the philosophy of language, "Hesperus is Phosphorus" is a famous sentence in relation to the semantics of proper names. Gottlob Frege used the terms "the evening star" (der Abendstern) and "the morning star" (der Morgenstern) to illustrate his distinction between sense and reference, and subsequent philosophers changed the example to "Hesperus is Phosphorus" so that it utilized proper names. Saul Kripke used the sentence to posit that the knowledge of something necessary (in this case the identity of Hesperus and Phosphorus) could be empirical rather than knowable a priori. See also[edit] Earendel Hesperides Lucifer, the Latin name for the Morning Star The Wreck of the Hesperus Aspect of Venus Notes[edit] ^ Collins Latin Dictionary plus Grammar, p. 231. ISBN 0-06-053690-X. ^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica 4.27.1. ^ Hyginus, Fabulae, 65 ^ Ovid. Metamorphoses. Book XI, 295. ^ Servius. ad Aen. 4,484. References[edit] Diodorus Siculus, The Library of History translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer's Web Site Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Hyginus, Fabulae from The Myths of Hyginus translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Maurus Servius Honoratus, In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses translated by Brookes More (1859-1942). Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Publius Ovidius Naso, Metamorphoses. Hugo Magnus. Gotha (Germany). Friedr. Andr. Perthes. 1892. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library. External links[edit] "Hesperus" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 13 (11th ed.). 1911. v t e Venus Outline of Venus Geography General Arachnoid Atmosphere Dune fields Features Mapping of Venus Regions Regio Alpha Regio Asteria Regio Beta Regio Ovda Regio Terrae Aphrodite Terra Ishtar Terra Lada Terra Mountains and volcanoes Abeona Mons Akna Montes Anala Mons Artemis Corona Ba'het Corona Boala Corona Ciuacoatl Mons Fand Mons Fotla Corona Gula Mons Heng-O Corona Iaso Tholus Irnini Mons Jaszai Patera Maat Mons Maxwell Montes Nightingale Corona Onatah Corona Ozza Mons Pavlova Corona Quetzalpetlatl Corona Pancake dome Renpet Mons Sacajawea Patera Sachs Patera Sapas Mons Santa Corona Scalloped margin dome Siddons Patera Sif Mons Skadi Mons Theia Mons Ushas Mons Zisa Corona List of coronae on Venus Plains and plateaus Guinevere Planitia Lakshmi Planum Sedna Planitia Canyons and valleys Aikhulu Chasma Artemis Chasma Baltis Vallis Dali Chasma Devana Chasma Diana Chasma Ganis Chasma Craters Addams Adivar Agnesi Alcott Ariadne Aurelia Balch Barton Buck Cleopatra Cunitz Danilova De Lalande Dickinson Goeppert-Mayer Golubkina Grimke Gregory Guilbert Isabella Jeanne Maria Celeste Mariko Mead Meitner Merit Ptah Mona Lisa Nanichi Riley Ruth Stefania Wanda Wheatley Yablochkina Other Geodynamics Geology Surface features Venus snow Venusquake Moons Neith (hypothetical moon) Astronomy General Aspects Orbit Phases Transits 1631 1639 1769 1874 1882 2004 2012 Asteroids Venus-crosser asteroid 2002 VE68 Exploration Past Sputnik programme Sputnik 7 Venera program Venera 1 Sputnik 19 Sputnik 20 Sputnik 21 Kosmos 21 Venera 1964A Kosmos 27 Venera 2 Venera 3 Kosmos 96 Venera 4 Kosmos 167 Venera 5 Venera 6 Venera 7 Venera 8 Kosmos 482 Venera 9 Venera 10 Venera 11 Venera 12 Venera 13 Venera 14 Venera 15 Venera 16 Mariner program Mariner 1 Mariner 2 Mariner 5 Mariner 10 Zond program Zond 1 Pioneer Venus Pioneer Venus Orbiter / Pioneer 12 Pioneer Venus Multiprobe / Pioneer 13 Vega program Vega 1 Vega 2 Magellan Galileo Cassini–Huygens IKAROS MESSENGER Shin'en Venus Express Current Akatsuki BepiColombo Planned Venera-D Proposed EnVision European Venus Explorer VAMP VISE VISAGE VICI VOX Shukrayaan-1 Proposed crewed Colonization Inspiration Mars (flyby) Terraforming Other Geological mapping of Venus Artificial objects on Venus Related Cytherean In culture In fiction Hesperus Life Mythology Phosphorus Venusians Category Portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125