Coat of arms of the counts of Toggenburg in the Zürich armorial (c. 1340) Coat of arms of Baldeck (a baronial family of Württemberg) in Scheiblersches Wappenbuch (15th century) The hound or dog (also levrier, leverer; French lévrier;[1] dogue, chien) is used as a charge in classical heraldry. In English heraldry, the commonly used variant are the talbot, also blazoned as sleuth-hound, e.g. in the arms of Wolseley of Staffordshire, the greyhound and bloodhound. Rarely seen variants are the ratch-hound, the mastiff (alant or aland[2]), the foxhound, the spaniel and the terrier. The "sea-dog" is a curious charge resembling the talbot but with scales, webbed feet and a broad tail, used in the arms of Stourton barony, presumably originally depicting a beaver (as used in the Coat of arms of Oxford).[3] Similar charges include the wolf and the fox.[4] German heraldry distinguishes three variants of dogs: Windhund (greyhound), Bracke and Rüde (also Dogge).[5] Attitudes of the hound may be sejant, rampant, salient (its hind feet on the ground), passant (trippant), skipping, courant (sometimes blazoned "in full chase" or "in full course") or questing (i.e. pointing). The ears, tongue and claws may be in different tinctures. It is often shown gorged or collared. An early example of a blazon involving a dog (levrier) is that of Sir Perez Burdeux in Walford's Roll (Harley MS. 6589, c. 1275): porte d'or ou ung lev'er de gules, ou le collere de sable ou le bordure de sable besante dor (i.e.: or a hound gules collared sable, a border sable besanty or). See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dogs in heraldry. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Cultural depictions of the dog Talbot (dog) Calygreyhound White Greyhound of Richmond References[edit] ^ in French heraldry, the lévrier is the collared greyhound; the greyhound without collar is called levron, and the female greyhound, i.e. a greyhound shown without penis, is called levrette. d'Haucourt & Durivault, Le Blason 4th ed. (1965). ^ Parker (1894): "[Span. alano., med. lat. Canes alani], a mastiff with short ears, appears to be used only as the supporter of the arms of Lord Dacre. "About his char ther wenten white alauns."—Chaucer, Knight's Tale. 2450." ^ Fox-Davies (1909:204f) ^ Fox-Davies (1909:196f) ^ J. Siebmacher's grosses und allgemeines Wappenbuch, Einleitungsband, Abteilung B: Grundsätze der Wappenkunst verbunden mit einem Handbuch der heraldischen Terminologie ( M. Gritzner). Nürnberg: Bauer & Raspe, 1889. Arthur Charles Fox-Davies, A complete guide to heraldry (1909), Joan Corder, John Blatchly, A Dictionary of Suffolk Crests: Heraldic Crests of Suffolk Families (1998), 46ff. "Dog" in James Parker, A Glossary of Terms used in Heraldry (1894), v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources