Ancient Chinese treatise This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Chinese. (February 2020) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Chinese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Chinese Wikipedia article at [[:zh:淮南子]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|zh|淮南子}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Huainanzi Chinese 淮南子 Literal meaning [The Writings of] the Huainan Masters Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Huáinánzǐ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Hwainantzyy Wade–Giles Huai2-nan2 tzŭ3 IPA [xwǎi.nǎn.tsɨ̀] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Wàaih-nàahm-jí Jyutping Waai4-naam4-zi2 IPA [wȁːi nȁːm tsǐː] Southern Min Tâi-lô Huâi-lâm-tsú Middle Chinese Middle Chinese Hweaj-nom-tzí Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *[ɢ]ʷˤrij nˤ[ə]m tsəʔ The Huainanzi is an ancient Chinese text that consists of a collection of essays that resulted from a series of scholarly debates held at the court of Liu An, Prince of Huainan, sometime before 139 BC. The Huainanzi blends Daoist, Confucianist, and Legalist concepts, including theories such as yin and yang and Wu Xing theories. The Huainanzi's essays are all connected to one primary goal: attempting to define the necessary conditions for perfect socio-political order.[1] It concludes that perfect societal order derives mainly from a perfect ruler, and the essays are compiled in such a way as to serve as a handbook for an enlightened sovereign and his court.[1] Contents 1 The book 2 Notable translations 3 References 3.1 Citations 3.2 Bibliography 4 External links The book[edit] The date of composition for the Huainanzi is more certain than for most early Chinese texts. Both the Book of Han and Records of the Grand Historian record that when Liu An paid a state visit to his nephew the Emperor Wu of Han in 139 BC, he presented a copy of his "recently completed" book in twenty-one chapters. The Huainanzi is an eclectic compilation of chapters or essays that range across topics of mythology, history, astronomy, geography, philosophy, science, metaphysics, nature, and politics. It discusses many pre-Han schools of thought, especially the Huang–Lao form of religious Daoism, and contains more than 800 quotations from Chinese classics. The textual diversity is apparent from the chapter titles (tr. Le Blanc, 1985, 15–16): Number Name Reading Meaning 1 原道訓 Yuandao Searching out Dao (Tao) 2 俶真訓 Chuzhen Beginning of Reality 3 天文訓 Tianwen Patterns of Heaven 4 墜形訓 Zhuixing Forms of Earth 5 時則訓 Shize Seasonal Regulations 6 覽冥訓 Lanming Peering into the Obscure 7 精神訓 Jingshen Seminal Breath and Spirit 8 本經訓 Benjing Fundamental Norm 9 主術訓 Zhushu Craft of the Ruler 10 繆稱訓 Miucheng On Erroneous Designations 11 齊俗訓 Qisu Placing Customs on a Par 12 道應訓 Daoying Responses of Dao 13 氾論訓 Fanlun A Compendious Essay 14 詮言訓 Quanyan An Explanatory Discourse 15 兵略訓 Binglue On Military Strategy 16 說山訓 Shuoshan Discourse on Mountains 17 說林訓 Shuolin Discourse on Forests 18 人間訓 Renjian In the World of Man 19 脩務訓 Youwu Necessity of Training 20 泰族訓 Taizu Grand Reunion 21 要略 Yaolue Outline of the Essentials Some Huainanzi passages are philosophically significant, for instance, this combination of Five Phases and Daoist themes.   When the lute-tuner strikes the kung note [on one instrument], the kung note [on the other instrument] responds: when he plucks the chiao note [on one instrument], the chiao note [on the other instrument] vibrates. This results from having corresponding musical notes in mutual harmony. Now, [let us assume that] someone changes the tuning of one string in such a way that it does not match any of the five notes, and by striking it sets all twenty-five strings resonating. In this case there has as yet been no differentiation as regards sound; it just happens that that [sound] which governs all musical notes has been evoked. Thus, he who is merged with Supreme Harmony is beclouded as if dead-drunk, and drifts about in its midst in sweet contentment, unaware how he came there; engulfed in pure delight as he sinks to the depths; benumbed as he reaches the end, he is as if he had not yet begun to emerge from his origin. This is called the Great Merging. (chapter 6, tr. Le Blanc 1985:138) Notable translations[edit] Most Huainanzi translations deal with only one chapter, and no complete Huainanzi translation in a Western language existed prior to 2003. Balfour, Frederic H. (1884). Taoist Texts, Ethical, Political, and Speculative. London: Trübner, and Shanghai: Kelly and Walsh. Morgan, Evan (1933). Tao, the Great Luminant: Essays from the Huai-nan-tzu. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co. Wallacker, Benjamin (1962). The Huai-nan-tzu, Book Eleven: Behavior Culture and the Cosmos. New Haven: American Oriental Society. (in Japanese) Kusuyama, Haruki 楠山春樹 (1979–88). E-nan-ji 淮南子 [Huainanzi]. Shinshaku kanbun taikei 54, 55, 62. (in French) Larre, Claude (1982). "Le Traité VIIe du Houai nan tseu: Les esprits légers et subtils animateurs de l'essence" ["Huainanzi Chapter 7 Translation: Light Spirits and Subtle Animators of Essence"]. Variétés sinologiques 67. Ames, Roger T. (1983). The Art of Rulership: A Study in Ancient Chinese Political Thought. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. Le Blanc, Charles (1985). Huai nan tzu; Philosophical Synthesis in Early Han Thought: The Idea of Resonance (Kan-ying) With a Translation and Analysis of Chapter Six. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. Major, John S. (1993). Heaven and Earth in Early Han Thought: Chapters Three, Four and Five of the Huainanzi. Albany: State University of New York Press. Ames, Roger T. and D.C. Lau (1998). Yuan Dao: Tracing Dao to Its Source. New York: Ballantine Books. (in French) Le Blanc, Charles and Mathieu, Rémi (2003). Philosophes Taoïstes II: Huainan zi. Paris: Gallimard. ———; Queen, Sarah; Meyer, Andrew; Roth, Harold (2010). The Huainanzi: A Guide to the Theory and Practice of Government in Early Han China, by Liu An, King of Huainan. New York: Columbia University Press. References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ a b Le Blanc (1993), p. 189. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFLe_Blanc1993 (help) Bibliography[edit] Le Blanc, Charles (1993). "Huai nan tzu 淮南子". In Loewe, Michael (ed.). Early Chinese Texts: A Bibliographical Guide. Berkeley: Society for the Study of Early China; Institute for East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley. pp. 189–95. ISBN 1-55729-043-1. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Chinese Wikisource has original text related to this article: Huainanzi (in Chinese) 淮南子 - Chinese Text Project 淮南子, original text in Chinese 21 chapters 淮南子, original text in Chinese 21 chapters 淮南子, original text in Chinese 21 chapters Tao, the Great Luminant, Morgan's translation Huainan-zi, Sanderson Beck's article Huainanzi, Chinaknowledge article v t e Han dynasty topics History Chu–Han Contention (Feast at Swan Goose Gate) Lü Clan Disturbance Rebellion of the Seven States Han–Xiongnu War Han conquest of Gojoseon Southward expansion (Han–Minyue War Han conquest of Nanyue Han conquest of Dian First Chinese domination of Vietnam Trung sisters' rebellion Second Chinese domination of Vietnam) Xin dynasty Red Eyebrows and Lulin Chengjia Goguryeo–Han War Disasters of the Partisan Prohibitions Way of the Five Pecks of Rice Yellow Turban Rebellion End of the Han dynasty Battle of Red Cliffs Society and culture Ban Gu Sima Qian Records of the Grand Historian Book of Han Book of the Later Han Records of the Three Kingdoms Flying Horse of Gansu Huainanzi Eight Immortals of Huainan Mawangdui Silk Texts Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals Yiwu Zhi Old Texts Han poetry Fu Government and military Ban Chao Lu Bode Ma Yuan Emperor list Family tree Three Lords and Nine Ministers Nine Ministers Three Ducal Ministers Kings Four Commanderies Protectorate of the Western Regions (Chief Official) list of government titles Economy Ancient Chinese coinage Silk Road Sino-Roman relations Science and technology Cai Lun Ding Huan Du Shi Hua Tuo Wang Chong Zhang Heng Zhang Zhongjing Texts Balanced Discourse Book of Origins Book on Numbers and Computation Essential Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art Huangdi Neijing Treatise on Cold Injury and Miscellaneous Disorders Zhoubi Suanjing Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125