Hugh Magennis is a scholar of Old English and the author of several books on Anglo-Saxon society and poetry, including especially Beowulf. Contents 1 Biography 2 Honours and distinctions 3 Works 3.1 Books 4 References 5 External links Biography[edit] Hugh Magennis gained his bachelor's degree at Queen's University Belfast in 1970. He obtained his master's degree there in 1972 and his PhD also there in 1981.[1] He joined the staff of the university in the 1970s, becoming a full professor, head of its School of English and director of its Institute of Theology. He served from 2004 as chair of the Teachers of Old English in Britain and Ireland, and from 2011 its honorary president.[2] Honours and distinctions[edit] A festschrift called Saints and Scholars: New Perspectives on Anglo-Saxon Literature and Culture in Honour of Hugh Magennis, was published in 2012.[3] A collection of studies in his honour, entitled "Holy and Unholy Appetites in Anglo-Saxon England" was published the same year in English Studies.[4] Magennis became a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 2006.[1] He is a Fellow of the English Association.[2] Works[edit] Books[edit] 1994: The Old English Lives of St. Margaret (with M. Clayton and C. mary) 2006: Images of community in Old English poetry 2009: A companion to Ælfric (with M. Swan) 2011: The Cambridge Introduction to Anglo-Saxon Literature 2015: Translating Beowulf: Modern Versions in English Verse References[edit] ^ a b "Hugh Magennis". Royal Irish Academy. Retrieved 6 April 2021. ^ a b "Hugh Magennis". Queen's University Belfast. Retrieved 6 April 2021. ^ Magennis, Hugh; McWilliams, Stuart, eds. (2012). Saints and Scholars: New Perspectives on Anglo-Saxon Literature and Culture in Honour of Hugh Magennis. DS Brewer. ^ "(Whole Issue of the Journal) Holy and Unholy Appetites in Anglo-Saxon England: a Collection of Studies in Honour of Hugh Magennis". English Studies. Taylor and Francis. 93 (5): 501–620 (collection of articles). 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2021. External links[edit] Official website v t e Beowulf Old English Alliterative verse Kenning Clans, (Characters) Geats Beowulf Heardred Hygd Hygelac Scyldings Æschere Healfdene Heorogar Hroðgar Unferð Scylfings Eadgils Eanmund Ohthere Onela Ongentheow Waegmundings Ecgþeow Weohstan Wiglaf Wulfings Wealhþeow Monsters Grendel Grendel's mother The Dragon Translating Beowulf List of translations of Beowulf Michael J. Alexander P. J. Cosijn Kevin Crossley-Holland E. Talbot Donaldson Francis Barton Gummere J. R. Clark Hall John Lesslie Hall Seamus Heaney Beowulf: A New Verse Translation Roy Liuzza William Morris John Mitchell Kemble Frederick Klaeber Hugh Magennis Marijane Osborn Burton Raffel Grímur Jónsson Thorkelin J. R. R. Tolkien Beowulf: A Translation and Commentary "Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics" Beowulf and the Critics "On Translating Beowulf" "Sellic Spell" Finn and Hengest A. Diedrich Wackerbarth Charles Leslie Wrenn David Wright Scholars Nora K. Chadwick Michael D. C. Drout Kevin Kiernan John D. Niles Related List of adaptations of Beowulf Anglo-Saxon paganism Battle of Finnsburg Beowulf in Middle-earth Heorot Hrunting Nægling Nowell Codex