Comic book superhero "The Hulk" and "The Incredible Hulk" redirect here. For other uses, see Hulk (disambiguation) and The Incredible Hulk (disambiguation). Bruce Banner Hulk Cover art for the comic book issue Immortal Hulk #20 (July 2019) Art by Dale Keown and Peter Steigerwald Publication information Publisher Marvel Comics First appearance The Incredible Hulk #1 (May 1962) Created by Stan Lee Jack Kirby In-story information Alter ego Robert Bruce Banner[1] Species Human mutate Place of origin Dayton, Ohio Team affiliations Avengers Defenders Horsemen of Apocalypse Fantastic Four[2] Pantheon Warbound S.M.A.S.H. Secret Avengers Notable aliases Joe Fixit, War, World-Breaker, Doc Green, Devil Hulk Abilities As Bruce Banner: Genius intellect As Hulk: Invulnerability Superhuman strength, speed, stamina, and durability Anger empowerment Regeneration The Hulk is a fictional superhero appearing in publications by the American publisher Marvel Comics. Created by writer Stan Lee and artist Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in the debut issue of The Incredible Hulk (May 1962). In his comic book appearances, the character is both the Hulk, a green-skinned, hulking and muscular humanoid possessing a vast degree of physical strength, and his alter ego Dr. Robert Bruce Banner, a physically weak, socially withdrawn, and emotionally reserved physicist. The two exist as independent dissociative personalities, and resent each other. Hulk comic logo Following his accidental exposure to gamma rays saving the life of Rick Jones during the detonation of an experimental bomb, Banner is physically transformed into the Hulk when subjected to emotional stress, at or against his will, often leading to destructive rampages and conflicts that complicate Banner's civilian life. The Hulk's level of strength is normally conveyed as proportionate to his level of anger. Commonly portrayed as a raging savage, the Hulk has been represented with other personalities based on Banner's fractured psyche, from a mindless, destructive force, to a brilliant warrior, or genius scientist in his own right. Despite both Hulk and Banner's desire for solitude, the character has a large supporting cast. This includes Banner's lover Betty Ross, his best friend Rick Jones, his cousin She-Hulk, and therapist and ally Doc Samson. In addition, the Hulk alter ego has many key supporting characters like his co-founders of the superhero team the Avengers, his queen Caiera, fellow warriors Korg and Miek, and sons Skaar and Hiro-Kala. However, his uncontrollable power has brought him into conflict with his fellow heroes and others. Despite this he tries his best to do what's right while battling villains such as Leader, Abomination, Absorbing Man and more. Lee stated that the Hulk's creation was inspired by a combination of Frankenstein and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.[3] Although the Hulk's coloration has varied throughout the character's publication history, the most usual color is green. One of the most iconic characters in popular culture,[4][5] the character has appeared on a variety of merchandise, such as clothing and collectable items, inspired real-world structures (such as theme park attractions), and been referenced in a number of media. Banner and the Hulk have been adapted in live-action, animated, and video game incarnations. The character was first played in a live-action feature film by Eric Bana. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe,[not verified in body] the character was portrayed by Edward Norton in the film The Incredible Hulk (2008) and by Mark Ruffalo in the films The Avengers (2012), Iron Man 3 (2013) in a cameo, Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015), Thor: Ragnarok (2017), Avengers: Infinity War (2018), Captain Marvel (2019) in a cameo, and Avengers: Endgame (2019). Ruffalo will reprise the role in the upcoming Disney+ series What If...? (2021) and She-Hulk (2022). Contents 1 Publication history 1.1 Concept and creation 1.2 Series history 2 Fictional character biography 2.1 Alternative versions of Hulk 3 Characterization 3.1 Personality 3.1.1 Bruce Banner 3.1.2 Hulk 3.2 Powers and abilities 3.3 Supporting characters 4 Cultural impact 4.1 Analysis 5 Other Marvel Comics characters called the Hulk 6 In other media 7 Reception 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Publication history[edit] Further information: List of Hulk titles Concept and creation[edit] The Hulk first appeared in The Incredible Hulk #1 (cover dated May 1962), written by writer-editor Stan Lee, penciled and co-plotted by Jack Kirby,[6][7] and inked by Paul Reinman. Lee cites influence from Frankenstein[8] and Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in the Hulk's creation: It was patently apparent that [the monstrous character the] Thing was the most popular character in [Marvel's recently created superhero team the] Fantastic Four. ... For a long time, I'd been aware of the fact that people were more likely to favor someone who was less than perfect. ... It's a safe bet that you remember Quasimodo, but how easily can you name any of the heroic, handsomer, more glamorous characters in The Hunchback of Notre Dame? And then there's Frankenstein ... I've always had a soft spot in my heart for the Frankenstein monster. No one could ever convince me that he was the bad guy. ... He never wanted to hurt anyone; he merely groped his torturous way through a second life trying to defend himself, trying to come to terms with those who sought to destroy him. ... I decided I might as well borrow from Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde as well—our protagonist would constantly change from his normal identity to his superhuman alter ego and back again.[9] Kirby, commenting upon his influences in drawing the character, recalled as inspiration witnessing in person the hysterical strength of a mother lifting a car off her trapped child.[10][11][12] Lee has also compared Hulk to the Golem of Jewish mythology.[8] In The Science of Superheroes, Gresh and Weinberg see the Hulk as a reaction to the Cold War[13] and the threat of nuclear attack, an interpretation shared by Weinstein in Up, Up and Oy Vey.[8] This interpretation corresponds with other popularized fictional media created during this time period, which took advantage of the prevailing sense among Americans that nuclear power could produce monsters and mutants.[14] In the debut, Lee chose grey for the Hulk because he wanted a color that did not suggest any particular ethnic group.[15] Colorist Stan Goldberg, however, had problems with the grey coloring, resulting in different shades of grey, and even green, in the issue. After seeing the first published issue, Lee chose to change the skin color to green.[16] Green was used in retellings of the origin, with even reprints of the original story being recolored for the next two decades, until The Incredible Hulk vol. 2, #302 (December 1984) reintroduced the grey Hulk in flashbacks set close to the origin story. An exception is the early trade paperback, Origins of Marvel Comics, from 1974, which explains the difficulties in keeping the grey color consistent in a Stan Lee written prologue, and reprints the origin story keeping the grey coloration. Since December 1984, reprints of the first issue have displayed the original grey coloring, with the fictional canon specifying that the Hulk's skin had initially been grey. Lee gave the Hulk's alter ego the alliterative name "Bruce Banner" because he found he had less difficulty remembering alliterative names. Despite this, in later stories he misremembered the character's name and referred to him as "Bob Banner", an error which readers quickly picked up on.[17] The discrepancy was resolved by giving the character the official full name "Robert Bruce Banner."[1] The Hulk got his name from a comic book character named The Heap who was a large green swamp monster.[18] Series history[edit] The Hulk's original series was canceled with issue #6 (March 1963). Lee had written each story, with Kirby penciling the first five issues and Steve Ditko penciling and inking the sixth. The character immediately guest-starred in The Fantastic Four #12 (March 1963), and months later became a founding member of the superhero team the Avengers, appearing in the first two issues of the team's eponymous series (Sept. and Nov. 1963), and returning as an antagonist in issue #3 and as an ally in #5 (Jan.–May 1964). He then guest-starred in Fantastic Four #25–26 (April–May 1964), which revealed Banner's full name as Robert Bruce Banner, and The Amazing Spider-Man #14 (July 1964).[19] The Incredible Hulk #1 (May 1962). Cover art by Jack Kirby and Paul Reinman. Around this time, co-creator Kirby received a letter from a college dormitory stating the Hulk had been chosen as its official mascot.[8] Kirby and Lee realized their character had found an audience in college-age readers. A year and a half after The Incredible Hulk was canceled, the Hulk became one of two features in Tales to Astonish, beginning in issue #60 (Oct. 1964).[20] This new Hulk feature was initially scripted by Lee, with pencils by Steve Ditko and inks by George Roussos. Other artists later in this run included Jack Kirby (#68–87, June 1965 – Oct. 1966); Gil Kane (credited as "Scott Edwards", #76, (Feb. 1966)); Bill Everett (#78–84, April–Oct. 1966); John Buscema (#85–87); and Marie Severin. The Tales to Astonish run introduced the super-villains the Leader,[3] who would become the Hulk's nemesis, and the Abomination, another gamma-irradiated being.[3] Marie Severin finished out the Hulk's run in Tales to Astonish. Beginning with issue #102 (April 1968) the book was retitled The Incredible Hulk vol. 2,[21] and ran until 1999, when Marvel canceled the series and launched Hulk #1. Marvel filed for a trademark for "The Incredible Hulk" in 1967, and the United States Patent and Trademark Office issued the registration in 1970.[22] Len Wein wrote the series from 1974 through 1978, working first with Herb Trimpe, then, as of issue #194 (December 1975), with Sal Buscema, who was the regular artist for ten years.[23] Issues #180–181 (Oct.–Nov. 1974) introduced Wolverine as an antagonist,[24] who would go on to become one of Marvel Comics' most popular characters. In 1977, Marvel launched a second title, The Rampaging Hulk, a black-and-white comics magazine.[3] This was originally conceived as a flashback series, set between the end of his original, short-lived solo title and the beginning of his feature in Tales to Astonish.[25] After nine issues, the magazine was retitled The Hulk! and printed in color.[26] In 1977, two Hulk television films were aired to strong ratings, leading to an Incredible Hulk TV series which aired from 1978 to 1982. A huge ratings success, the series introduced the popular Hulk catchphrase, "Don't make me angry. You wouldn't like me when I'm angry", and broadened the character's popularity from a niche comic book readership into the mainstream consciousness.[27] Bill Mantlo became the series' writer for five years beginning with issue #245 (March 1980). Mantlo's "Crossroads of Eternity" stories (#300–313 (Oct. 1984 – Nov. 1985)) explored the idea that Banner had suffered child abuse. Later Hulk writers Peter David and Greg Pak have called these stories an influence on their approaches to the character.[28][29] Mantlo left the series for Alpha Flight and that series' writer John Byrne took over The Incredible Hulk.[30] The final issue of Byrne's six issue run featured the wedding of Bruce Banner and Betty Ross.[31] Writer Peter David began a 12-year run with issue #331 (May 1987). He returned to the Roger Stern and Mantlo abuse storylines, expanding the damage caused, and depicting Banner as suffering dissociative identity disorder (DID).[3] In 1998, David killed off Banner's long-time love Betty Ross. Marvel executives used Ross' death as an opportunity to pursue the return of the Savage Hulk. David disagreed, leading to his parting ways with Marvel.[32] Also in 1998, Marvel relaunched The Rampaging Hulk as a standard comic book rather than as a comics magazine.[3] The Incredible Hulk was again cancelled with issue #474 of its second volume in March 1999 and was replaced with a new series, Hulk the following month, with returning writer Byrne and art by Ron Garney.[33][34] New series writer Paul Jenkins developed the Hulk's multiple personalities,[35] and his run was followed by Bruce Jones[36] with his run featuring Banner being pursued by a secret conspiracy and aided by the mysterious Mr. Blue. Jones appended his 43-issue Incredible Hulk run with the limited series Hulk/Thing: Hard Knocks #1–4 (Nov. 2004 – Feb. 2005), which Marvel published after putting the ongoing series on hiatus. Peter David, who had initially signed a contract for the six-issue Tempest Fugit limited series, returned as writer when it was decided to make that story the first five parts of the revived (vol. 3).[37] After a four-part tie-in to the "House of M" storyline and a one-issue epilogue, David left the series once more, citing the need to do non-Hulk work for the sake of his career.[38] Writer Greg Pak took over the series in 2006, leading the Hulk through several crossover storylines including "Planet Hulk" and "World War Hulk", which left the Hulk temporarily incapacitated and replaced as the series' title character by the demigod Hercules in the retitled The Incredible Hercules (Feb. 2008). The Hulk returned periodically in Hulk, which then starred the new Red Hulk.[39] In September 2009, The Incredible Hulk was relaunched as The Incredible Hulk (vol. 2) #600.[39] The series was retitled The Incredible Hulks with issue #612 (Nov. 2010) to encompass the Hulk's expanded family, and ran until issue #635 (Oct. 2011) when it was replaced with The Incredible Hulk (vol. 3) (15 issues, Dec. 2011 – Dec. 2012) written by Jason Aaron with art by Marc Silvestri.[40] As part of Marvel's 2012 Marvel NOW! relaunch, a series called The Indestructible Hulk (Nov. 2012) debuted under the creative team of Mark Waid and Leinil Yu.[41] This series was replaced in 2014 with The Hulk by Waid and artist Mark Bagley.[42] Fictional character biography[edit] During the experimental detonation of a gamma bomb, scientist Robert Bruce Banner saves teenager Rick Jones who has driven onto the testing field; Banner pushes Jones into a trench to save him, but is hit with the blast, absorbing massive amounts of gamma radiation. He awakens later seemingly unscathed, but that night transforms into a lumbering grey form. A pursuing soldier dubs the creature a "hulk".[43] Originally, it was believed that Banner's transformations into the Hulk were caused by sunset and undone at sunrise, but later, after Rick witnessed Banner turn into Hulk at daytime following a failed attempt by Ross' men to shoot the Hulk into space, it was discovered to be caused by anger. Banner was cured in The Incredible Hulk #4, but chose to restore Hulk's powers with Banner's intelligence. The gamma-ray machine needed to affect the transformation-induced side effects that made Banner temporarily sick and weak when returned to his normal state. In The Avengers #1 (September 1963), the Hulk became a founding member of the title's eponymous superhero team. By The Avengers #3, overuse of the gamma-ray machine rendered the Hulk as an uncontrollable, rampaging monster, subject to spontaneous changing. In Tales to Astonish #59 (September 1964) the Hulk appeared as an antagonist for Giant-Man. The series established stress as the trigger for Banner turning into the Hulk and vice versa.[44] It was during this time that the Hulk developed a more savage and childlike personality, shifting away from his original portrayal as a brutish but not entirely unintelligent figure. Also, his memory, both long-term and short-term, would now become markedly impaired in his Hulk state. Tales to Astonish #64 (February 1965) was the last Hulk story to feature him speaking in complete sentences. In Tales to Astonish #77 (March 1966), Banner's and the Hulk's dual identity became publicly known when Rick Jones, mistakenly convinced that Banner was dead (when he actually had been catapulted into the future), told Major Glenn Talbot, a rival to Banner for the affections of Betsy Ross, the truth. Consequently, Glenn informed his superiors and that turned Banner into a wanted fugitive upon returning to the present. The 1970s saw Banner and Betty nearly marry in The Incredible Hulk #124 (February 1970).[45] Betty ultimately married Talbot in issue #158 (Dec. 1972).[46] The Hulk also traveled to other dimensions, one of which had him meet empress Jarella, who used magic to bring Banner's intelligence to the Hulk, and came to love him. The Hulk helped to form the Defenders.[47] In the 1980s, Banner once again gained control over the Hulk,[48] and gained amnesty for his past rampages;[49] however, due to the manipulations of supernatural character Nightmare, Banner eventually lost control over the Hulk.[50] It was also established that Banner had serious mental problems even before he became the Hulk, having suffered childhood traumas that engendered Bruce's repressed rage.[51] Banner comes to terms with his issues for a time, and the Hulk and Banner were physically separated by Doc Samson.[52][53] Banner is recruited by the U.S. government to create the Hulkbusters, a government team dedicated to catching the Hulk. Banner finally married Betty in The Incredible Hulk #319 (May 1986) following Talbot's death in 1981.[31][54] Banner and the Hulk were reunited in The Incredible Hulk #323 (Sep. 1986)[55] and with issue #324, returned the Hulk to his grey coloration, with his transformations once again occurring at night, regardless of Banner's emotional state. In issue #347 the grey Hulk persona "Joe Fixit" was introduced, a morally ambiguous Las Vegas enforcer and tough guy. Banner remained repressed in the Hulk's mind for months, but slowly began to reappear. The 1990s saw the Green Hulk return.[56] In issue #377 (Jan. 1991), the Hulk was revamped in a storyline that saw the personalities of Banner, Grey Hulk, and Savage Hulk confront Banner's past abuse at the hands of his father Brian and a new "Guilt Hulk" persona. Overcoming the trauma, the intelligent Banner, cunning Grey Hulk, and powerful Savage Hulk personalities merge into a new single entity possessing the traits of all three. The Hulk also joined the Pantheon, a secretive organization of superpowered individuals.[57][58] His tenure with the organization brought the Hulk into conflict with a tyrannical alternate future version of himself called the Maestro in the 1993 Future Imperfect miniseries, who rules over a world where many heroes are dead. In 2000, Banner and the three Hulks (Savage Hulk, Grey Hulk, and the "Merged Hulk", now considered a separate personality and referred to as the Professor) become able to mentally interact with one another, each personality taking over the shared body as Banner began to weaken due to his suffering from Lou Gehrig's disease. During this, the four personalities (including Banner) confronted yet another submerged personality, a sadistic "Devil" intent on attacking the world and attempting to break out of Banner's fracturing psyche, but the Devil was eventually locked away again when the Leader was able to devise a cure for the disease using genes taken from the corpse of Brian Banner.[35] In 2005, it is revealed that the Nightmare has manipulated the Hulk for years, and it is implied that some or all of the Hulk's adventures written by Bruce Jones may have been just an illusion.[59] In 2006, the Illuminati decide the Hulk is too dangerous to remain on Earth and send him away by rocket ship which crashes on Planet Sakaar ushering in the "Planet Hulk" storyline that saw the Hulk find allies in the Warbound, and marry alien queen Caiera, a relationship that was later revealed to have born him two sons: Skaar and Hiro-Kala.[60] After the Illuminati's ship explodes and kills Caiera, the Hulk returns to Earth with his superhero group Warbound and declares war on the planet in World War Hulk (2007).[61] However, after learning that Miek, one of the Warbound, had actually been responsible for the destruction, the Hulk allows himself to be defeated, with Banner subsequently redeeming himself as a hero as he works with and against the new Red Hulk to defeat the new supervillain team the Intelligencia.[62] In the 2010s, Hiro-Kala traveled to Earth to destroy the OldStrong Power wielded by Skaar, forcing Skaar and the Hulk to defeat and imprison him within his home planet.[63] During the 2011 Fear Itself storyline, the Hulk finds one of the Serpent's magical hammers associated with the Worthy and becomes Nul: Breaker of Worlds. As he starts to transform, the Hulk tells the Red She-Hulk to run far away from him. Rampaging through South and Central America, Nul was eventually transported to New York City where he began battling Thor, with aid of the Thing, who was transformed into Angrir: Breaker of Souls. After defeating the Thing, Thor stated that he never could beat the Hulk, and instead removed him from the battle by launching him into Earth orbit, after which Thor collapsed from exhaustion.[64] Landing in Romania, Nul immediately began heading for the base of the vampire-king Dracula. Opposed by Dracula's forces, including a legion of monsters, Nul was seemingly unstoppable.[65] Only after the intervention of Raizo Kodo's Forgiven was Nul briefly slowed.[66] Ultimately, Nul makes his way to Dracula's castle where the timely arrival of Kodo and Forgiven member Inka, disguised as Betty Ross, is able to throw off the effects of the Nul possession. Throwing aside the hammer, the Hulk regains control, and promptly leaves upon realizing "Betty's" true nature.[67] With the crisis concluded, the Hulk contacted Doctor Doom for help separating him and Banner for good in return for an unspecified favour. Doom proceeded to perform brain surgery on the Hulk, extracting the uniquely Banner elements from the Hulk's brain and cloning a new body for Banner.[68] When Doctor Doom demands to keep Banner for his own purposes, the Hulk reneges on the deal and flees with Banner's body, leaving his alter ego in the desert where he was created to ensure that Doctor Doom cannot use Banner's intellect.[69] When Banner goes insane due to his separation from the Hulk, irradiating an entire tropical island trying to recreate his transformation- something he cannot do as the cloned body lacks the genetic elements of Banner that allowed him to process the gamma radiation- the Hulk is forced to destroy his other side by letting him be disintegrated by a gamma bomb, prompting the Hulk to accuse Doom of tampering with Banner's mind, only for Doom to observe that what was witnessed was simply Banner without the Hulk to use as a scapegoat for his problems.[70] Initially assuming that Banner is dead, the Hulk soon realizes that Banner was somehow "re-combined" with him when the gamma bomb disintegrated Banner's body, resulting in the Hulk finding himself waking up in various strange locations, including helping the Punisher confront a drug cartel run by a mutated dog, hunting sasquatches with Kraven the Hunter, and being forced to face Wolverine and the Thing in an old SHIELD base. Banner eventually leaves a video message for the Hulk in which he apologizes for his actions while they were separate, having come to recognize that he is a better person with the Hulk than without,[71] the two joining forces to thwart the Doombots' attempt to use the animals on Banner's irradiated island as the basis for a new gamma army using a one-of-a-kind gamma cure Banner had created to turn all the animals back to normal.[72] Following this, Bruce willingly joined the spy organization S.H.I.E.L.D., allowing them to use the Hulk as a weapon in exchange for providing him with the means and funding to create a lasting legacy for himself.[73] After the Hulk had suffered brain damage upon being shot in the head by the Order of the Shield- the assassin having been carefully trained to target Bruce at just the right part of the brain to incapacitate him without triggering a transformation- Iron Man used the Extremis to cure the Hulk.[74] This procedure also increased Banner's mental capacity, which gave him the intelligence to tweak the Extremis virus within him and unleash a new persona for the Hulk: the super-intelligent Doc Green. During the 2014 "Original Sin" storyline, Bruce Banner confronted by the eye of the murdered Uatu the Watcher. Bruce temporarily experienced some of Tony Stark's memories of their first meeting before either of them became the Hulk or Iron Man. During this vision, Bruce witnessed Tony modifying the gamma bomb to be more effective prompting Bruce to realize that Tony was essentially responsible for him becoming the Hulk in the first place.[75] Subsequent research reveals that Tony's tampering had actually refined the bomb's explosive potential so that it would not disintegrate everyone within the blast radius, with the result that Tony's actions had actually saved Bruce's life.[76] In the 2014 "AXIS" storyline, when a mistake made by the Scarlet Witch causes various heroes and villains to experience a moral inversion, Bruce Banner attended a meeting between Nick Fury Jr. and Maria Hill of S.H.I.E.L.D. and the Avengers who refused to turn over Red Skull. Later when he sided with Edwin Jarvis and tried to prevent his teammates from executing the Red Skull, the Hulk was thrown aside by Luke Cage. The Hulk's sorrow at his friends' betrayal awakened a new persona known as the bloodthirsty Kluh (described as the Hulk's Hulk, being the ruthless part of himself that even the Hulk repressed) with this new version easily defeating the Avengers, sneering that the Hulk they knew was nothing more than a "sad piece of 'Doc Green's' ID." Kluh then leaves to wreak havoc,[77] with Nova attempting to stop him after witnessing his rampage with the remaining good heroes.[78] As with the other inverted Avengers and X-Men, Kluh was restored to Hulk when Brother Voodoo was summoned back to life by Doctor Doom so that Daniel Drumm's ghost can possess the Scarlet Witch and undo the inversion. With his newfound intellect, Doc Green came to the conclusion that the world was in danger by Gamma Mutates and thus needed to be depowered. He developed a serum made from Adamantium nanobites that absorbed gamma energy.[79] He used these to depower Red Leader, Red She-Hulk, Red Hulk, Skaar, Gamma Corps, and A-Bomb, but decided to 'spare' She-Hulk as he concluded that she was the one gamma mutation whose life had been legitimately improved by her mutation. At the close of the storyline, Doc Green discovered that he was beginning to disappear as the result of the Extremis serum wearing off. He ultimately allowed himself to fade away, returning to his normal Hulk form, as he feared that remaining at his current intellectual level would lead to him becoming the Maestro.[80] During the 2015 "Secret Wars" storyline, the Hulk took part in the incursion between Earth-616 and Earth-1610. The Hulk used the "Fastball Special" with Colossus to destroy the Triskelion.[81] As part of the 2015–2018 All-New, All-Different Marvel branding, Amadeus Cho becomes the new Hulk. Flashbacks reveal that the Hulk had absorbed a dangerous new type of radiation while helping Iron Man and the Black Panther deal with a massive accident on Kiber Island. Fearing the Hulk's meltdown would kill countless innocents, Cho was able to use special nanites to absorb the Hulk from Banner and take it into himself to become his own version of the Hulk, leaving Banner normal and free from the Hulk.[82] He is then rescued from a bar fight by Amadeus, who tells him that he is cured. Having confirmed that he can no longer transform or sense the Hulk, Bruce spends some time traveling across America taking various risks such as driving at high speeds, running away from a bear, or gambling in Las Vegas, until he is confronted by Tony Stark out of concern that Bruce has a death wish. Bruce instead acknowledges that he still harbors guilt and rage over how so many of the Hulk's rampages were provoked by various agencies refusing to leave him alone.[83] During the 2016 "Civil War II" storyline, the vision of the Inhuman Ulysses shows a rampaging Hulk standing over the corpses of the superheroes. Meanwhile, Bruce Banner is shown to have set up a laboratory in Alpine, Utah, where he is approached by Captain Marvel,[84] followed by Tony Stark, the rest of the Avengers, the X-Men, and the Inhumans. The confrontation leads to the Beast hacking into Banner's work servers and the revelation that he had been injecting himself with dead gamma-irradiated cells. S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Maria Hill places him under arrest. Banner gets infuriated at all these events, when suddenly, Hawkeye shoots Banner with an arrow to the head and then to the heart, killing him, much to the dismay and horror of the superheroes, especially Tony Stark. At an Avengers-presided tribunal, Hawkeye states that Bruce Banner had approached him and ordered him to kill him if he ever showed signs of turning into the Hulk again.[85] At the funeral, Korg of the Warbound stated how Hulk wanted to be left alone and how his allies that he made along the way have become his family. In his video will, Bruce leaves various items to other heroes and his allies including leaving Doctor Strange his notes on the Hulk's ability to perceive ghosts and an egg-timer for the various former/current other Hulks (based on one of Bruce's more successful attempts to control himself as he would sit down for three minutes doing nothing before making a particularly big decision and then decide if he still wanted to do it).[86] Following the funeral of Bruce Banner, the Hand in allegiance with Daniel Drumm's ghost steal Bruce Banner's body in order to use the dead to bolster their ranks.[87] When the reassembled Uncanny Avengers went to Japan and attempted to enlist Elektra for help in stopping the Hand, the ritual that the Hand performed has been completed as the Uncanny Avengers are attacked by a revived Hulk who is wearing samurai armor.[88] The Uncanny Avengers were able to contain Hulk's rampage and sever his mystical link to the Beast of the Hand. Afterward, Hulk regressed back to Bruce Banner and returned to the dead.[89] During the 2017 "Secret Empire" storyline, Arnim Zola used an unknown method to temporarily revive Bruce Banner, and the Hydra Supreme version of Captain America persuades his Hulk side to attack the Underground's hideout called the Vault. He fought Thing and Giant-Man's A.I.Vengers until the temporary revival started to wear off and caused Hulk to die again.[90] During the "No Surrender" arc, the exiled Elder of the Universe Challenger revives Hulk to be his ace in the hole during a contest between his Black Order and Grandmaster's Lethal Legion. Hulk participated since he knew that Earth will be destroyed either way while his Bruce Banner suspects that Hulk's revivals were a manifestation of Hulk's immortality. While defeating Cannonball and Living Lightning, breaking Vision, and draining the gamma energy out of Robert Maverick's Hulk Plug-In, Wonder Man successfully reasoned with him as Hulk destroyed the Pyarmoid in Voyager's possession. After feeling remorse for what happened, Bruce Banner became Hulk and faced off against Challenger. After Challenger sent Hulk into Earth's orbit, Hulk was pleased that he managed to hurt Challenger.[91] While maintaining a low profile, Bruce Banner was shot by Tommy Hill of the Dogs of Hell biker gang during a robbery that also claimed the lives of Sandy Brockhurst and Josh Alfaro. He came back to life and turned into Hulk where he badly beat up Tommy Hill. The witnesses in the Dogs of Hell told Detective Gloria Mayes of the attacker as she and reporter Jackie McGee have a suspicion that it was Hulk even though Banner is believed to be dead.[92] During the events of "Absolute Carnage," the Venom Symbiote takes Bruce as its host to fight Carnage.[93] Inside of Bruce's mind, Bruce converses with the Venom Symbiote as the other Hulk personalities such as Joe Fixit and Savage Hulk add their opinions about their current situation. Devil Hulk (in his more traditional looking reptilian form) is against the symbiote's presence in Bruce and says it should be removed immediately, saying they have more important matters to deal with. In the end, Bruce, Joe Fixit, and Savage Hulk agree to collaborate with the Venom Symbiote and Devil Hulk storms off, saying they're making a mistake. As Bruce states that the vote is three to one with two abstentions, he welcomes the Venom symbiote to the family.[94] Alternative versions of Hulk[edit] Main article: Alternative versions of the Hulk A number of alternate universes and alternate timelines in Marvel Comics publications allow writers to introduce variations on the Hulk, in which the character's origins, behavior, and morality differ from the mainstream setting.[citation needed] In some stories, someone other than Bruce Banner is the Hulk. In some versions, the Hulk succumbs to the darker side of his nature: in "Future Imperfect" (December 1992), a future version of the Hulk has become the Maestro, the tyrannical and ruthless ruler of a nuclear war-irradiated Earth,[95] and in "Old Man Logan" (2008), an insane Hulk rules over a post-apocalyptic California and leads a gang of his inbred Hulk children created with his first cousin She-Hulk.[96][97] Characterization[edit] Like other long-lived characters, the Hulk's character and cultural interpretations have changed with time, adding or modifying character traits. The Hulk is typically seen as a hulking man with green skin, hair, and eyes, wearing only a pair of torn purple pants that survive his physical transformation as the character progressed. As Bruce Banner, the character is about 5 ft 9 in (1.75 m) tall and weighs 128 lbs (58.05 kg), but when transformed into the Hulk, the character stands between 7 to 8 ft (2.13 - 2.43 m) tall and weighs between 1,040 to 1,400 lbs (471.73 - 635.02 kg). The Gray Hulk stands 6 ft 6 in (1.98 m) tall and weighs 900 lbs (408.23 kg); the Merged Hulk stands 7 ft 6 in (2.28 m) tall and weighs 1,150 lbs (521.63 kg); the Green Scar stands 8 ft 8 in (2.64 m) tall and weighs 2,400 lbs (1.08 ton).[98] The Immortal Hulk is roughly the same size as Sasquatch, standing around 9 or 10 ft (2.74 / 3.04 m) tall and weighing roughly 2,000 lbs (907.18 kg). Following his debut, Banner's transformations were triggered at nightfall, turning him into a grey-skinned Hulk. In Incredible Hulk #2, the Hulk started to appear with green skin,[99] and in Avengers #3 (1963) Banner realized that his transformations were now triggered by surges of adrenaline in response to feelings of fear, pain or anger.[100] Incredible Hulk #227 (1978) established that the Hulk's separate personality was not due to the mutation affecting his brain, but because Banner was suffering from multiple personality disorder, with the savage Green Hulk representing Banner's repressed childhood rage and aggression,[101] and the Grey Hulk representing Banner's repressed selfish desires and urges.[102] Personality[edit] Bruce Banner[edit] During his decades of publication, Banner has been portrayed differently, but common themes persist. Banner, a physicist, is sarcastic and seemingly very self-assured when he first appears in Incredible Hulk #1, but is also emotionally withdrawn.[3] Banner designed the gamma bomb which caused his affliction, and the ironic twist of his self-inflicted fate has been one of the most persistent common themes.[8] Arie Kaplan describes the character thus: "Robert Bruce Banner lives in a constant state of panic, always wary that the monster inside him will erupt, and therefore he can't form meaningful bonds with anyone."[103] As a child, Banner's father Brian often got mad and physically abused both Banner and his mother, creating the psychological complex of fear, anger, and the fear of anger and the destruction it can cause that underlies the character. Banner has been shown to be emotionally repressed, but capable of deep love for Betty Ross, and for solving problems posed to him. Under the writing of Paul Jenkins, Banner was shown to be a capable fugitive, applying deductive reasoning and observation to figure out the events transpiring around him. On the occasions that Banner has controlled the Hulk's body, he has applied principles of physics to problems and challenges and used deductive reasoning. It was shown after his ability to turn into the Hulk was taken away by the Red Hulk that Banner has been extremely versatile as well as cunning when dealing with the many situations that followed. When he was briefly separated from the Hulk by Doom, Banner became criminally insane, driven by his desire to regain the power of the Hulk, but once the two recombined he came to accept that he was a better person with the Hulk to provide something for him to focus on controlling rather than allowing his intellect to run without restraint against the world.[104] Hulk[edit] The original Hulk was shown as grey and average in intelligence who roamed aimlessly and became annoyed at "puny" humans who took him for a dangerous monster. Shortly after becoming the Hulk, his transformation continued turning him green, coinciding with him beginning to display primitive speech,[99] and by Incredible Hulk #4 radiation treatments gave Banner's mind complete control of the Hulk's body. While Banner relished his indestructibility and power, he was quick to anger and more aggressive in his Hulk form, and, while he became known as a hero alongside the Avengers, his increasing paranoia caused him to leave the group, believing he would never be trusted.[100] Originally, the Hulk was shown as simple minded and quick to anger.[105] The Hulk generally divorces his identity from Banner's, decrying Banner as "puny Banner."[106] From his earliest stories, the Hulk has been concerned with finding sanctuary and quiet[8] and often is shown reacting emotionally to situations quickly. Grest and Weinberg call Hulk the "dark, primordial side of Banner's psyche."[13] Even in the earliest appearances, Hulk spoke in the third person. Hulk retains a modest intelligence, thinking and talking in full sentences, and Lee even gives the Hulk expository dialogue in issue #6, allowing readers to learn just what capabilities Hulk has, when the Hulk says, "But these muscles ain't just for show! All I gotta do is spring up and just keep goin'!" In the 1970s, Hulk was shown as more prone to anger and rage, and less talkative. Writers played with the nature of his transformations,[107] briefly giving Banner control over the change, and the ability to maintain control of his Hulk form. Artistically and conceptually, the character has become progressively more muscular and powerful in the years since his debut.[108] Originally, Stan Lee wanted the Hulk to be grey, but, due to ink problems, Hulk's color was changed to green. This was later changed in the story to indicate that the Grey Hulk and the Savage Hulk are separate personalities or entities fighting for control in Bruce's subconscious. The Grey Hulk incarnation can do the more unscrupulous things that Banner could not bring himself to do, with many sources comparing the Grey Hulk to the moody teenager that Banner never allowed himself to be. While the Grey Hulk still had the "madder he gets, the stronger he gets" part that is similar to the Savage Hulk, it is on a much slower rate. It is said by Leader that the Grey Hulk is stronger on nights of the new moon and weaker on nights of the full moon. Originally, the night is when Bruce Banner becomes the Grey Hulk and changes back by dawn. In later comics, willpower or stress would have Banner turn into the Grey Hulk.[109] During one storyline where he was placed under a spell to prevent him turning back into Bruce Banner and publicly presumed dead when he was teleported away from a gamma bomb explosion that destroyed an entire town, the Grey Hulk adopted a specific name as Joe Fixit, a security guard for a Las Vegas casino owner,[110] with the Grey Hulk often being referred to as Joe after these events. The Gravage Hulk is the result of Banner using the Gamma Projector on himself which merged his Savage Hulk and Grey Hulk personas. This form possesses the raw power of the Savage Hulk and the cunning intellect of the Grey Hulk. While he does not draw on anger to empower him, the Gravage Hulk persona draws on dimensional nexus energies to increase his strength.[111] The Dark Hulk persona is the result of Hulk being possessed by Shanzar. This form has black skin and is viciously strong.[112] Convinced that unaided, the Banner, Green Hulk, and Grey Hulk identities would eventually destroy each other, Doc Samson uses hypnosis to merge the three to create a new single identity combining Banner's intelligence with the Grey Hulk's and Banner's attitudes and the Green Hulk's body. This new Merged Hulk or Professor Hulk considered himself cured and began a new life, but the merger was not perfect, and the Hulk sometimes still considered Banner a separate person, and when overcome with rage the Merged Hulk would transform back into Banner's human body while still thinking himself the Hulk.[102] The Merged Hulk is the largest of the three primary Hulk incarnations. While in a calm emotional state, the Merged Hulk is stronger than Savage Hulk when he is calm. Unlike the Savage Hulk and the Grey Hulk, Banner subconsciously installed a type of safeguard within this incarnation. The safeguard is that when the Merged Hulk gets angry, he regresses back to Banner with the mind of the Savage Hulk.[113] The Guilt Hulk is a malevolent representation of Banner's abusive father, Brian Banner, that manifests itself in Banner's childhood memories.[114] The Devil Hulk or Immortal Hulk is the result of the Hulk needing a father figure. While the character's physical appearance varies, he is always depicted as having glowing red eyes and reptilian traits.[115] The new form of the Devil Hulk is the result of Banner and Hulk having been through different deaths and rebirths. This incarnation is articulate, smart, and cunning, and does merciless attacks on those who do harm. Unlike the other Hulk incarnations, the Devil Hulk is content with waiting inside Bruce. If Bruce is injured by sunset, the Devil Hulk will emerge with his transformation being limited to night-time.[92] Thanks to the Devil Hulk side and Banner working together, the Devil Hulk can maintain his form in sunlight.[116] The Green Scar persona is unleashed on Sakaar and is an enraged version of the Gravage Hulk. In addition, he is an expert in armed combat like the use of swords and shields. Green Scar is also a capable leader and an expert strategist.[117] Doc Green is a variation of the Merged Hulk persona that is the result of Extremis fixing Hulk's brain. This persona is powerful enough to destroy Tony Stark's mansion with one thunderclap.[79] Powers and abilities[edit] Banner is considered one of the greatest scientific minds on Earth, possessing "a mind so brilliant it cannot be measured on any known intelligence test."[118] Norman Osborn estimates that he is the fourth most-intelligent person on Earth.[119] Banner holds expertise in biology, chemistry, engineering, medicine, physiology, and nuclear physics. Using this knowledge, he creates advanced technology dubbed "Bannertech", which is on par with technological development from Tony Stark or Doctor Doom. Some of these technologies include a force field that can protect him from the attacks of Hulk-level entities, and a teleporter. The Hulk possesses the potential for seemingly limitless physical strength which is influenced by his emotional state, particularly his anger.[120] This has been reflected in the repeated comment, "The madder Hulk gets, the stronger Hulk gets."[121] The cosmically-powerful entity known as the Beyonder once analyzed the Hulk's physiology, and claimed that the Hulk's potential strength had "no finite element inside."[122] Hulk's strength has been depicted as sometimes limited by Banner's subconscious influence; when Jean Grey psionically "shut Banner off", Hulk became strong enough to overpower and destroy the physical form of the villain Onslaught.[123] Writer Greg Pak described the Worldbreaker Hulk shown during World War Hulk as having a level of physical power where "Hulk was stronger than any mortal—and most immortals—who ever walked the Earth",[124] and depicted the character as powerful enough to completely destroy entire planets.[125][126] His strength allows him to leap into lower Earth orbit or across continents,[127][128] and he has displayed superhuman speed.[129][130] Exposure to radiation has also been shown to make the Hulk stronger.[122] It is unknown how he gains biomass during transformation but it may be linked to the One-Below-All. His durability, regeneration, and endurance also increase in proportion to his temper.[131] Hulk is resistant to injury or damage, though the degree to which varies between interpretations, but he has withstood the equivalent of solar temperatures,[132][133] nuclear explosions,[129][134][135][136] and planet-shattering impacts.[125][126][137][138][139] Despite his remarkable resiliency, continuous barrages of high-caliber gunfire can hinder his movement to some degree while he can be temporarily subdued by intense attacks with chemical weapons such as anesthetic gases, although any interruption of such dosages will allow him to quickly recover.[140] He has been shown to have both regenerative and adaptive healing abilities, including growing tissues to allow him to breathe underwater,[141] surviving unprotected in space for extended periods,[142] and when injured, healing from most wounds within seconds, including, on one occasion, the complete destruction of most of his body mass.[143] His future self, the "Maestro", was even eventually able to recover from being blown to pieces.[144] As an effect, he has an extremely prolonged lifespan.[145][146] He also possesses less commonly described powers, including abilities allowing him to "home in" to his place of origin in New Mexico;[147] resist psychic control,[148][149][150][151] or unwilling transformation;[152][153][154] grow stronger from radiation[125][135][136][155][156] or dark magic;[157][158] punch his way between separate temporal[159][160] or spatial[161] dimensions; and to see and interact with astral forms.[158][162] Some of these abilities were in later years explained as being related; his ability to home in on the New Mexico bomb site was due to his latent ability to sense astral forms and spirits, since the bomb site was also the place where the Maestro's skeleton was and the Maestro's spirit was calling out to him in order to absorb his radiation.[144] In the first Hulk comic series, "massive" doses of gamma rays would cause the Hulk to transform back to Banner, although this ability was written out of the character by the 1970s.[citation needed] Supporting characters[edit] Main article: List of Hulk supporting characters Over the long publication history of the Hulk's adventures, many recurring characters have featured prominently, including his best friend and sidekick Rick Jones, love interest and wife Betty Ross and her father, the often adversarial General "Thunderbolt" Ross. Both Banner and Hulk have families created in their respective personas. Banner is son to Brian, an abusive father who killed Banner's mother while she tried to protect her son from his father's delusional attacks, and cousin to Jennifer Walters, the She-Hulk, who serves as his frequent ally.[163] Banner had a stillborn child with Betty, while the Hulk has two sons with his deceased second wife Caiera Oldstrong, Skaar and Hiro-Kala, and his DNA was used to create a daughter named Lyra with Thundra the warrior woman.[164] The Fantastic Four #12 (March 1963), featured the Hulk's first battle with the Thing. Although many early Hulk stories involve Ross trying to capture or destroy the Hulk, the main villain is often a radiation-based character, like the Gargoyle or the Leader, along with other foes such as the Toad Men, or Asian warlord General Fang. Ross' daughter Betty loves Banner and criticizes her father for pursuing the Hulk. General Ross' right-hand man, Major Glenn Talbot, also loves Betty and is torn between pursuing Hulk and trying to gain Betty's love more honorably. Rick Jones serves as the Hulk's friend and sidekick in these early tales. The Hulk's archenemies are the Abomination and the Leader. The Abomination is more monstrous-looking, twice as strong as the Hulk at normal levels (however, the Abomination's strength levels do not increase when he gets angry) and wreaks havoc for fun and pleasure. The Leader is a super-genius who has tried plan after plan to take over the world. Cultural impact[edit] See also: Hulk in other media The Hulk character and the concepts behind it have been raised to the level of iconic status by many within and outside the comic book industry. In 2003, Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine claimed the character had "stood the test of time as a genuine icon of American pop culture."[165] In 2008, the Hulk was listed as the 19th greatest comic book character by Wizard magazine.[166] Empire magazine named him as the 14th-greatest comic-book character and the fifth-greatest Marvel character.[167] In 2011, the Hulk placed No. 9 on IGN's list of "Top 100 Comic Book Heroes",[168] and fourth on their list of "The Top 50 Avengers" in 2012.[169] Analysis[edit] The Hulk is often viewed as a reaction to war. As well as being a reaction to the Cold War, the character has been a cipher for the frustrations the Vietnam War raised, and Ang Lee said that the Iraq War influenced his direction.[13][170][171] In the Michael Nyman edited edition of The Guardian, Stefanie Diekmann explored Marvel Comics' reaction to the September 11 attacks. Diekmann discussed The Hulk's appearance in the 9/11 tribute comic Heroes, claiming that his greater prominence, alongside Captain America, aided in "stressing the connection between anger and justified violence without having to depict anything more than a well-known and well-respected protagonist."[172] In Marvel: Five Fabulous Decades of the World's Greatest Comics, Les Daniels addresses the Hulk as an embodiment of cultural fears of radiation and nuclear science. He quotes Jack Kirby thus: "As long as we're experimenting with radioactivity, there's no telling what may happen, or how much our advancements in science may cost us." Daniels continues, "The Hulk became Marvel's most disturbing embodiment of the perils inherent in the atomic age."[173] In Comic Book Nation, Bradford Wright alludes to Hulk's counterculture status, referring to a 1965 Esquire magazine poll amongst college students which "revealed that student radicals ranked Spider-Man and the Hulk alongside the likes of Bob Dylan and Che Guevara as their favorite revolutionary icons." Wright goes on to cite examples of his anti-authority symbol status. Two of these are "The Ballad of the Hulk" by Jerry Jeff Walker, and the Rolling Stone cover for September 30, 1971, a full color Herb Trimpe piece commissioned for the magazine.[107][174] The Hulk has been caricatured in such animated television series as The Simpsons,[175] Robot Chicken, and Family Guy,[176] and such comedy TV series as The Young Ones.[177] The character is also used as a cultural reference point for someone displaying anger or agitation. For example, in a 2008 Daily Mirror review of an EastEnders episode, a character is described as going "into Incredible Hulk mode, smashing up his flat."[178] In September 2019, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson likened himself to The Hulk in an interview with the Mail On Sunday, as political pressure built on him to request an extension to the date of the UK's withdrawal from the European Union.[179][180] The Hulk, especially his alter-ego Bruce Banner, is also a common reference in rap music. The term was represented as an analogue to marijuana in Dr. Dre's 2001,[181] while more conventional references are made in Ludacris and Jermaine Dupri's popular single "Welcome to Atlanta".[182] The 2003 Ang Lee-directed Hulk film saw discussion of the character's appeal to Asian Americans.[183] The Taiwanese-born Ang Lee commented on the "subcurrent of repression" that underscored the character of The Hulk, and how that mirrored his own experience: "Growing up, my artistic leanings were always repressed—there was always pressure to do something 'useful,' like being a doctor." Jeff Yang, writing for the San Francisco Chronicle, extended this self-identification to Asian American culture, arguing that "the passive-aggressive streak runs deep among Asian Americans—especially those who have entered creative careers, often against their parents' wishes."[184] There have been explorations about the real world possibility of Hulk's gamma-radiation based origin. In The Science of Superheroes, Lois Grest and Robert Weinberg examined Hulk's powers, explaining the scientific flaws in them. Most notably, they point out that the level of gamma radiation Banner is exposed to at the initial blast would induce radiation sickness and kill him, or if not, create significant cancer risks for Banner, because hard radiation strips cells of their ability to function. They go on to offer up an alternate origin, in which a Hulk might be created by biological experimentation with adrenal glands and GFP. Charles Q. Choi from LiveScience.com further explains that unlike the Hulk, gamma rays are not green; existing as they do beyond the visible spectrum, gamma rays have no color at all that we can describe. He also explains that gamma rays are so powerful (the most powerful form of electromagnetic radiation and 10,000 times more powerful than visible light) that they can even convert energy into matter – a possible explanation for the increased mass that Bruce Banner takes on during transformations. "Just as the Incredible Hulk 'is the strongest one there is,' as he says himself, so too are gamma-ray bursts the most powerful explosions known."[185] Other Marvel Comics characters called the Hulk[edit] Prior to the debut of the Hulk in May 1962, Marvel had earlier monster characters that used the name the "Hulk", but had no direct relation. In Strange Tales #75 (June 1960), Albert Poole built an armor he called the Hulk. In modern-day reprints, the character's name was changed to Grutan.[186] In Journey into Mystery #62 (Nov. 1960) was Xemnu the Living Hulk, a huge, furry alien monster went by the name of the Hulk.[187] Coincidentally, the character's debut story was also illustrated by Jack Kirby. The character reappeared in issue #66 (March 1961). Since then the character has been a mainstay in the Marvel Universe, and was renamed Xemnu the Living Titan.[188] A huge, orange, slimy monster called the Hulk was featured in a movie titled The Hulk in Tales to Astonish #21 (July 1961). In modern-day reprints, the character's name was changed to the Glop.[189] In other media[edit] Main article: Hulk in other media Reception[edit] The Hulk was ranked #1 on a listing of Marvel Comics' monster characters in 2015.[190] See also[edit] List of Marvel Comics superhero debuts United States portal Comics portal Speculative fiction portal References[edit] ^ a b Cronin, Brian (November 3, 2005). "Comic Book Urban Legends Revealed #23". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. [Stan] Lee began referring (for more than a couple of months) to the Incredible Hulk's alter ego as 'Bob Banner' rather than the 'Bruce Banner' that he was originally named. Responding to criticism of the goof, Stan Lee, in issue #28 of the Fantastic Four, laid out how he was going to handle the situation, 'There's only one thing to do-we're not going to take the cowardly way out. From now on his name is Robert Bruce Banner-so we can't go wrong no matter WHAT we call him!' ^ Simonson, Walt (w), Adams, Arthur (p), Thibert, Art (i). "Big Trouble on Little Earth!" Fantastic Four 347 (December 1990) ^ a b c d e f g DeFalco, Tom (2003). The Hulk: The Incredible Guide. London, United Kingdom: Dorling Kindersley. p. 200. ISBN 978-0-7894-9260-9. ^ Miller, Matt (July 13, 2016). "Marvel Just Killed Off Another Iconic Superhero (But it Was the Worst One, Really)". Esquire. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved October 1, 2016. ^ Rothman, Michael (July 13, 2016). "Marvel Kills Off Iconic 'Avenger' and 50-Year-Old Superhero". Good Morning America. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved October 1, 2016. ^ DeFalco, Tom; Gilbert, Laura, ed. (2008). "1960s". Marvel Chronicle A Year by Year History. London, United Kingdom: Dorling Kindersley. p. 85. ISBN 978-0756641238. Based on their collaboration on The Fantastic Four, [Stan] Lee worked with Jack Kirby. Instead of a team that fought traditional Marvel monsters, however, Lee decided that this time he wanted to feature a monster as the hero.CS1 maint: extra text: authors list (link) ^ Cooper, Quentin (May 11, 2012). "Hulk makes a monster out of gamma rays". BBC. Archived from the original on October 13, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016. ^ a b c d e f Weinstein, Simcha (2006). Up, Up, and Oy Vey!. Baltimore, Maryland: Leviathan Press. pp. 82–97. ISBN 978-1-881927-32-7. ^ Lee, Stan (1974). Origins of Marvel Comics. New York, New York: Simon & Schuster/Marvel Fireside Books. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-671-21863-8. ^ Hill, Dave (July 17, 2003). "Green with anger". The Guardian. London, United Kingdom. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. one of the Hulk comic books' artists, Jack Kirby, has said he was inspired by seeing a woman rescue her child from beneath a trapped car. ^ Groth, Gary (23 May 2011). "Jack Kirby Interview - Part 6". The Comics Journal. KIRBY: The Hulk I created when I saw a woman lift a car. Her baby was caught under the running board of this car. The little child was playing in the gutter and he was crawling from the gutter onto the sidewalk under the running board of this car — he was playing in the gutter. His mother was horrified. She looked from the rear window of the car, and this woman in desperation lifted the rear end of the car. From The Comics Journal #134 (February 1990) ^ Lipstak, Andrew (30 August 2015). "The Incredible Hulk Was Inspired By A Woman Saving Her Baby". Gizmodo. Jack Kirby witnessed a woman lift a car to get her child out from under it. The moment helped inspire one of his most famous creations: the Incredible Hulk. ^ a b c Gresh, Lois; Robert Weinberg (September 29, 2003). The Science of Superheroes. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-46882-0.[page needed] ^ Poole, W. Scott. Monsters in America: Our Historical Obsession with the Hideous and the Haunting. Waco, Texas: Baylor University Press, 2011. ISBN 978-1-60258-314-6. ^ Comics Buyer's Guide #1617 (June 2006) ^ Murray, Will (July 2003). "The Historic Hulk". Starlog (312): 73. ^ Boatz, Darrel L. (December 1988). "Stan Lee". Comics Interview (64). Fictioneer Books. p. 15. ^ "14 Things You Didn't Know About the Hulk". ScreenRant. 2016-06-03. Retrieved 2019-12-15. ^ Manning, Matthew K.; Gilbert, Laura, ed. (2012). "1960s". Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. London, United Kingdom: Dorling Kindersley. p. 26. ISBN 978-0756692360. Another important character entered Spider-Man's life in Amazing Spider-Man #14. Hiding in the same cavern that Spider-Man entered during his fight with the Enforcers and the [Green] Goblin, Totally paranoic now, the Hulk attacked the web-slinger.CS1 maint: extra text: authors list (link) ^ DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 102: "Tales to Astonish #60 ... introduced a new series – The Incredible Hulk – starring the famous character." ^ DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 128: "Hailing 1968 as the beginning of the 'Second Age of Marvel Comics,' and with more titles to play with, editor Stan Lee discarded his split books and gave more characters their own titles ... Tales to Astonish #101 [was followed] by The Incredible Hulk #102." ^ "The Incredible Hulk". Markify. Retrieved January 6, 2016. ^ Amash, Jim (2010). Sal Buscema: Comics' Fast & Furious Artist. Raleigh, North Carolina: TwoMorrows Publishing. p. 17. ISBN 978-1605490212. ^ Sanderson, Peter "1970s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 167: "Len Wein wrote and Herb Trimpe drew Wolverine's cameo appearance in The Incredible Hulk #180 and his premiere in issue #181." ^ Sanderson, "1970s", in Gilbert (2008), p. 178: "This black-and-white magazine starred the Hulk in adventures set in Europe shortly after his original six-issue series." ^ Sanderson, "1970s", in Gilbert (2008), p. 186: "To appeal to the audience of the popular new Incredible Hulk TV series, Marvel revamped The Rampaging Hulk magazine, calling it The Hulk!." ^ Greenberg, Glenn (February 2014). "The Televised Hulk". Back Issue! (70): 19–26. ^ O'Neill, Patrick Daniel (February 1992). "Peter David". Comics Interview (105). Fictioneer Books. p. 22. ^ Taylor, Robert (August 3, 2006). "Greg Goes Wild on Planet Pak". Wizard. Wizard Entertainment Group. Archived from the original on April 2, 2007. Retrieved November 15, 2007. ^ Serwin, Andy (July 23, 2007). "The Wizard Retrospective: Mike Mignola". Wizard. Wizard Entertainment Group. Archived from the original on January 20, 2008. Retrieved November 13, 2007. ^ a b DeFalco "1980s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 227: "Dr. Bruce Banner first met Betty Ross in The Incredible Hulk #1 (May 1962) and finally married her in issue #319 by John Byrne." ^ Radford, Bill (February 21, 1999). "Marvel's not-so-jolly green giant gets a fresh start and a new team". The Gazette. Colorado Springs, Colorado. p. L4. ^ The Unofficial Handbook of Marvel Comics Creators: Hulk (II) (1999–2000) ^ Manning, Matthew K. "1990s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 294: "Bruce Banner took to the road in an attempt to escape his past in this new series by writer John Byrne and artist Ron Garney." ^ a b Jenkins, Paul (w), Garney, Ron (p), Buscema, Sal (i). "Snake Eyes, Part 2" The Incredible Hulk v3, 13 (April 2000) ^ Manning "2000s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 310: "Creating a lengthy run to rival J. Michael Straczynski over on The Amazing Spider-Man and Brian Michael Bendis on Daredevil, writer Bruce Jones reinvented the green goliath with a modern, cinematic approach." ^ "Slight change of plan with Hulk". PeterDavid.net. September 30, 2004. Archived from the original on October 25, 2007. Retrieved November 5, 2007. ^ David, Peter (July 18, 2005). "My leaving Hulk". The Incredible Hulk Message Board. Archived from the original on March 7, 2006. Retrieved August 28, 2005. ^ a b The Unofficial Handbook of Marvel Comics Creators: The Incredible Hulk (IV) • Incredible Hulks (2009-2011) ^ The Unofficial Handbook of Marvel Comics Creators: Incredible Hulk (V) (2011-2012) ^ Hoffman, Carla (August 8, 2012). "Marvel NOW! Q&A: Indestructible Hulk". Marvel Comics. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2012. ^ Arrant, Chris (January 7, 2014). "Mark Waid Talks 2014 Hulk Relaunch, Who Shot Bruce Banner?". Newsarama. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. ^ Lee, Stan (w), Kirby, Jack (p), Reinman, Paul (i). "The Hulk" The Incredible Hulk 1: 8 (May 1962) ^ Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Roussos, George (i). "The Incredible Hulk" Tales to Astonish 60 (October 1964) ^ Sanderson "1970s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 144: "Bruce [Banner] and Betty Ross decided to get married, Banner having erased his brute side and gained control over the changes. But on their wedding day, Banner's archenemy, the Leader, hit Bruce with radiation that turned him once more into a savage, uncontrollable Hulk." ^ Thomas, Roy; Gerber, Steve (w), Trimpe, Herb (p), Trapani, Sal (i). "Frenzy On a Far-Away World!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 158 (December 1972) ^ Sanderson "1970s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 151: "[Roy] Thomas and artist Ross Andru reunited [Doctor] Strange, the Hulk, and Namor as a brand new Marvel superhero team – the Defenders." ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Mignola, Mike (p), Talaoc, Gerry (i). "Weird Song of the Wen-Di-Go" The Incredible Hulk v2, 272 (June 1982) ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Mignola, Mike (p), Talaoc, Gerry (i). "Amnesty" The Incredible Hulk v2, 2 (October 1982) ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Mignola, Mike (p), Talaoc, Gerry (i). "To Kill or Cure!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 296 (June 1984) ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Mignola, Mike (p), Talaoc, Gerry (i). "Monster" The Incredible Hulk v2, 312 (October 1985) ^ Byrne, John (w), Byrne, John (p), Byrne, John; Williams, Keith (i). "Freedom!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 315 (January 1986) ^ David, Peter (w), Purves, Jeff (p), Gustovich, Mike (i). "Crap Shoot" The Incredible Hulk v2, 347 (September 1988) ^ Byrne, John (w), Byrne, John (p), Byrne, John; Williams, Keith (i). "Member of the Wedding" The Incredible Hulk v2, 319 (May 1986) ^ Milgrom, Al (w), Milgrom, Al (p), Barras, Dell; Bulanadi, Danny (i). "Certain Intangibles" The Incredible Hulk v2, 323 (September 1986) ^ David, Peter (w), Keown, Dale (p), McLeod, Bob (i). "He's Back" The Incredible Hulk v2, 372 (August 1990) ^ David, Peter (w), Keown, Dale (p), Farmer, Mark (i). "Moving On" The Incredible Hulk v2, 382 (June 1991) ^ Manning "1990s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 253: "The Hulk first met Agamemnon, the leader of the Pantheon team, in a story written by Peter David with art by Dale Keown." ^ David, Peter (w), Weeks, Lee (p), Palmer, Tom (i). "Tempest Fugit Conclusion" The Incredible Hulk v3, 81 (July 2005) ^ Incredible Hulk Vol. 3 #92-104. Marvel Comics. ^ Incredible Hulk Vol. 3 #105. Marvel Comics. ^ World War Hulk #5. Marvel Comics. ^ Pak, Greg (w), Kitson, Barry (p), Hanna, Scott; Kitson, Barry; Leisten, Jay (i). "Fratricide" Incredible Hulks 617 (January 2011), Marvel Comics ^ Fraction, Matt (w), Immonen, Stuart (p), Von Grawbadger, Wade (i). "Fear Itself 5: Brawl" Fear Itself 5 (October 2011), Marvel Comics ^ Gischler, Victor (w), Stegman, Ryan (p), Babinski, Michael (i). "Hulk vs. Dracula, Part 1" Fear Itself: Hulk vs. Dracula 1 (November 2011), Marvel Comics ^ Gischler, Victor (w), Stegman, Ryan (p), Babinski, Michael (i). "Hulk vs. Dracula, Part 2" Fear Itself: Hulk vs. Dracula 2 (November 2011), Marvel Comics ^ Gischler, Victor (w), Stegman, Ryan (p), Babinski, Michael (i). "Hulk vs. Dracula, Part 3" Fear Itself: Hulk vs. Dracula 3 (December 2011), Marvel Comics ^ Aaron, Jason (w), Portacio, Whilce (p), Martinez, Allen; Ketcham, Rick; Hanna, Scott (i). "Hulk vs. Banner! Chapter Two: There Will Be Doom" The Incredible Hulk v4, 5 (April 2012), Marvel Comics ^ Aaron, Jason (w), Portacio, Whilce (p), Martinez, Allen (i). "Hulk vs. Banner Chapter Three: And Only One Shall Smash!" The Incredible Hulk v4, 6 (May 2012), Marvel Comics ^ Aaron, Jason (w), Portacio, Whilce; Vlasco, Juan (p), Martinez, Allen; Ho, Don (i). "Hulk vs. Banner! The monster is dead ... Long live the monster!" The Incredible Hulk v4, 7 (June 2012), Marvel Comics ^ Aaron, Jason (w), Talajić, Dalibor (p), Talajić, Dalibor (i). "The Search for the City of Sasquatches" The Incredible Hulk v4, 11 (September 2012), Marvel Comics ^ Aaron, Jason (w), Palo, Jefte (p), Palo, Jefte (i). "Hulk: United Part 1" The Incredible Hulk v4, 13 (November 2012), Marvel Comics ^ Waid, Mark (w), Yu, Leinil Francis (p), Alanguilan, Gerry (i). "Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D." Indestructible Hulk 1 (January 2013), Marvel Comics ^ Waid, Mark (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Hennessy, Andrew (i). "Who Shot the Hulk #4" Hulk v3, 4 (August 2014), Marvel Comics ^ Gillen, Kieron; Waid, Mark (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Hennessy, Andrew (i). Original Sin 3.1 (August 2014), Marvel Comics ^ Gillen, Kieron; Waid, Mark (w), Ross, Luke (p), Ross, Luke (i). Original Sin 3.4 (October 2014), Marvel Comics ^ Remender, Rick (w), Yu, Leinil Francis (p), Alanguilan, Gerardo; Yu, Leinil Francis (i). "Altered beast" Avengers & X-Men: AXIS 4 (January 2015), Marvel Comics ^ Remender, Rick (w), Dodson, Terry (p), Dodson, Rachel (i). "Something clearly went wrong" Avengers & X-Men: AXIS 5 (January 2015) ^ a b Duggan, Gerry (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Hennessy, Andrew (i). "The Omega Hulk Chapter One" Hulk v3, 5 (October 2014), Marvel Comics ^ Duggan, Gerry (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Hennessy, Andrew (i). "The Omega Hulk Chapter Twelve" Hulk v3, 16 (July 2015), Marvel Comics ^ Hickman, Jonathan (w), Ribić, Esad (p), Ribić, Esad (i). "The End Times" Secret Wars 1 (July 2015), Marvel Comics ^ Pak, Greg (w), Cho, Frank (p), Cho, Frank (i). "Cho Time: Part One" Totally Awesome Hulk 1 (February 2016), Marvel Comics Pak, Greg (w), Cho, Frank (p), Cho, Frank (i). "Cho Time: Part Two" Totally Awesome Hulk 2 (March 2016), Marvel Comics Pak, Greg (w), Cho, Frank (p), Cho, Frank (i). "Cho Time: Part Three" Totally Awesome Hulk 3 (April 2016), Marvel Comics Pak, Greg (w), Cho, Frank (p), Cho, Frank (i). "Cho Time: Part Four" Totally Awesome Hulk 4 (May 2016) ^ Pak, Greg (w), Davis, Alan (p), Farmer, Mark (i). Totally Awesome Hulk 7 (August 2016), Marvel Comics ^ Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Marquez, David (a). "How we looking, Friday?" Civil War II 2 (August 2016), Marvel Comics ^ Bendis, Brian Michael (w), Marquez, David; Coipel, Olivier (a). "Mister Murdock, call your first witness" Civil War II 3 (September 2016), Marvel Comics ^ Pak, Greg (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Deering, Marc; Hanna, Scott (i). Civil War II: The Fallen 1 (October 2016), Marvel Comics ^ Duggan, Gerry (w), Stegman, Ryan (p), Stegman, Ryan (i). "A Failed Experiment" Uncanny Avengers v3, 14 (November 2016), Marvel Comics ^ Duggan, Gerry (w), Larraz, Pepe (p), Larraz, Pepe (i). "The Rebound" Uncanny Avengers v3, 15 (December 2016), Marvel Comics ^ Uncanny Avengers Vol. 3 #17. Marvel Comics. ^ Secret Empire #6-7 (2017). Marvel Comics. ^ Avengers #679-688. Marvel Comics. ^ a b Immortal Hulk #1. Marvel Comics. ^ Absolute Carnage #3. Marvel Comics. ^ Absolute Carnage: Immortal Hulk #1 (October 2, 2019). Marvel Comics. ^ Parrish, Robin (July 13, 2016). "5 Storylines Marvel Should Use For a 'Hulk' Movie". Tech Times. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. Retrieved October 2, 2016. ^ McGinley, Brendan (June 19, 2013). "The 5 Most Ridiculous Attempts to Reinvent Superheroes". Cracked. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. Retrieved October 2, 2016. ^ Zambrano, Mark (June 6, 2016). "11 Biggest WTF Things The Hulk Has Ever Done". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. Retrieved October 2, 2016. ^ "Hulk". Marvel Comics. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved September 24, 2016. Height 5' 9​1⁄2" (Banner); 6'6" (gray Hulk); 7' – 8' (green/savageHulk); 7'6" (green/Professor Hulk) Weight 128 lbs. (Banner); 900 lbs. (gray Hulk); 1,040 – 1,400 lbs.(green/savage Hulk); 1,150 lbs. (green/Professor Hulk) ^ a b "Duo Dynamics: The Many Incarnations of HULK-BANNER Bond? (Page 2)". Newsarama. December 23, 2015. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. ^ a b "Duo Dynamics: The Many Incarnations of HULK-BANNER Bond? (Page 3)". Newsarama. December 23, 2015. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. ^ "Duo Dynamics: The Many Incarnations of HULK-BANNER Bond? (Page 5)". Newsarama. December 23, 2015. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. ^ a b "Duo Dynamics: The Many Incarnations of HULK-BANNER Bond? (Page 9)". Newsarama. December 23, 2015. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved October 8, 2016. ^ Kaplan, Arie (2006). Masters of the Comic Book Universe Revealed!. Chicago, Illinois: Chicago Review Press. p. 58. ISBN 978-1556526336. ^ Aaron, Jason (w), Palo, Jefte (p), Palo, Jefte (i). "Hulk: United Part 1" The Incredible Hulk v4, 13 (November 2012), Marvel Comics ^ Lee, Stan (w), Kirby, Jack (p), Ayers, Dick (i). "The Monster and the Machine!" The Incredible Hulk 4 (November 1962) ^ Milgrom, Al (w), Milgrom, Al (p), Janke, Dennis (i). "The Monster's Analyst" The Incredible Hulk v2, 221 (September 1972) ^ a b Wright, Bradford (March 22, 2001). Comic Book Nation. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 336. ISBN 978-0-8018-6514-5. ^ Randerson, James (May 17, 2006). "Superman copycats 'risk health'". The Guardian. London, United Kingdom. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. ^ Milgrom, Al (w), Milgrom, Al (p), Janke, Dennis (i). "The More Things Change ..." The Incredible Hulk v2, 324 (October 1986) ^ Peter David (w), Jeff Purves (p), Mike Gustovich (i). "Crapshoot" The Incredible Hulk v2, 347 (September 1988) ^ Incredible Hulk Vol. 3 #60. Marvel Comics. ^ Incredible Hulk Vol. 2 #371. Marvel Comics. ^ David, Peter (w), Keown, Dale (p), Farmer, Mark (i). "Hit and Myth" The Incredible Hulk v2, 379 (March 1991) ^ The Incredible Hulk Vol. 2 #377 (January 1991). Marvel Comics. ^ The Incredible Hulk Vol. 3 #19. Marvel Comics. ^ Immortal Hulk #27. Marvel Comics. ^ Incredible Hulk Vol. 3 #93 ^ Pisani, Joseph. "The Smartest Superheroes". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2007. ^ Pak, Greg (w), Oliver, Ben (p), Oliver, Ben (i), Gandini, Veronica (col), Bowland, Simon (let), Paniccia, Mark (ed). "The List: Hulk" Dark Reign: The List – Hulk 1 (December 2009) ^ Pak, Greg (w), Pagulayan, Carlo (p), Huet, Jeffrey (i). "Warbound -- Part IV" The Incredible Hulk v3, 109 (October 2007) ^ Achenbach, Joel (June 19, 2003). "All the Rage: The Hulk in Us All". The Washington Post. ^ a b Hill, Kyle (December 9, 2014). "Who Would Win In A Fight Between Superman And The Hulk?". Nerdist News. Archived from the original on August 28, 2015. Retrieved October 3, 2016. ^ Lobdell, Scott; Waid, Mark (w), Kubert, Adam; Bennett, Joe (p), Green, Dan; Thibert, Art; Townsend, Tim; Delpergang, Jesse (i). "With Great Power ..." Onslaught: Marvel 1 (October 1996) ^ Pak, Greg (April 2, 2008). "Hulk, Skaar & Hercules". Broken Frontier. Archived from the original on January 11, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2010. ^ a b c Pak, Greg (w), Pelletier, Paul (p), Miki, Danny (i). "Heart of the Monster Part Six" Incredible Hulks 635 (October 2011) ^ a b Pak, Greg (w), Pelletier, Paul (p), Miki, Danny (i). "Heart of the Monster Part Five" Incredible Hulks 634 (October 2011) ^ Priest, Christopher (w), Bogdanove, Jon (p), Bogdanove, Jon (i). "Tides" The Incredible Hulk v3, 33 (December 2001) ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Buscema, Sal (p), Buscema, Sal (i). "Waiting For the U-Foes!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 254 (December 1980) ^ a b David, Peter (w), Medina, Angel (p), Riggs, Robin (i). "The Big Bang" The Incredible Hulk v2, 440 (April 1996) ^ Pak, Greg (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Janson, Klaus (i). "The Incredible Hulk Versus the Sentry" World War Hulk 5 (January 2008) ^ David, Peter (w), Wildman, Andrew (p), Ivy, Chris (i). "Cold Storage" The Incredible Hulk v2, 394 (June 1992) ^ Cooper, Chris (w), Rebner, Jeff (p), Irwin, Mark (i). "Sins of the Father" The Incredible Hulk '97 1 (1997) ^ Pak, Greg (w), Romita Jr., John (p), Janson, Klaus (i). "Hulk" World War Hulk 2 (September 2007) ^ Way, Daniel (w), Dazo, Bong (p), Pimentel, Joe (i). "Operation: Annihilation Part One: Journada Del Muerto" Deadpool v4, 37 (July 2011) ^ a b Straczynski, J. Michael (w), McKone, Mike (p), Lanning, Andy (i). "What Happens in Vegas, Stays in Vegas" Fantastic Four 533 (January 2006) ^ a b Pak, Greg (w), Pagulayan, Carlo (p), Huet, Jeffrey (i). "Planet Hulk Armageddon Part II" The Incredible Hulk v3, 105 (June 2007) ^ Wilson, Ron (w), Wilson, Ron (p), Morgan, Tom (i). "Kids Will Be Kids" Marvel Comics Presents 52 (June 1990) ^ Greenberg, Glen; DeMatteis, J. M. (w), Garney, Ron (p), Wiacek, Bob (i). "Heart of the Beast" Silver Surfer v3, 125 (February 1997) ^ Lee, Stan (w), Trimpe, Herb (p), Adkins, Dan (i). "The Brute Battles On!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 112 (February 1969) ^ Wein, Len (w), Buscema, Sal (p), Palmer, Tom (i). "You Just Don't Quarrel With the Quintronic Man!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 213 (July 1977) ^ David, Peter (w), Weeks, Lee (p), Palmer, Tom (i). "Tempest Fugit, Part 1 of 5" The Incredible Hulk v3, 77 (March 2005) ^ David, Peter (w), Rio, Al; Weeks, Lee; Phillips, Sean (p), Hanna, Scott; Weeks, Lee; Palmer, Tom (i). "Casus Belli" World War Hulk Prologue: World Breaker 1 (July 2007) ^ David, Peter (w), Keown, Dale (p), Farmer, Mark (i). "Betrayals" The Incredible Hulk v2, 398 (October 1992) ^ a b David, Peter (w), Kubert, Adam (p), Farmer, Mark (i). "Homecoming" The Incredible Hulk v2, 460 (January 1998) ^ David, Peter (w), Keown, Dale (p), Weems, Joe; Livesay, John (i). "The Last Titan" Incredible Hulk: The End 1 (August 2002) ^ Cates, Donny (w), Shaw, Geoff (p), Shaw, Geoff (i). "Thanos Wins" Thanos v2, 17 (March 2018) ^ Byrne, John (w), Byrne, John (p), Wiacek, Bob (i). "Call of the Desert" The Incredible Hulk v2, 314 (December 1985) ^ Wein, Len (w), Buscema, Sal (p), Abel, Jack (i). "The Titan Strikes Back!" Defenders 12 (February 1974) ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Buscema, Sal (p), Buscema, Sal; Milgrom, Al (i). "The Family That Dies Together ... !" The Incredible Hulk v2, 259 (May 1981) ^ Loeb, Jeph (w), Churchill, Ian (p), Hanna, Scott (i). "Loose Cannons" Cable 34 (August 1996) ^ Gage, Christos (w), Di Vito, Andrea (p), Di Vito, Andrea (i). "Hard Questions" World War Hulk: X-Men 1 (August 2007) ^ Claremont, Chris; Wein, Len (w), Buscema, Sal (p), Abel, Jack (i). "And Six Shall Crush the Hulk" The Incredible Hulk Annual 5 (October 1976) ^ Mantlo, Bill (w), Buscema, Sal (p), Buscema, Sal (i). "Devolution!" The Incredible Hulk v2, 266 (December 1981) ^ David, Peter (w), Purves, Jeff (p), Severin, Marie (i). "Countdown Part 4: The Abomination" The Incredible Hulk v2, 364 (December 1989) ^ David, Peter (w), Pérez, George (p), Pérez, George (i). "Part 2 of 2" Hulk: Future Imperfect 2 (January 1993) ^ Gage, Christos (w), Di Vito, Andrea (p), Di Vito, Andrea (i). "Sworn to Protect" World War Hulk: X-Men 2 (September 2007) ^ Jenkins, Paul (w), Keown, Dale (p), Keown, Dale (i). The Darkness / The Incredible Hulk 1 (June 2004) ^ a b David, Peter (w), Lee, Jae (p), Lee, Jae (i). "Dear Tricia ..." The Incredible Hulk v3, 82 (August 2005) ^ Thomas, Roy (w), Trimpe, Herb (p), Buscema, Sal (i). "Descent Into the Time-Stream" The Incredible Hulk v2, 135 (January 1971) ^ Waid, Mark (w), Jacinto, Kim (p), Jacinto, Kim (i). "Agent of T.I.M.E. Part Five" The Indestructible Hulk 15 (January 2014) ^ Waid, Mark (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Hennessy, Andrew (i). "Who Shot the Hulk #1" Hulk v3, 1 (June 2014) ^ David, Peter (w), Keown, Dale (p), McLeod, Bob (i). "Silent Screams" The Incredible Hulk v2, 369 (May 1990) ^ DeFalco "1980s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 197: "Stan Lee decided to introduce a female version of the Hulk ... With the help of artist John Buscema, Lee created Jennifer Walters, the cousin of Bruce Banner." ^ Pepose, David (June 11, 2010). "Dark Son Rising As The Other Son Of Hulk Hits Earth". Newsarama. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved June 11, 2010. ^ "Smash!". Archived from the original on June 12, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2008. ^ "The 200 Greatest Comic Book Characters of All Time". Wizard. May 23, 2008. Archived from the original on May 26, 2008. The one constant for this 'atomic Jekyll-and-Hyde,' as they used to say, remains Bruce Banner's eternal struggle to control the gamma-spawned half of his psyche. The green goliath never goes out of style: The Hulk is, undeniably, all the rage. ^ "The 50 Greatest Comic Book Characters". Empire. December 5, 2006. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2010. ^ "Top 100 Comic Book Heroes". IGN. 2011. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. ^ "The Top 50 Avengers". IGN. April 30, 2012. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015. Retrieved July 28, 2015. ^ Lahr, John (June 30, 2003). "Becoming the Hulk". The New Yorker: 72. ^ Phelan, Stephen (December 23, 2007). "The Clash of Symbols". Sunday Herald. Glasgow, United Kingdom. p. 42. ^ Diekmann, Stefanie (April 24, 2004). "Hero and superhero". The Guardian. London, United Kingdom. Archived from the original on June 12, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2008. ^ Daniels, Les (1991). Marvel: Five Fabulous Decades of the World's Greatest Comics. New York, New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 89. ISBN 9780810938212. ^ Goldberg, Jonah (May 7, 2002). "Spin City". National Review Online. Archived from the original on June 8, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2008. ^ Swartzwelder, John (writer); Sheetz, Chuck (director) (April 28, 2002). "I Am Furious Yellow". The Simpsons. Season 13. Episode 18. Fox Broadcasting Company. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Smith, Danny (writer); Polcino, Dominic (director) (April 18, 1999). "Chitty Chitty Death Bang". Family Guy. Season 1. Episode 3. Fox Broadcasting Company. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Elton, Ben, Mayall, Rik, and Mayer, Lise (writers); Posner, Geoff (director) (June 19, 1984). "Summer Holiday". The Young Ones. Series 2. Episode 6. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Quigley, Maeve (February 5, 2008). "We love telly: We love soaps". Daily Mirror. London, United Kingdom. p. 1. ^ "Boris Johnson, channelling the Incredible Hulk, defiant on October 31 Brexit". Euronews. 15 September 2019. Retrieved 15 September 2019. ^ Read, Jonathon (15 September 2019). "Boris Johnson compared himself to the Hulk and the internet reacted with scorn". The New European. Retrieved 15 September 2019. ^ "Some L.A. Niggaz" from 2001. Dr. Dre. 1999. ^ "Welcome to Atlanta" from Instructions and Word of Mouf. Jermaine Dupri and Ludacris. 2002. ^ Marchetti, Gina (November 2004). "Hollywood Taiwan". Film International. 2 (6): 42–51. doi:10.1386/fiin.2.6.42. ISSN 1651-6826. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007. Retrieved March 23, 2008. ^ Yang, Jeff (June 1, 2006). "Look ... Up in the sky! It's Asian Man!". San Francisco Chronicle. Hearst Corporation. Archived from the original on June 12, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2008. ^ Choi, Charles Q. (June 11, 2008). "Gamma Rays: The Incredible, Hulking Reality". LiveScience. Archived from the original on April 9, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2008. ^ Christiansen, Jeff (September 11, 2010). "The Hulk (Albert Poole)". The Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2011. ^ DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 79: "The lead story of [Journey into Mystery] issue #62, 'I Was a Slave of the Living Hulk', introduced a giant monster called the Hulk – similar in name only to the future Hulk." ^ Christiansen, Jeff (March 15, 2012). "Xemnu the Titan". The Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved January 23, 2013. ^ Christiansen, Jeff (February 8, 2006). "Hulk (Glop)". The Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2011. ^ Buxton, Marc (October 30, 2015). "Marvel's 31 Best Monsters". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. The Hulk is way more superhero than horror icon, but in the character's year history, there were plenty of times that this titanic creature was cast in the role of classic monster. External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Hulk at the Marvel Universe wiki Hulk at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) Hulk at the Grand Comics Database Hulk at Curlie Hulk on IMDb Bruce Banner on Marvel Database, a Marvel Comics wiki v t e The Hulk Stan Lee Jack Kirby Hulk family Hulk/Bruce Banner Devil Hulk Guilt Hulk She-Hulk/Jennifer Walters Skaar Red Hulk Thunderbolt Ross Robert Maverick A-Bomb/Rick Jones She-Hulk/Lyra Hiro-Kala Red She-Hulk/Betty Ross Hulk/Amadeus Cho Weapon H Supporting characters Avengers Black Widow Captain America Doctor Strange Hawkeye Iron Man Spider-Man Thor Defenders Doc Samson Fantastic Four Gamma Corps Glorian Jack McGee/Jackie McGee Jarella Jim Wilson Marlo Chandler Namor Pantheon Rebecca Banner S.H.I.E.L.D. Nick Fury Teen Brigade Warbound Caiera Elloe Kaifi Hiroim Korg Miek No-Name X-Men Wolverine Enemies Main enemies Abomination Absorbing Man Brian Banner Bi-Beast Gargoyle Glenn Talbot Juggernaut Leader Madman Maestro Red Hulk Red King Rhino Ringmaster Thunderbolt Ross Tyrannus Wendigo Xemnu Zzzax Group enemies A.I.M. Alpha Flight Circus of Crime Enclave Hulkbusters Maggia Riot Squad Secret Empire Thunderbolts U-Foes Winter Guard Other enemies Arsenal Attuma Boomerang Cobalt Man Constrictor D'Spayre Devastator Doctor Doom Flux Glob Gold Bug Gremlin Grey Gargoyle Guilt Hulk Hammer and Anvil Hulk Robot It the Living Colossus John Ryker Killer Shrike Klaatu Man-Beast Man-Bull Metal Master Minotaur Missing Link Mister Hyde MODOK Moonstone Nightmare Professor Phobos Psyklop Puffball Collective Ravage Sandman Shaper of Worlds Super-Adaptoid Umar Woodgod Neutral rivals Doc Samson Hulkbuster suit (Iron Man) Namor Sabra Sasquatch Thing Thor Thunderbolt Ross Thundra Wolverine Television Live action The Incredible Hulk (1977–1982) episodes soundtrack home video releases The Incredible Hulk Returns The Trial of the Incredible Hulk The Death of the Incredible Hulk Animation The Marvel Super Heroes (1966) The Incredible Hulk (1982–1983) (characters) The Incredible Hulk (1996–1997) Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. (episodes) Films Live action Hulk (2003) The Incredible Hulk (2008) soundtrack Bruce Banner (Marvel Cinematic Universe) Animation Marvel Animated Features Iron Man and Hulk: Heroes United Where Monsters Dwell Video games Questprobe featuring The Hulk The Incredible Hulk (1994) The Pantheon Saga Hulk (2003) Ultimate Destruction The Incredible Hulk (2008) Titles The Incredible Hulk Hulk Comic The End The Manga Tales to Astonish The Rampaging Hulk 5 Ronin Storylines "Planet Hulk" "World War Hulk" "Fall of the Hulks" "World War Hulks" Related articles The Incredible Hulk (comic strip) Other versions Maestro Ultimate Hulk Hulk 2099 Tyrone Cash Hulk Hands The Incredible Hulk Coaster The Incredible Hulks Hulk Classics hysterical strength Category v t e Avengers characters Founding members Ant-Man (Hank Pym) Captain America Hulk Iron Man Thor Wasp (Janet van Dyne) Recurring members Agent Venom Ant-Man Scott Lang Eric O'Grady Beast Black Knight Black Panther Black Widow Blade Captain Britain Captain Marvel Mar-Vell Carol Danvers Crystal Doctor Druid Doctor Strange Echo Falcon Firebird Ghost Rider (Robbie Reyes) Gilgamesh Hawkeye Hellcat Hercules Iron Fist Jocasta Justice Luke Cage Mantis Mockingbird Moondragon Moon Knight Ms. Marvel Namor Nebula Nova Richard Rider Sam Alexander Quake Quasar Quicksilver Rocket Raccoon Scarlet Witch Sentry Sersi Shang-Chi She-Hulk Spectrum Spider-Man Peter Parker Miles Morales Spider-Woman Jessica Drew Julia Carpenter Starfox Stingray Storm Swordsman Thor (Jane Foster) Tigra Valkyrie Vision War Machine Wasp Hope van Dyne Nadia van Dyne White Tiger Winter Soldier Wolverine Wonder Man Other characters Supporting characters Agent 13 Asgardians Balder the Brave Eitri Frigga Heimdall Lady Sif Odin Warriors Three Fandral Hogun Volstagg Aunt May Beta Ray Bill Bethany Cabe Betty Ross Daily Bugle Betty Brant J. Jonah Jameson Robbie Robertson Doc Samson Dora Milaje Nakia Okoye Erik Selvig Guardsman Happy Hogan Henry Peter Gyrich H.E.R.B.I.E. J.A.R.V.I.S. Mary Jane Watson Pepper Potts Rick Jones Shuri Wong Allies Alpha Flight Champions Daredevil Defenders Eternals Ajak Druig Ikaris Makkari Sprite Thena Fantastic Four Human Torch Invisible Woman Mister Fantastic Thing Guardians of the Galaxy Drax Gamora Groot Mantis Star-Lord Inhumans Black Bolt Gorgon Karnak Lockjaw Medusa Triton Jessica Jones Midnight Sons Elsa Bloodstone Morbius Werewolf by Night New Warriors S.H.I.E.L.D. Maria Hill Nick Fury Phil Coulson Silver Surfer Thunderbolts Atlas Fixer Ghost MACH-I Moonstone Songbird Uatu the Watcher X-Men Angel Banshee Colossus Cyclops Emma Frost Gambit Havok Iceman Jean Grey (Phoenix) Jubilee Kitty Pryde Nightcrawler Professor X Psylocke Rogue Ultraforce Hardcase Prime Neutral allies Deadpool Elektra Ghost Rider (Johnny Blaze) Punisher Sandman Squadron Supreme Hyperion Thunderbolt Ross Venom Yelena Belova Enemies Central rogues Baron Zemo Heinrich Zemo Helmut Zemo Blood Brothers Collector Count Nefaria Doctor Doom Enchantress Galactus Grandmaster Graviton Green Goblin Norman Osborn Grim Reaper High Evolutionary Hood Immortus Kang the Conqueror Loki Magneto MODOK Onslaught Red Skull Super-Adaptoid Super-Skrull Taskmaster Thanos Ultron Other supervillains Annihilus Ares Arkon Baron Strucker Beyonder Carnage Crossbones Doctor Octopus Dormammu Egghead Ghaur Grey Gargoyle Griffin Klaw Knull Korvac Leader Living Laser Mandarin Master Pandemonium Maximus Mephisto Morgan le Fay Powderkeg Surtur Whirlwind Organizations A.I.M. Black Order Brotherhood of Mutants Celestials Chitauri Circus of Crime Dark Avengers Enclave Frightful Four H.A.M.M.E.R. The Hand Hydra Kree Legion of the Unliving Lethal Legion Maggia Masters of Evil Mindless Ones Secret Empire Sinister Six Skrulls Sons of the Serpent Squadron Sinister Symbiotes U-Foes Wrecking Crew Zodiac Alternative versions Alternate versions of the Avengers A-Force A-Next Agents of Atlas Avengers A.I. Avengers Academy Dark Avengers Force Works Great Lakes Avengers Mighty Avengers New Avengers Members Secret Avengers Ultimates Members Uncanny Avengers U.S.Avengers West Coast Avengers Members Young Avengers Marvel Cinematic Universe Bruce Banner Bucky Barnes Carol Danvers Clint Barton Loki Natasha Romanoff Nick Fury Peter Parker Rocket Sam Wilson Scott Lang Stephen Strange Steve Rogers T'Challa Thanos Thor Tony Stark Vision Wanda Maximoff Others Captain America Hulk Iron Man Thor Category Related topics v t e Spider-Man characters Spider-Man family By secret identity Spider-Man Spider-Woman Scarlet Spider Spider-Girl By public identity Peter Parker Ben Reilly Jessica Drew Julia Carpenter Miguel O'Hara Kaine Parker Mattie Franklin Anya Corazon Mac Gargan Miles Morales Otto Octavius (Superior Spider-Man) Cindy Moon Gwen Stacy Supporting characters Main support Liz Allan Aunt May Betty Brant Eddie Brock Black Cat Cardiac Carlie Cooper Jean DeWolff Glory Grant J. Jonah Jameson John Jameson Ned Leeds Madame Web Michael Morbius Harry Osborn Mary Parker Richard Parker Teresa Parker Randy Robertson Robbie Robertson George Stacy Gwen Stacy Flash Thompson Uncle Ben Ben Urich Mary Jane Watson Other Sally Avril Martha Connors Billy Connors Jefferson Davis Ezekiel Vanessa Fisk Vin Gonzales Walter Hardy Ashley Kafka Anna Maria Marconi Kenny McFarlane Max Modell Normie Osborn Gwen Poole Solo Sarah Stacy Steel Spider Debra Whitman Wraith/Yuri Watanabe Neutral characters Anti-Venom Beetle Abner Jenkins Black Cat Cardiac Gibbon Green Goblin Harry Osborn Molten Man Morbius the Living Vampire Prowler Puma Razorback Rocket Racer Silver Sable Toxin Venom Eddie Brock Will o' the Wisp Superhero allies Avengers Captain America Daredevil Deadpool Doctor Strange Cloak and Dagger Fantastic Four Mr. Fantastic Invisible Woman Human Torch Thing Firestar Ghost Rider Johnny Blaze Danny Ketch Heroes for Hire Hulk Iceman Iron Fist Iron Man Luke Cage Moon Knight New Avengers Nick Fury Punisher S.H.I.E.L.D. Thor Wolverine X-Men Antagonists Central rogues gallery Black Cat Carnage Cletus Kasady Chameleon Doctor Octopus Electro Green Goblin Norman Osborn Hammerhead Hobgoblin Roderick Kingsley Hydro-Man Jackal Kingpin Kraven the Hunter Lizard Morbius the Living Vampire Mysterio Rhino Sandman Scorpion Shocker Tinkerer Tombstone Venom Eddie Brock Vulture Crime lords and mobsters Big Man Frederick Foswell Burglar Crime Master Enforcers Fancy Dan Montana Ox Man Mountain Marko Rose Richard Fisk Silvermane Scientists / inventors Jonas Harrow Alistair Smythe Spencer Smythe Mendel Stromm Other supervillains Arcade Beetle Abner Jenkins Janice Lincoln Big Wheel Black Tarantula Bloodshed Boomerang Bushwacker Calypso Carrion Cyclone Demogoblin Doctor Doom Doppelganger Dracula Elementals Foreigner Gladiator Gog Grey Goblin Grim Hunter Grizzly Hippo Hood Human Fly Humbug Hypno-Hustler Jack O' Lantern Jason Macendale Jester Juggernaut Kangaroo King Cobra Kraven the Hunter (Ana Kravinoff) Kraven the Hunter (Alyosha Kravinoff) Living Brain Lobo Brothers Looter Lady Octopus Leap-Frog Man-Bull Man-Wolf Masked Marauder Massacre Mephisto Menace Mister Hyde Mister Negative Molten Man Morlun Overdrive Owl Ringer Scarecrow Scorcher Scream Shathra Shriek Sin-Eater Slyde Speed Demon Spot Stegron the Dinosaur Man Stilt-Man Swarm Tarantula Taskmaster Trapster Typhoid Mary Phil Urich Vermin Walrus White Rabbit Groups / teams A.I.M. Circus of Crime Dark Avengers Enclave Enforcers Femme Fatales Frightful Four H.A.M.M.E.R. Hand HYDRA Inheritors Life Foundation Maggia Savage Six Sinister Six List of members Sinister Syndicate Spider-Slayers List of Spider-Slayers Wrecking Crew Bulldozer Piledriver Thunderball Wrecker Zodiac Alternative versions Spider-Man Miles Morales Spider-Girl (Mayday Parker) Spider-UK Spider-Ham Spider-Man 2099 Spider-Man Noir Peni Parker Spider-Punk Marvel Mangaverse version Spider-Man (Pavitr Prabhakar) Spider-Woman (Gwen Stacy) Ultimate Marvel Spider-Man Others Green Goblin Ultimate Marvel Green Goblin Venom In other media Sam Raimi film series Peter Parker Mary Jane Watson Harry Osborn Norman Osborn Marc Webb film series Peter Parker Gwen Stacy Marvel Cinematic Universe Peter Parker Michelle "MJ" Video games Spider-Man Peter Parker Other Firestar Gentleman Spider-Man (1994 TV series) characters The Spectacular Spider-Man characters Other topics Goblin Symbiotes Slingers OZ Category v t e Fantastic Four Stan Lee Jack Kirby Members Original members Mister Fantastic Invisible Woman Human Torch Thing Notable recruits Ant-Man Black Panther Crystal Devil Dinosaur Flux Ghost Rider Hulk Medusa Moon Girl Ms. Marvel/She-Thing Namorita Nova Power Man She-Hulk Spider-Man Storm Tigra Wolverine Supporting Supporting cast Agatha Harkness Alicia Masters Avengers Franklin Richards Franklin Storm H.E.R.B.I.E. Inhumans Black Bolt Medusa Karnak Gorgon Triton Crystal Lockjaw Lyja Namor Nathaniel Richards Silver Surfer Spider-Man Thundra Uatu the Watcher Valeria Richards Willie Lumpkin Wyatt Wingfoot X-Men Yancy Street Gang Superhero allies Avengers Black Panther Black Widow Captain America Daredevil Hawkeye Hulk Iron Man Nick Fury S.H.I.E.L.D. Spider-Man Thor Wolverine X-Men Enemies Antagonists Annihilus Aron the Rogue Watcher Awesome Android Blastaar Brute Devos the Devastator Diablo Doctor Doom Galactus Hate-Monger Impossible Man Kala Kang the Conqueror Kristoff Vernard Mad Thinker Maker Maximus Miracle Man Mole Man Molecule Man Nicholas Scratch Occulus Overmind Psycho-Man Puppet Master Red Ghost Salem's Seven Thanos Organizations Black Order Chitauri Doombots Frightful Four Dragon Man Electro Hydro-Man Klaw Llyra Sandman Titania Trapster Wizard Heralds of Galactus Air-Walker Firelord Stardust Terrax Kree Ronan the Accuser Supreme Intelligence Maggia Skrulls Dorrek VII Paibok Super-Skrull Symbiotes Locations Baxter Building Four Freedoms Plaza Latveria Negative Zone Publications Current Fantastic Four Previous Fantastic Force FF Marvel Knights 4 Marvel Two-in-One Super-Villain Team-Up The Thing Limited Fantastic Four: 1234 Fantastic Four: The End Spider-Man and the Fantastic Four Other continuities Doom 2099 Fantastic Five Fantastic Four: Unstable Molecules Fantastic Four 2099 Marvel 1602: Fantastick Four Superman/Fantastic Four Ultimate Fantastic Four Storylines "The Galactus Trilogy" "This Man... This Monster!" "Days of Future Present" Alternate versions Invisible Woman The Thing Related articles Doctor Doom's Fearfall Fantastic Four Incorporated Fantastic Four in popular media Fantasticar Future Foundation List of Ultimate Fantastic Four story arcs Unstable molecules Category v t e Wolverine Len Wein John Romita Sr. Teams X-Men Alpha Flight Avengers Fantastic Four New Avengers S.H.I.E.L.D. Team X / Weapon X X-Force Uncanny Avengers Secret Defenders Horsemen of Apocalypse X-Men allies Angel/Archangel Banshee Bishop Cable Colossus Cyclops Deadpool Emma Frost Forge Gambit Havok Iceman Jean Grey/Phoenix Jubilee Magneto Morph Nightcrawler Polaris Professor X Kitty Pryde Psylocke Rogue Storm X-23 Supporting characters Alpha Flight Avengers Black Widow Captain America Daken Agent Zero/Maverick Deadpool Elsie-Dee Dog Logan Elektra Fantastic Four Hawkeye Hulk Iron Man Jimmy Hudson Moon Knight Native Nick Fury Silver Fox Spider-Man Thor Tyger Tiger Weapon H John Wraith X-23 X-Men (List) Mariko Yashida Yukio Enemies A.I.M. Agent Zero/Maverick Apocalypse Arnim Zola Bastion Bolivar Trask Brotherhood of Mutants Magneto Sabretooth Toad Mystique Juggernaut Blob Pyro Mastermind Avalanche Cameron Hodge Chimera Malcolm Colcord Collector Abraham Cornelius Cyber Genesis Gorgon Hand Hellfire Club Brent Jackson Juggernaut Lady Deathstrike Lord Dark Wind Lord Shingen Thomas Logan Maggia Magneto Mister Sinister Mister X Mojo Mystique Nitro Nuke Ogun Omega Red Phalanx Donald Pierce Professor Thorton Puma Reavers Romulus Roughouse Sabretooth Sauron Savage Land Mutates Sebastian Shaw Sentinels Shadow King Silver Samurai Kenuichio Harada Shin Harada Spiral Sapphire Styx Symbiotes Taskmaster Tiger Shark Matsu'o Tsurayaba Vermin Viper Wendigo Wild Child William Stryker Comic books 5 Ronin Astonishing Spider-Man & Wolverine Elektra and Wolverine: The Redeemer Kitty Pryde and Wolverine Logan Marvel Comics Presents "Weapon X" Origin Savage Wolverine Ultimate Wolverine vs. Hulk Wolverine Wolverine: Manifest Destiny Wolverine: Origins Wolverine: Snikt! Wolverine: The Best There Is Wolverine and the X-Men Wolverine and Deadpool Wolverine: Weapon X Death of Wolverine Wolverine/Nick Fury The Scorpio Connection Bloody Choices Scorpio Rising All-New Wolverine Hunt for Wolverine Return of Wolverine In other media X-Men Origins: Wolverine The Wolverine Logan Wolverine and the X-Men episodes Wolverine (podcast) Marvel Anime Alternative versions Ultimate Wolverine Old Man Logan Film Logan Related articles Weapon X Weapon Plus Category v t e X-Men Creators: Stan Lee Jack Kirby Founding student and staff members Professor X Cyclops Iceman Beast Angel Jean Grey Recurring members Anole Armor Aurora Banshee Bishop Blindfold Blink Boom-Boom Box Cable Caliban Cannonball Chamber Changeling Cipher Cloak and Dagger Colossus Cypher Darwin Dazzler Doctor Nemesis Domino Dust Elixir Emma Frost Fantomex Firestar Forge Frenzy Gambit Gentle Graymalkin Havok Hellion Hepzibah Hope Husk Ink Joseph Jubilee Karma Lady Mastermind Lifeguard Lockheed Longshot M Maggott Magik Magma Magneto Marrow Mercury Mimic Moonstar Mystique Namor Nightcrawler Northstar Omega Sentinel Pixie Polaris Prodigy Kitty Pryde Psylocke/Revanche Rockslide Rogue Sage Slipstream Spyke Stacy X Storm Rachel Summers Sunfire Sunspot Surge Thunderbird (John Proudstar) Thunderbird (Neal Shaara) Warlock Warpath Wolfsbane Wolverine X-23 X-Man Shen Xorn Secondary teams Alpha Squadron Excalibur Fallen Angels Generation X Marauders New Mutants Paragons X-Corporation X-Corps X-Factor X-Force X-Statix X-Terminators X.S.E. X-Treme Sanctions Executive Xavier's Security Enforcers Supporting characters Callisto Deadpool Ka-Zar Senator Robert Kelly Legion Lilandra Neramani Moira MacTaggert Quicksilver Revanche Shi'ar Scarlet Witch Starjammers Ch'od Corsair Korvus Raza Longknife Hepzibah Valerie Cooper Superhero allies Avengers Black Widow Hawkeye Hulk Iron Man Captain America Thor Ms. Marvel/Binary/Warbird/Captain Marvel Carol Danvers Fantastic Four S.H.I.E.L.D. Nick Fury Spider-Man S.W.O.R.D. Antagonists Apocalypse Arcade Avalanche Azazel Bastion Belasco Black Tom Cassidy Blob Abraham Cornelius Graydon Creed Cyber Dark Beast Deathbird Demon Bear Doctor Doom Donald Pierce Exodus Trevor Fitzroy Emma Frost Fabian Cortez Galactus Henry Peter Gyrich Cameron Hodge High Evolutionary Holocaust Juggernaut Kid Omega Lady Deathstrike Living Monolith Magneto Master Mold Mastermind Mesmero Mikhail Rasputin Mister Sinister Mojo Mystique N'astirh Nimrod Cassandra Nova Omega Red Onslaught Norman Osborn Phantazia Predator X Proteus Madelyne Pryor Pyro Sabretooth Saturnyne Sauron Selene Shadow King Sebastian Shaw Shinobi Shaw Siena Blaze Silver Samurai Kenuichio Harada Spiral Stryfe William Stryker Sublime Sugar Man Thanos Toad Bolivar Trask Viper Vulcan Kuan-Yin Xorn Zaladane Antagonistic teams A.I.M. Alliance of Evil Brood Brotherhood of Mutants Clan Akkaba Dark Riders Dark X-Men Externals Factor Three Fenris Freedom Force Hand Hell's Belles Hellfire Club Hellions Horsemen of Apocalypse Humanity's Last Stand Maggia Marauders Mutant Liberation Front Nasty Boys Neo Phalanx Purifiers Reavers The Right Savage Land Mutates Sentinels Shadow-X U-Men Upstarts Weapon X Locations Asteroid M/Utopia Avalon District X/Mutant Town Genosha Limbo Madripoor Muir Island Savage Land X-Mansion Equipment and technology Blackbird Cerebro Danger Room Miscellanea Alpha Flight Crimson Dawn Inhumans vs. X-Men Legacy Virus Morlocks Mutants Mutant Registration Act Phoenix Force Shi'ar Imperial Guard Storm Force Accelatron Technarchy X-Babies X-Men in other media television X-Men '92 X-Men comics X-Men Classics (action figure) In Other Media Charles Xavier Logan Erik Lehnsherr Peter Maximoff Category v t e Iron Man Don Heck Stan Lee Larry Lieber Jack Kirby Characters Iron Man family Iron Man Rescue War Machine Doctor Doom Ironheart Supporting Avengers Black Widow Bethany Cabe Captain America Fantastic Four Friday Rumiko Fujikawa Nick Fury Guardsman Maria Hill Happy Hogan Hawkeye Hulk J.A.R.V.I.S. Edwin Jarvis Pepper Potts S.H.I.E.L.D. Spider-Man Arno Stark Howard Stark Maria Stark Thor Wolverine X-Men Antagonists Main enemies Black Knight Blizzard Count Nefaria Controller Crimson Dynamo Fin Fang Foom Firebrand Ghost Iron Monger Justin Hammer Living Laser Madame Masque Mandarin Melter MODOK Raiders Spymaster Zeke Stane Temugin Thanos Titanium Man Ultimo Unicorn Whiplash Groups A.I.M Maggia Roxxon Other enemies Arsenal Beetle Crimson Cowl Detroit Steel Doctor Doom Dreadknight Firepower Grey Gargoyle Kearson DeWitt Mauler Norman Osborn Morgan Stark Sasha Hammer Shockwave Sunset Bain Sunturion Technovore Ultron Whirlwind Wong-Chu Comic books Iron Man and Sub-Mariner Iron Man (vol. 4) Enter the Mandarin Infamous Iron Man The Invincible Iron Man Iron Man vs. Whiplash Storylines "Demon in a Bottle" "Doomquest" "Armor Wars" "Extremis" "Civil War" "Civil War II" Ultimate Marvel series Ultimate Iron Man Ultimate Human Ultimate Comics: Armor Wars Ultimate Comics: Iron Man In other media Films Marvel Cinematic Universe Tony Stark / Iron Man armor Iron Man soundtrack Iron Man 2 soundtrack Iron Man 3 soundtrack Marvel Animated Features Iron Man: Rise of Technovore Television The Marvel Super Heroes Iron Man episodes Iron Man: Armored Adventures episodes Marvel Anime Video games Iron Man / X-O Manowar in Heavy Metal The Invincible Iron Man Iron Man Iron Man 2 Iron Man 3 Iron Man VR Attraction Iron Man Experience Alternative versions Iron Man 2020 Mainframe Ultimate Iron Man Related articles Avengers Mansion Force Works Iron Man's armor War Machine in other media Iron Patriot Roxxon Energy Corporation S.H.I.E.L.D. Stark Industries Stark Tower Iron Man: The Armored Avenger Category v t e Thor (Marvel Comics) Stan Lee Larry Lieber Jack Kirby Supporting characters Angela Avengers Balder Beta Ray Bill Captain America Eitri Fantastic Four Frigga Gaea Guardians of the Galaxy Heimdall Hercules Hulk Hrimhari Iron Man Kelda Jane Foster Loki Odin Sif Spider-Man Thor Girl Thunderstrike Kevin Masterson Tyr Valkyrie Warriors Three Fandral Hogun Volstagg Wolverine X-Men Zeus Antagonists Absorbing Man Ares Bloodaxe Cobra Desak Destroyer Ego the Living Planet Enchanters Three Enchantress Executioner Fafnir Fenris Wolf Firelord Galactus Gorr the God Butcher Grey Gargoyle Hela Karnilla Laufey Loki Lorelei Malekith the Accursed Man-Beast Mangog Midgard Serpent Minotaur Mister Hyde Mongoose Pluto Radioactive Man Ragnarok Serpent Surtur Ulik Wrecking Crew Bulldozer Piledriver Thunderball Wrecker Ymir Zarrko Bibliography Journey into Mystery Thor: Blood Oath Thor: Son of Asgard Thor: Vikings Ultimate Comics: Thor War of the Realms In other media Television The Marvel Super Heroes The Incredible Hulk Returns Film Marvel Animated Features Film soundtrack Thor: The Dark World soundtrack Team Thor Thor: Ragnarok Music by Mothersbaugh Thor: Love and Thunder Video games Thor: God of Thunder Thor: Son of Asgard Motion comic Thor & Loki: Blood Brothers Related articles Mjolnir Thor in Norse mythology Alternative versions Ultimate Thor Thor (MCU) Thor in comics Asgard Asgardians of the Galaxy Dwarves Elves Giants Demons Hugin and Munin Norn Stones Valkyrior Category v t e Captain America Joe Simon Jack Kirby Alter egos Steve Rogers Isaiah Bradley William Nasland Jeffrey Mace William Burnside John Walker Bucky Barnes Sam Wilson Supporting characters All-Winners Squad Ant-Man Black Widow Betsy Ross / Golden Girl Bucky Bucky Barnes Jack Monroe Rick Jones Battlestar Rikki Barnes Peggy Carter Sharon Carter Deadpool Demolition Man Diamondback Fabian Stankowicz Falcon Fantastic Four Maria Hill Jack Flag Free Spirit Nick Fury Hawkeye Howling Commandos Hulk Invaders Iron Man Rick Jones Nomad Redwing Ian Rogers S.H.I.E.L.D. Silver Surfer Spider-Man Thor Wolverine X-Men Enemies Main Arnim Zola Baron Strucker Baron Zemo Heinrich Zemo Helmut Zemo Batroc the Leaper Crossbones Doctor Faustus Flag-Smasher Grand Director Machinesmith Madame Hydra MODOK Red Skull Sin Taskmaster Thanos Winter Soldier Groups A.I.M. Circus of Crime HYDRA Maggia Secret Empire Serpent Society Serpent Squad Skeleton Crew Watchdogs Snake- themed Anaconda Asp Black Mamba Black Racer Boomslang Bushmaster Coachwhip Cobra Constrictor Copperhead Cottonmouth Death Adder Diamondback Eel Fer-de-Lance Princess Python Puff Adder Rattler Rock Python Sidewinder Viper Other Armadillo Baron Blood Blackwing Cutthroat Doughboy Dredmund the Druid Everyman Hate-Monger Jack O'Lantern Aleksander Lukin Mister Hyde MODAM Mother Night Nefarius/Moonstone Nightshade Nuke Porcupine Roxxon Scarecrow Scourge of the Underworld Sleeper Slug Superia Vermin Publications Captain America Captain America (vol. 5) Captain America: Reborn Captain America and the Falcon Fallen Son: The Death of Captain America Truth: Red, White & Black Tales of Suspense Adventures of Captain America Captain America and Nick Fury: Blood Truce Captain America and Nick Fury: The Otherworld War Captain America: White Storylines "Captain America: The Captain" "Civil War" "The Death of Captain America" In other media Film Captain America (1944 serial) Captain America (1990) Captain America: The First Avenger soundtrack Captain America: The Winter Soldier soundtrack Captain America: Civil War soundtrack Steve Rogers (Marvel Cinematic Universe) TV The Marvel Super Heroes Captain America (1979) Captain America II: Death Too Soon (1979) "The Capture of Captain America" The Falcon and the Winter Soldier Video games Captain America in: The Doom Tube of Dr. Megalomann The Amazing Spider-Man and Captain America in Dr. Doom's Revenge! Captain America and The Avengers Captain America: Super Soldier Related articles American Dream Ultimate Captain America Captain America's shield Iron Patriot Stucky Category v t e Black Widow Stan Lee Don Rico Don Heck Characters Claire Voyant Natasha Romanoff Yelena Belova Supporting characters Captain America Crimson Dynamo Daredevil Hawkeye Hulk Iron Man Maria Hill Mockingbird Nick Fury Punisher Spider-Man Thor Winter Soldier Wolverine Teams Avengers Mighty Secret Champions Heroes for Hire Lady Liberators S.H.I.E.L.D. Thunderbolts Enemies A.I.M. Black Spectre Damon Dran HYDRA Femizons Red Guardian Taskmaster Viper (Madame Hydra) Publications Amazing Adventures Marvel Fanfare Fury/Black Widow: Death Duty The Twelve Widowmaker In other media Avengers Confidential: Black Widow & Punisher Natasha Romanoff (Marvel Cinematic Universe) Black Widow Alternative versions Monica Chang Ultimate Jessica Drew Category v t e Hawkeye Stan Lee Don Heck Characters Clint Barton Kate Bishop Bullseye Affiliations Avengers Defenders S.H.I.E.L.D. Thunderbolts Supporting characters Black Widow Dominic Fortune Mockingbird Enemies Barney Barton Baron Zemo Circus of Crime Death-Throws Oddball Madame Masque Maggia Moonstone Phantom Rider Silencer Swordsman Trick Shot Publications Solo Avengers Hawkeye & Mockingbird Widowmaker Hawkeye: Blindspot Related articles Cross Technological Enterprises Goliath The Hawkeye Initiative Ronin Clint Barton (Marvel Cinematic Universe) Hawkeye (TV series) v t e Defenders Roy Thomas Ross Andru Founding members Doctor Strange Hulk Namor the Sub-Mariner Recurring members Andromeda Angel Ant-Man Ardina Atlas Beast Black Cat Blazing Skull Captain America Clea Colossus Dagger Daimon Hellstrom Darkhawk Daredevil Deadpool Deathlok Devil-Slayer Doctor Druid Drax the Destroyer Gargoyle Ghost Rider Hawkeye Hellcat Iceman Interloper Iron Fist Jessica Jones Junta Loa Luke Cage Lyra Manslaughter Moondragon Namorita Nighthawk Nomad Northstar Nova Overmind Paladin Red Guardian (Tania Belinsky) Red Raven Red She-Hulk Scarlet Witch Sepulchre She-Hulk Silver Surfer Sleepwalker Spider-Man Spider-Woman Thunderstrike U.S. Agent Valkyrie War Machine Warlord Krang Wasp Wolverine Yellowjacket Other characters Aragorn Black Knight Black Panther Ghost Rider Howard the Duck Mister Fantastic Punisher Thing Wonder Man Wong Enemies Main enemies Alpha the Ultimate Mutant Attuma Dormammu Dracula Eel Enchantress Gargantua Karnilla Loki Lunatik Mandrill Mephisto Nebulon Null the Living Darkness Overmind Plantman Pluto Porcupine Presence Red Ghost Satannish Xemnu the Living Titan Yandroth Group enemies A.I.M. Brotherhood of Mutants Emissaries of Evil Cobalt Man Egghead Rhino Solarr The Hand Headmen Chondu the Mystic Gorilla-Man Ruby Thursday Shrunken Bones HYDRA Maggia Mutant Force Secret Empire Sons of the Serpent Squadron Sinister Undying Ones Wrecking Crew Wrecker Bulldozer Piledriver Thunderball Other media The Defenders Related topics List of Defenders members Marvel Feature v t e She-Hulk Stan Lee John Buscema Supporting characters Awesome Andy Blonde Phantom Doc Samson Elaine Banner Goodman, Lieber, Kurtzberg & Holliway Hellcat Hulk/Bruce Banner John Jameson Jazinda Lyra Michael Morbius Red She-Hulk/Betty Ross Richard Rory Rick Jones Southpaw Wyatt Wingfoot Group memberships A-Force Avengers Defenders Fantastic Force Fantastic Four Future Foundation Heroes for Hire Lady Liberators Magistrati S.H.I.E.L.D. Enemies Abomination Absorbing Man A.I.M. Alistair Smythe Apocalypse Armadillo Batroc Boomerang Champion of the Universe Circus of Crime Death Doctor Bong Doctor Faustus Dragon Man Electro Grey Gargoyle Grizzly Headmen Chondu the Mystic Gorilla-Man Ruby Thursday Juggernaut Krang Leader Lightmaster Madcap Mad Thinker Mahkizmo Mandrill Man-Elephant Master Mold Mephisto Mole Man Morgan le Fay Nightwatch/Nighteater/Kevin Trench Ogress Orka Plantman Puppet Master Radioactive Man Roxxon Sabretooth Scarecrow Shocker Silencer Spymaster Stilt-Man Super-Skrull Taskmaster Thunderbolt Ross Tiger Shark Titania Trapster U-Foes Xemnu the Titan Whirlwind Wrecking Crew Zzzax Television The Incredible Hulk and She-Hulk (1996-1997) Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H. (2013-2015) (episodes) She-Hulk v t e Winter Guard Bill Mantlo, Kurt Busiek, Mark Gruenwald, Jeph Loeb, David Gallaher, Jason Aaron Founding members Darkstar Red Guardian Ursa Major Crimson Dynamo Opponents Dire Wraiths Hulk Kang the Conqueror Mandarin Skrulls Doc Samson She-Hulk Lady Liberators Red Hulk Iron Man A.I.M. Avengers Storylines Maximum Security Secret Invasion Related articles Soviet Super-Soldiers v t e Jack Kirby Bibliography Marvel Comics 2001: A Space Odyssey Absorbing Man Adam Warlock Agatha Harkness Alicia Masters Amazing Adventures Amphibion Annihilus Ant-Man / Giant-Man Hank Pym Arnim Zola Asgard Astonishing Tales Attuma Avengers Avengers Mansion Awesome Android Balder Baron Strucker Baron Zemo Heinrich Zemo Batroc the Leaper Baxter Building Betsy Ross Betty Ross Black Panther Blastaar Blob Boomerang Brother Tode Brotherhood of Mutants Bucky Bucky Barnes Burner Captain America shield Celestial Cerebro Circus of Crime Contemplator Cosmic Cube Crusaders Cyttorak Daily Bugle Danger Room Deviant Devil Dinosaur Destroyer Diablo Doctor Doom Doctor Druid Doctor Faustus Doughboy Dragon Man Dredmund the Druid Egghead Ego the Living Planet Enchantress Enclave Erik Josten Eternals Ajak Druig Forgotten One Ikaris Kingo Sunen Makkari Sersi Sprite Thena Zuras Executioner Fafnir Fantastic Four Human Torch Invisible Woman Mister Fantastic Thing Fenris Wolf Fin Fang Foom Fixer Forbush Man Franklin Richards Franklin Storm Frightful Four Galactus Giants Giganto Goom Gorgilla Grey Gargoyle Groot Growing Man H.E.R.B.I.E. Hate-Monger Heimdall Hela Helicarrier High Evolutionary Hippolyta Hulk Hulk Robot Human Cannonball HYDRA Immortus Impossible Man Inhumans Black Bolt Crystal Gorgon Karnak Lockjaw Maximus Medusa Triton Iron Man armor It! The Living Colossus Jane Foster Jasper Sitwell Journey into Mystery Juggernaut Ka-Zar Kala Kang the Conqueror Karkas Karnilla Klaw Krang Kree Ronan the Accuser Sentry Supreme Intelligence Kro Latveria Laufey Lifter Loki Lucifer Machine Man Mad Thinker Magneto Man-Beast Mangog Marvel Fireside Books Masters of Evil Mentallo Miracle Man MODOK Mole Man Molecule Man Monsteroso Moon-Boy Mastermind (Jason Wyngarde) Mutants Negative Zone New Men Nick Fury Norn Stones Odin Olympians Ares Artemis Athena Hera Hercules Hermes Pluto Zeus Orrgo Painter Peggy Carter Peepers Plunderer Power Broker Psycho-Man Puppet Master Quicksilver Radioactive Man Randall Darby Rawhide Kid Red Ghost Red Skull Resistants Rick Jones Ringmaster S.H.I.E.L.D. Savage Land Scarlet Witch Scorpion Secret Empire Sentinel Master Mold Bolivar Trask Sharon Carter Sif Silver Surfer Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos Dino Manelli Dum Dum Dugan Gabe Jones Happy Sam Sawyer Howling Commandos Izzy Cohen Junior Juniper Pinky Pinkerton Rebel Ralston Skrull Dorrek VII Morrat Super-Skrull Sleeper Slither Stark Industries Stark Tower Tales of Suspense Tales to Astonish Stranger Subterranea Super-Adaptoid Surtur T'Chaka The Galactus Trilogy The Incredible Hulk This Man... This Monster! Thor Mjolnir Thunderbolt Ross Toad Trapster Tricephalous Trolls Tumbler Tutinax Two-Gun Kid Tyr Tyrannus Ulik Ultimate Nullifier Uncanny X-Men Uni-Mind Unicorn Unus the Untouchable Vanisher Vision (Timely Comics) Volla Wakanda Warriors Three Fandral Hogun Volstagg Wasp Watchers Uatu Whirlwind Willie Lumpkin Wizard Wonder Man Wong-Chu Wrecker Wyatt Wingfoot X-Mansion X-Men Angel Beast Cyclops Iceman Marvel Girl Professor X Yancy Street Gang Ymir Young Allies Yuri Topolov Zabu Zarrko DC Comics 1st Issue Special Agent Axis Anti-Life Equation Apokolips Darkseid DeSaad Devilance Doctor Bedlam Female Furies Bernadeth Lashina Mad Harriet Stompa Glorious Godfrey Granny Goodness Kalibak Kanto Mantis Parademons Steppenwolf Virman Vundabar Atlas Black Racer Boom tube Boy Commandos Bruno Mannheim Challengers of the Unknown Ace Morgan Red Ryan Crazy Quilt Dan Turpin Dingbats of Danger Street Dubbilex Etrigan the Demon Fourth World Funky Flashman Global Peace Agency OMAC Guardian House of Secrets Infinity-Man Intergang Kamandi Klarion the Witch Boy Kobra Manhunter Manhunters Metron Morgan Edge Morgaine le Fey Mother Box Mr. Scarlet Newsboy Legion New Gods New Genesis Bekka Big Barda Forager Forever People Highfather Lightray Mister Miracle Orion Oberon Project Cadmus Sandman (Garrett Sanford) Shilo Norman Sonny Sumo Source Star Spangled Comics Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen Super Powers Weird Mystery Tales Other Black Magic Boys' Ranch Captain 3-D Captain Glory Captain Victory and the Galactic Rangers Destroyer Duck The Double Life of Private Strong Fighting American The Fly Headline Comics (For The American Boy) Jack Kirby's Galactic Bounty Hunters Justice Traps the Guilty The Kirbyverse My Date Comics Our Fighting Forces Secret City Saga Silver Star Sky Masters Street Code Young Love Young Romance Television work The Centurions Goldie Gold and Action Jack Mister T Thundarr the Barbarian Related articles Kirby Krackle Stan Lee Joe Simon Mainline Publications Kirby: Genesis Kirby: King of Comics Category v t e Stan Lee Media Titles Backstreet Project Heroes for Hope How to Draw Comics the Marvel Way Just Imagine... Marvel Fireside Books Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos Stan Lee's God Woke The Amazing Spider-Man The Incredible Hulk The Sensational Spider-Man Ultimo Uncanny X-Men Storylines "Astonishing Tales" "Epic Illustrated" "Marvel Super-Heroes" "Green Goblin Reborn!" "If This Be My Destiny...!" "Snafu" "Stan Lee Meets..." "The Galactus Trilogy" "The Six Arms Saga" "This Man... This Monster!" "Venus" Shows Heroman Stan Lee's Superhumans Stan Lee's World of Heroes Stan Lee's Lucky Man Stripperella The Reflection Who Wants to Be a Superhero? Who Wants to Be a Superhero? (U.K. TV series) Films The Comic Book Greats Stan Lee's Mutants, Monsters & Marvels The Condor Lightspeed Mosaic Related Joan Boocock Lee (wife) Larry Lieber (brother) List of cameos Stan Lee Foundation Stan Lee Media productions Stan Lee's LA Comic Con POW! Entertainment Created Characters Heroes Ant-Man / Giant-Man Hank Pym Bill Foster Avengers Black Knight Sir Percy Dane Whitman Black Panther Black Widow Blonde Phantom Brother Voodoo Captain Marvel Mar-Vell Linda Carter Millie Collins Daredevil Destroyer Doctor Druid Doctor Strange Falcon Fantastic Four Human Torch Invisible Woman Mister Fantastic Thing Forbush Man Frankenstein Monster Goliath Groot Guardians of the Galaxy Hawkeye Hercules Howling Commandos Izzy Cohen Dum Dum Dugan Nick Fury Gabe Jones Eric Koenig Rebel Ralston Junior Juniper Pinky Pinkerton Dino Manelli Hulk Inhumans Black Bolt Crystal Gorgon Karnak the Shatterer Lockjaw Medusa Triton Iron Man Ka-Zar Kid Colt Man-Thing Marvel Boy (Robert Grayson) Mimic Prowler Quicksilver Ravage 2099 Rawhide Kid Scarlet Witch Sersi She-Hulk S.H.I.E.L.D. Spider-Man Stan Lee's Mighty 7 Starborn Swordsman The Guardian Project Thor Two-Gun Kid Venus Vision Adam Warlock Wasp Witness Wonder Man X-Men Angel Beast Cyclops Iceman Jean Grey Professor X Yondu Zombie Villains Abomination Absorbing Man A.I.M. Air-Walker Amphibion Annihilus Ape-Man Ares Asbestos Man Attuma Awesome Android Baron Mordo Baron Strucker Baron Zemo Heinrich Zemo Batroc the Leaper Beetle Abner Jenkins Big Man Frederick Foswell Black Knight (Nathan Garrett) Blastaar Blizzard Blob Boomerang Brotherhood of Mutants Burglar Cat-Man Chameleon Circus of Crime Clown Cobra Collector Count Nefaria Crime Master Crimson Dynamo Cyttorak Death-Stalker Destroyer Diablo Doctor Doom Doctor Faustus Doctor Octopus Doombot Doomsday Man Dormammu Dorrek VII Dragon Man Dredmund the Druid Eel Egghead Ego the Living Planet Electro Emissaries of Evil Enchantress Enclave Enforcers Fancy Dan Montana Ox Executioner Fafnir Femizons Fenris Wolf Fin Fang Foom Fixer Richard Fisk Freak Frightful Four Funky Flashman Galactus Galaxy Master Gibbon Giganto Gladiator Gorgilla Green Goblin Norman Osborn Grey Gargoyle Grizzly Growing Man Hate-Monger Hela High Evolutionary Hippolyta Human Cannonball HYDRA Immortus Impossible Man Jackal Jester Erik Josten Juggernaut Kaecilius Kala Kaluu Kangaroo Kang the Conqueror Karnilla Kingpin Klaw Krang Kraven the Hunter Laufey Leader Leap-Frog Living Brain Living Laser Lizard Loki Looter/Meteor Man Lucifer Machinesmith Madame Masque Mad Thinker Maggia Magneto Man-Beast Mandarin Mangog Man Mountain Marko Masked Marauder Master Khan Mastermind Masters of Evil Matador Maximus Melter Mentallo Mephisto Merlin Metal Master Midgard Serpent Mimic Mindless Ones Miracle Man Mister Fear Mister Hyde MODOK Molecule Man Mole Man Molten Man Monsteroso Mordred Morgan le Fay Morrat Mother Night Mysterio Nightmare Overmind Owl Painter Plantman Plunderer Pluto Porcupine Princess Python Prowler Psycho-Man Purple Man Puppet Master Radioactive Man Ravonna Rattler Red Barbarian Red Ghost Rhino Ringmaster Ronan the Accuser Sandman Scarecrow Scorpion Secret Empire Sentinel Master Mold Bolivar Trask Sentry Shocker Silvermane Sinister Six Sleeper Sons of the Serpent Spencer Smythe Spider-Slayer Spymaster Farley Stillwell Stranger Mendel Stromm Strongman Super-Adaptoid Super-Skrull Surtur Swordsman Glenn Talbot Thunderbolt Ross Tiboro Tinkerer Titanium Man Toad Yuri Topolov Trapster Tricephalous Tumbler Tyrannus Ulik Ultimo Unicorn Unus the Untouchable Vanisher Vulture Whiplash Whirlwind Wizard Wong-Chu Wrecker Yon-Rogg Ymir Zarrko Supporting Liz Allan Ancient One Artemis Athena Aunt May Balder Sally Avril Betty Brant Peggy Carter Sharon Carter Clea Billy Connors Martha Connors Eternity Vanessa Fisk Jane Foster Frigga Goom Agatha Harkness Happy Hogan Happy Sam Sawyer Heimdall Hera H.E.R.B.I.E. Hermes J. Jonah Jameson John Jameson Edwin Jarvis Rick Jones Ned Leeds Living Tribunal Willie Lumpkin Alicia Masters Jack Murdock Foggy Nelson Neptune Harry Osborn Odin Karen Page Richard and Mary Parker Pepper Potts Redwing Franklin Richards Randy Robertson Robbie Robertson Betty Ross Shalla-Bal Sif Jasper Sitwell George Stacy Gwen Stacy Supreme Intelligence Franklin Storm T'Chaka Teen Brigade Flash Thompson Tyr Uatu Uncle Ben Anna Watson Mary Jane Watson Wong Wyatt Wingfoot Valkyrior Volla Warriors Three Fandral Hogun Volstagg Yancy Street Gang Ho Yinsen Zabu Zeus Species Asgardians Kree Giants Goblins Mutants New Men Olympians Skrulls Trolls Uranians Watchers Locations and businesses Asgard Avengers Mansion Baxter Building Daily Bugle Empire State University Latveria Midtown High School Negative Zone Oscorp Sanctum Sanctorum Savage Land Stark Industries Stark Tower Subterranea Wakanda X-Mansion Artifacts and technology Cerebro Cosmic Cube Eye of Agamotto Mjolnir Norn Stones Ultimate Nullifier Vibranium Category Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125