This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (March 2021) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may contain material discouraged by the manual of style for video game subjects. Please help by removing content such as lists of minutiae or a detailed description of how to play a game, and rewriting the article in an encyclopedic style. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Identity V Developer(s) NetEase Games Publisher(s) NetEase Games Platform(s) Microsoft Windows, Android, iOS Release 2018 Genre(s) Horror Mode(s) Asymmetrical multiplayer Identity V is an asymmetrical multiplayer horror video game developed and published by NetEase Games.[1][2] It was released in July 2018 for mobile devices.[3] It is free to download in App Store, Google Play and PC.[4] It follows a detective named Orpheus as he slowly unravels the mystery behind a mysterious killing game within a manor. The series has had crossover events with the Danganronpa series,[5][6][7][8] the Persona series,[9] the film Edward Scissorhands,[10] and the anime series The Promised Neverland.[11][12] Five players participate in single matches. One of them is tasked with eliminating the other four before they complete their objectives.[13] Contents 1 Game setup 1.1 Gameplay 1.2 Other game modes 1.3 Other features 1.3.1 Ranked Matches 1.3.2 Unlocking characters 1.3.3 Logic Path 2 References Game setup[edit] Gameplay[edit] Quick Matches or Rank Matches consist of five players. With one player as a Hunter, and the remaining four as Survivors. Each survivor is roughly classified into 4 different categories: Decode types, Assist types, Contain types, and Rescue types. The Hunter's objective is to find and eliminate all of the Survivors before they can escape. To do this, the Hunter must pursue each Survivor individually, then eliminate them by placing them down on a Rocket Chair. Meanwhile, the Survivor's objective is to try to escape via two Exit Gates by deciphering five Cipher Machines, or the Dungeon if there's one Survivor left. The Hunter is able to win the match by eliminating at least three Survivors, while the Survivors are able to win should three Survivors escape. If only two Survivors are eliminated and two have escaped, the match will end in a tie. Rewards vary based on the game mode. There are various characters to choose from, each having their own abilities in game. Apart from standard character's skills in game, there's another skill system called the Secondary Skills, available only for the Hunter and helping them track down survivors. Other game modes[edit] Other modes exist with different rules. In Duo Hunters, two Hunters team up against a group of eight Survivors. Blackjack plays like regular Blackjack, with one of the players becoming a Hunter with each round. In Tarot, a team of three Survivors (two Squires and a King) and one Hunter (playing as their team's Knight) face off against another team of the same composition, whose goal is to eliminate the opposing King before their rivals do. A temporary fourth mode (added in 2021), known as Nightmare Shadows or Chasing Shadows features six Survivors who have to race against each other in an obstacle course. Other features[edit] Ranked Matches[edit] Identity V features 2 different ranking systems, in the form of Character Points and Tier Divisions. Both are used only in Ranked Matches, available at specific time slots during the day. Character Points are earned by playing ranked matches while using a specific character, and are used to determine one's spot on the leaderboards. Wins award +55 points to the victor(s), draws give +11 points, and a loss results in -11 points. Character points are specific to each character and will slowly decrease over time. Identity V also features 6 Tiers split into subdivisions, which players can be sent up and down depending on their performance. Winning Ranked matches earns stars and losses loses stars. Once certain number of stars is reached, the player can go up to the next division if you win your next ranked match. The tier bracket you end up in will determine what reward you get once the season ends. Unlocking characters[edit] Identity V features many different characters, but only a few characters are available to use at first. Unlocking new characters requires Clues, which are obtained through playing matches and finishing quests. One to two characters on both factions are available for trial use each day. Logic Path[edit] The Logic Path is a gacha-like system can earn Clues, Essences and other items by rolling dice. Dice are obtained by playing and winning matches. Essences can be viewed and opened within the Logic Path. Each Essence has a set prize pool of obtainable items, which may include costumes, accessories, profile pictures, and other items. References[edit] ^ "Identity V Background". 163.com. ^ "Identity V Mobile Horror Game Review: This Thrilling Asymmetrical Multiplayer Will Be Your New Summer Obsession". newsweek.com. ^ "Identity V at Gamepedia". gamepedia.com. ^ "Identity V, NetEase's popular asymmetrical horror game, launches a crossover event with Danganronpa". pocketgamer.com. ^ "The 'Identity V' 'Danganronpa' Collaboration is Now Live on iOS and Android". TouchArcade. 2020-05-28. Retrieved 2020-05-30. ^ "NetEase's Horror Game, Identity V, Announces Crossover With Danganronpa". TheGamer. 2020-05-28. Retrieved 2020-05-30. ^ "Danganronpa and Identity V to Collaborate Once Again". Siliconera. 2020-11-18. Retrieved 2020-11-18. ^ "Identity V Danganronpa Event Includes Nagito and Chiaki". Siliconera. 2020-12-07. Retrieved 2020-12-07. ^ "IDV X Persona 5". Youtube. Identity V. Retrieved 3 January 2021. ^ "IDV X Edward Scissorhands". Youtube. Identity V. Retrieved 3 January 2021. ^ Gregson-Wood, Stephen. "Identity V's crossover event with anime The Promised Neverland is now live". www.pocketgamer.com. Retrieved 2021-02-26. ^ Identity V X the Promised Neverland Crossover Trailer, retrieved 2021-02-26 ^ "Identity V is set to receive a new map, game mode and three playable characters soon". pocketgamer.com.