This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in German. (September 2014) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the German article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:International Fantasy Award]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|de|International Fantasy Award}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. The International Fantasy Award was an annual literary award for the best science fiction or fantasy book and, in 1951-1953, the best non-fiction book of interest to science fiction and fantasy readers. The IFA was given by an international panel of prominent fans and professionals in 1951-1955 and then again in 1957. Winners[edit] 1951 Fiction: Earth Abides by George R. Stewart Non-fiction: The Conquest of Space by Willy Ley & Chesley Bonestell 1952 Fiction: Fancies and Goodnights by John Collier Non-fiction: The Exploration of Space by Arthur C. Clarke 1953 Fiction: City by Clifford D. Simak Non-fiction: Lands Beyond by L. Sprague de Camp & Willy Ley 1954 Fiction: More Than Human by Theodore Sturgeon 1955 Fiction: A Mirror for Observers by Edgar Pangborn 1957 Fiction: The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien External links[edit] Greg Pickersgill: The International Fantasy Award. Mark R. Kelly and Locus Publications: About the Awards – International Fantasy Award.