Online database of speculative fiction and its creators ISFDB: The Internet Speculative Fiction Database Type of site Online database Owner Al von Ruff Created by Al von Ruff and Ahasuerus URL www.isfdb.org Commercial No Registration None to view Launched 1995 Current status 1,531,160 story titles from 183,021 authors[1] The Internet Speculative Fiction Database (ISFDB) is a database of bibliographic information on genres considered speculative fiction, including science fiction and related genres such as fantasy fiction and horror fiction.[2][3] The ISFDB is a volunteer effort, with both the database and wiki being open for editing and user contributions. The ISFDB database and code are available under Creative Commons licensing[4] and there is support within both Wikipedia and ISFDB for interlinking.[5] The data are reused by other organizations, such as Freebase, under the creative commons license.[6] Contents 1 Purpose 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Purpose[edit] The ISFDB database indexes authors, novels, short stories, publishers, awards, and magazines. Additionally, it supports author pseudonyms, series, awards, and cover art plus interior illustration credits which is combined into integrated author, artist, and publisher bibliographies. An ongoing effort is verification of publication contents and secondary bibliographic sources against the database with the goals being data accuracy and to improve the coverage of speculative fiction to 100%. The current database statistics are available online.[1] ISFDB was the winner of the 2005 Wooden Rocket Award in the Best Directory Site category.[7] While the ISFDB is primarily a bibliographic research database it also contains biographic data for books, authors, series, and publishers that do not have an article on Wikipedia, particularly those unlikely to have such an article because they do not meet Wikipedia's notability standards. In 1998, Cory Doctorow wrote in Science Fiction Age: "The best all-round guide to things science-fictional remains the Internet Speculative Fiction Database".[3] In April 2009, Zenkat wrote on Freebase "...it is widely considered one of the most authoritative sources about Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror literature available on the Internet."[6] As of May 2009[update], Quantcast estimates that the ISFDB is visited by over 32,000 people monthly.[8] As a real-world example of a non-trivial database, the schema and MySQL files from the ISFDB have been used in a number of tutorials. ISFDB schema and data were used throughout Chapter 9 of the book Rails For Java Developers.[9] It was also used in a series of tutorials by Lucid Imagination on Solr, an enterprise search platform.[10] History[edit] Several speculative fiction author bibliographies were posted to the USENET newsgroup rec.arts.sf.written from 1984 to 1994 by Jerry Boyajian, Gregory J. E. Rawlins and John Wenn. A more or less standard bibliographic format was developed for these postings.[11] Many of these bibliographies can still be found at The Linköping Science Fiction Archive.[12] In 1993, a searchable database of awards information was developed by Al von Ruff.[11] In 1994, John R. R. Leavitt created the Speculative Fiction Clearing House (SFCH). In late 1994, he asked for help in displaying awards information, and von Ruff offered his database tools. Leavitt declined, because he wanted code that could interact with other aspects of the site. In 1995, Al von Ruff and "Ahasuerus" (a prolific contributor to rec.arts.sf.written) started to construct the ISFDB, based on experience with the SFCH and the bibliographic format finalized by John Wenn. The ISFDB went live in September 1995, and a URL was published in January 1996.[11][13] The ISFDB was first located at an ISP in Champaign Illinois, but it suffered from constrained resources in disk space and database support, which limited its growth.[11] In October 1997 the ISFDB moved to SF Site, a major SF portal and review site.[3][11] Due to the rising costs of remaining with SF Site, the ISFDB moved to its own domain in December 2002. The site was quickly shut down by the hosting ISP due to high resource usage.[11][14] In March 2003, after having been offline since January, the ISFDB began to be hosted by The Cushing Library Science Fiction and Fantasy Research Collection and Institute for Scientific Computation at Texas A&M University.[11][15][16] In 2007, after resource allocation problems with Texas A&M, the ISFDB became independently hosted on a hired server at the URL listed above. The ISFDB was originally edited by a limited number of people, principally Al von Ruff and "Ahasuerus".[17] However, in 2006 editing was opened to the general public on an Open Content basis. Changed content must be approved by one of a limited number of moderators, in an attempt to protect the accuracy of the content.[18] Both the source code and content of the ISFDB are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution License.[4] This was done on 27 February 2005.[11][19] See also[edit] Uchronia: The Alternate History List References[edit] ^ a b "ISFDB Statistics". Internet Speculative Fiction Database. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2018. ^ "Link Sites". SF Site. Retrieved 2009-05-17. ^ a b c Cory Doctorow (September 1998). "Internet Column from Science Fiction Age". Science Fiction Age. Retrieved 2009-05-17. The best all-round guide to things science-fictional remains the Internet Speculative Fiction Database. ^ a b "General disclaimer". ISFDB Wiki. ISFDB. Retrieved 2009-07-30. ^ See Template:isfdb name, Template:isfdb title, and Template:isfdb series. See also the "Wikipedia link" field when editing title or author data at the ISFDB. Documentation at "Help:Screen:EditTitle". ISFDB Help. ^ a b Zenkat (2012-05-19). "The Freebase Blog » Blog Archive » Our latest mass data load: science fiction books". Archived from the original on 2012-05-19. Retrieved 2015-12-12. ...it is widely considered one of the most authoritative sources about Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror literature available on the Internet. ^ "2005 winners: Wooden Rocket Awards". SF Crowsnest. Archived from the original on 2009-02-26. Retrieved 2009-02-08. 14 Best Directory Site. Directories, online databases or search engines with a worthy SFF section. Winner: Internet Speculative Fiction Database www.isfdb.org. ^ "Site Statistics". Quantcast. Archived from the original on 2012-03-08. Retrieved 2009-05-18. ^ Halloway, Stuart Dabbs; Gehtland, Justin (2007). Rails For Java Developers (PDF). ISBN 978-0-9776166-9-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-10. Retrieved 2011-03-14. ^ "Solr Powered ISFDB – Part #1". Archived from the original on 2011-03-01. Retrieved 2011-03-14. ^ a b c d e f g h "Internet Speculative Fiction Database". onpedia. Archived from the original on 2012-03-06. Retrieved 2009-05-17. ^ "The Linköping Science Fiction & Fantasy Archive". Retrieved 2009-07-23. ^ "What's New". ISFDB. Retrieved 2009-05-18. ^ Cory Doctorow (January 25, 2003). "Literary treasure needs new home". Boing Boing. Retrieved 2009-05-17. ^ "ISFDB finds new home at Texas A&M". SFWA News. Science Fiction Writers of America. April 5, 2003. Archived from the original on 2011-08-11. Retrieved 2010-09-29. ^ Cory Doctorow (March 25, 2003). "ISFDB rises from the grave". Boing Boing. Retrieved 2009-05-17. ^ "Major Contributors". ISFDB. Retrieved 2009-05-18. ^ Gandalara (December 23, 2006). "Changes to the ISFDB". Science Fiction Brewed Fresh Daily. Other*Worlds*Cafe. Retrieved 2009-05-17. ^ "What's New – 27 Feb 2005". ISFDB What's New. ISFDB. 27 February 2005. Retrieved 2009-07-30. External links[edit] Official website ISFDB Bibliographic Tools on SourceForge.net ISFDB Bibliographic Tools at Open Hub Sources of Bibliographic Information (isfdb.org) v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Hard Soft History Timeline The Golden Age New Wave Subgenres Anthropological Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Christian Climate fiction Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Gothic Isekai Libertarian Mecha anime and manga Military Parallel worlds Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Scientific romance Social Space opera Space Western Superhero Tech noir Techno-thriller Tokusatsu kaiju Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Steampunk Dieselpunk Biopunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines Internet Speculative Fiction Database Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary/art/audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Illustrators of the Future Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers of the Future Zajdel Media Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Film Film history Films India Japanese anime tokusatsu Television TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese anime live-action U.S. Themes Applied Astroengineering AI takeover Artificial intelligence Cloaking device Holography Invisibility Maritime Megastructure Dyson sphere Matrioshka brain Stellar engine Space stations and habitats Mind uploading Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Prosthetics Robots Self-replicating machines Simulated consciousness Simulated reality Space warfare Tachyons Terraforming Technomancy Time viewer Formal Fermi paradox Grandfather paradox Time travel Life Biological warfare Energy being Evolution Extraterrestrials List Genetic engineering Gender Group mind Parasites Sex and sexuality Superhabitable planet Symbiosis Physical v t e Spacetime and spatial anomalies in fiction Spacetime phenomena Black holes Hyperspace Time travel Technologies Faster-than-light Ansible Boom tube Hyperspace Hyperdrive Inertialess Slipstream Space folding Teleportation Warp drive Wormhole Portable hole Stargate Ultrawave Universe Earth Heim theory Force field Multiverse Parallel universes Planets Stars and planetary systems General relativity Faster-than-light communication Wormholes Social Ancient astronauts Alien invasion Alien language Black Cyborgs Evil corporation Feminist First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Libertarian Message from space Political ideas Religious ideas Sci horror Transhumanism Uplifting World government Xenoarchaeology Related topics Alternate history Afrofuturism Fantasy Fictional technology Future Future history Horror Magic realism Rubber science Science and technology studies Science fantasy Speculative fiction Spy-Fi Supernatural Weird Techno-thriller Technology and society Utopian and dystopian fiction Category Portal v t e Horror fiction Speculative fiction Media Comics Films Magazines Television programs Video games survival Types Body Comedy Zombie comedy Cosmic Dark fantasy Dark romanticism Erotic guro Ghost Giallo Gothic American Southern Southern Ontario Space Suburban Tasmanian Urban Japanese Korean Lovecraftian Monsters Jiangshi Vampire Werewolf Occult detective Organ transplantation Psychological Splatterpunk Survival Techno Weird fiction Weird menace Weird West Zombie apocalypse Related genres Black comedy Fantasy Fantastique Mystery Supernatural Thriller Science fiction Other Grand Guignol Writers Conventions LGBT themes characters Macabre Horror icon Related Pulp magazine Monster erotica Internet Speculative Fiction Database Category Portal