Iranian ethnoreligious community in the Indian subcontinent This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2015) Part of a series on Zoroastrianism Atar (fire), a primary symbol of Zoroastrianism Primary topics Ahura Mazda Zarathustra Asha Vohu Manah Persia/Iran Faravahar Avestan Divine entities Amesha Spentas Yazatas Ahuras Daevas Angra Mainyu Scripture and worship Avesta Ashem Vohu Ahuna Vairya Yenghe hatam Airyaman ishya Fire Temples 101 Names of Ahura Mazda Adur Burzen-Mihr Adur Farnbag Adur Gushnasp Cypress of Kashmar Gathas Yasna Vendidad Visperad Yashts Khordeh Avesta The Revayats Ab-Zohr Accounts and legends Dēnkard Bundahišn Book of Arda Viraf Book of Jamasp Story of Sanjan Chinvat Bridge Frashokereti History and culture Zurvanism Mazdakism Khurramites Calendar Festivals Marriage Burial Adherents Zoroastrians in India Zoroastrians in Iran Parsis Zoroastrianism in the United States Iranis Persecution of Zoroastrians Related topics Criticism of Zoroastrianism  Religion portal v t e The Irani (Persian: ایرانی‎; meaning Iranian) are an ethno-religious community in the Indian subcontinent; they belong to the Zoroastrians who emigrated from Iran to British India in the 19th and 20th centuries.[1] They are culturally, linguistically, ethnically and socially distinct from the Parsis, who – although also Zoroastrians – emigrated to the Indian subcontinent from Greater Iran many centuries before the Iranis did. Contents 1 Distinction from Parsis 2 History 3 Notable Iranis 4 See also 5 References Distinction from Parsis[edit] The Parsis and Iranis are considered legally distinct. A 1909 obiter dictum relating to the Indian Zoroastrians observed that Iranis (of the now defunct Bombay Presidency) were not obliged to uphold the decisions of the then regulatory Parsi Panchayat. Some of the Irani community speaks an ethnolect called Zoroastrian Dari. However, the two communities increasingly intermarry and are said to have been "integrated well" with each other.[2] History[edit] Although the term 'Irani' is first attested during the Mughal era, most Iranis are descended from immigrants who left Iran and migrated to the Indian subcontinent during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. At the time, Iran was ruled by the Qajars and religious persecution of Zoroastrians was widespread. Some Iranis still speak Persian and the Dari dialects of the Zoroastrians of those provinces. Iranis are generally seen as a subset of the wider Parsi community. As is also the case for the Parsis, the Iranis predominantly settled the west-coast of India, in the states of Gujarat and Maharashtra. A concentration of their people live in and around the city of Mumbai. Notable Iranis[edit] Irani is the generic surname for the community. Some families have adopted surnames related to their ancestral hometowns in Iran, such as Kermani, Yezdani, Khosravi, Faroodi, and Jafrabadi. Notable members of the Irani community include: Anosh Irani, Indian-Canadian novelist Aruna Irani, Bollywood actress Ardeshir Irani, director of the first Indian sound film Alam Ara Bakhtiyaar Irani, TV actor Boman Irani, film and theatre actor Firoz Irani, Gujarati film and theatre actor Indra Kumar, Bollywood film Director Brother of *Aruna Irani, C R Irani, Indian journalist and Editor-in-Chief of The Statesman Daisy Irani, Bollywood child actress of the 1950s and 60's Delnaaz Irani, Bollywood actress Dinshah Irani, Zoroastrian leader who provided aid to the Zoroastrian community of Iran. Faredoon Irani, Indian cinematographer Mehera Irani, Meher Baba mandali Honey Irani, Bollywood actress and screenwriter Jenni Irani (Jamshed Khudadad Irani), cricketer Kaikhosrov D. Irani, philosopher Kashmira Irani, actress Meher Baba (Merwan Sheriar Irani), mystic Manik Irani, actor Nariman Irani, cinematographer Ronnie Irani, cricketer Sanaya Irani, actress Sheriar Irani, father of Meher Baba Tanaaz Irani, Actress Zerbanoo Gifford, Human rights activist See also[edit] Irani café References[edit] ^ Masashi, Haneda. "Emigration of Iranian Elites to India during the 16-18th centuries". Retrieved 2013-12-17. ^ Shastri, Padmaja. "What sets Zoroastrian-Iranis apart". Retrieved 2018-06-24. This Zoroastrianism-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e v t e Iranian peoples Ethnic groups Achomis Balochs Farsiwan Gilaks Kurds Kurdish tribes Laks Lurs Bakhtiaris Mazanderanis Ossetians Digors Irons Jaszs Kudars Pamiris Tajiks of Xinjiang Wakhis Pashtuns Pashtun tribes Persians Tajiks Talyshs Tats of the Caucasus Tats of Iran Yaghnobis Yazidis Zazas Related ethnic groups Aimaqs Hazaras Ancient peoples Ancient Iranian peoples Origin Indo-Iranians Proto-Indo-Europeans Languages Iranian languages Iranian religions Ancient Iranian religion Assianism Bábism Baháʼí Faith Khurramites Manichaeism Mazdakism Mazdaznan Scythian Yarsanism Yazidism Zoroastrianism v t e Gujarati people Brahmin communities Aboti Brahmin Anavil Brahmin Bardai Brahmins Girnara Brahmin Jesthi Brahmins Khedaval Brahmin Modh Brahmin Nandwana Brahmins Nagar Brahmin Sachora Brahmins Sakaldwipiya Sidhra-Rudhra Brahmins Sompura Brahmins Sompura Salats Kshatriya communities Ahir Bhanushali Bhati Brahmakshatriya Chavda Chauhan Chudasama Dabhi Dodiya Kachhotia Kansara Kapadi Karadiya Kathi Darbar Gohil Gori Jadeja Jethwa Jhala Jinkara Lohana Manka Mer Mahyavanshi Mahiya Darbar Nadoda Parmar Rathor Rehvar Sarvaiya Sagar Sikligar Solanki Thakor Vala Wagher Vaishya communities Bhatia Modh Vanik Modh Ghanchi Soni Farming communities Anjana Chaudhari Koli Kunbi Agricultural communities Bharwad Rabari Genealogist communities Barot Charan Artisan communities Bhambi Khalpa Bhambi Rohit Bhambi Sindhi Mochi Gihara Gurjar Kshatriya Kadia Koshti Kutch Gurjar Kshatriya Mistry Mestri Panchal Gurjar Suthar Prajapati Shenva Sompura Salat Sathwara Salat Vankar Vanzha Valand Tribal communities Bamcha Bhil Dungri Garasia Vasava Bhoi Damor Dangi Dhanka Dhodia Dubla Gamit Garasia Godha Kharwa Koli Meghwal Naikda Padhar Padharia Patanwadia Pateliya Rathodia Rathwa Tirgar Thori Vagri Muslim communities Alavi Bohra Ansari Baloch Bhadala Chhipa Chundrigar Dawoodi Bohra Halaypotra Hingorja Hingora Jats of Kutch Juneja Kadia Kagzi Ker Khaskheli Khoja Machiyar Makrani Makwana Muslim Malik Mandali Mansoori Memon Meta Qureshi Miyana Molesalam Momna Multani Multani Lohar Mutwa Nagori Nayak Node Panar Patani Bohra Patni Jamat Pathans of Gujarat Salaat Samma Sandhai Muslims Shaikhs of Gujarat Shaikhda Sayyid of Gujarat Siddi Sipahi Sulaymani Bohra Sunni Bohra Tai Turk Jamat Vora Patel Vyapari Jain communities Navnat Zoroastrian communities Iranis Parsis Other communities Khant See also Genetic studies on Gujarati people