Newgrange, Ireland's largest Neolithic passage tomb, c. 3200 BC. One of the Boyne valley tombs. The prehistory of Ireland has been pieced together from archaeological evidence, which has grown at an increasing rate over the last decades. It begins with the first evidence of humans in Ireland around 10,500 BC,[1] and finishes with the start of the historical record around 400 AD. Both of these dates are later than for much of Europe and all of the Near East. The prehistoric period covers the Palaeolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Age and Iron Age societies of Ireland. For much of Europe, the historical record begins when the Romans invaded; as Ireland was not invaded by the Romans its historical record starts later, with the coming of Christianity. Bronze Age gold dress-fasteners and torc, amber necklace, Ulster Museum The two periods that have left the most spectacular groups of remains are the Neolithic, with its megalithic tombs, and the gold jewellery of the Bronze Age, when Ireland was a major centre of gold mining. Ireland has many areas of bogland, and a great number of archaeological finds have been recovered from these. The anaerobic conditions sometimes preserve organic materials exceptionally well, as with a number of bog bodies, a Mesolithic wicker fish-trap,[2] and a Bronze Age textile with delicate tassels of horse hair.[3] Contents 1 Glaciation and the Palaeolithic 2 Mesolithic (8000–4000 BC) 3 Neolithic (4000–2500 BC) 3.1 Monuments 3.2 Portable artefacts 4 Copper and Bronze Ages (2500–500 BC) 5 Iron Age (500 BC – AD 400) 6 Bog bodies 7 Collections 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 10.1 Archaeology 10.2 Genetics 11 External links Glaciation and the Palaeolithic[edit] Further information: Prehistoric settlement of the British Isles During the most recent Quaternary glaciation, ice sheets more than 3,000 m (9,800 ft) thick scoured the landscape of Ireland, pulverising rock and bone, and eradicating any possible evidence of early human settlements during the Glenavian warm period;[4] human remains pre-dating the last glaciation have been uncovered in the extreme south of Britain, which largely escaped the advancing ice sheets. During the Last Glacial Maximum (ca. 26,000–19,000 years ago),[5] Ireland was an arctic wasteland, or tundra. This period's effects on Ireland are referred to as Midland General Glaciation,[6] or Midlandian glaciation.[7] It was previously believed that during this period ice covered two thirds of Ireland.[8][6] Subsequent evidence from the past 50 years has shown this to be untrue and recent publications suggest that the ice sheet extended beyond the southern coast of Ireland.[9] Map of Ireland during the last ice age (the "first humans" annotation at bottom should be disregarded, and the existence of any "fresh water lake" is doubtful). During the period between 17,500 and 12,000 years ago, a warmer period referred to as the Bølling-Allerød allowed for the rehabitation of northern areas of Europe by roaming hunter-gatherers. Genetic evidence suggests this reoccupation began in southwestern Europe and faunal remains suggest the existence of a refugium in Iberia that extended up into southern France. Those originally attracted to the north during the pre-boreal period would be species like reindeer and aurochs. Some sites as far north as Sweden inhabited earlier than 10,000 years ago suggest that humans might have used glacial termini as places from which they hunted migratory game. These factors and ecological changes brought humans to the edge of the northernmost ice-free zones of continental Europe by the onset of the Holocene and this included regions close to Ireland. However, during the early part of the Holocene Ireland itself had a climate that was inhospitable to most European animals and plants. Human occupation was unlikely, although fishing was possible. Britain and Ireland may have been joined by a land bridge, but because this hypothetical link would have been cut by rising sea levels so early into the warm period, probably by 16,000 BC, few temperate terrestrial flora or fauna would have crossed into Ireland.[10][11] Snakes and most other reptiles could not repopulate Ireland because any land bridge disappeared before temperatures became warm enough for them.[12] The lowered sea level also joined Britain to continental Europe; this persisted much longer, probably until around 5600 BC.[13] The earliest known modern humans in Ireland date back to the late Palaeolithic Age. This date was pushed back some 2,500 years by a radiocarbon dating performed in 2016 on a bear bone excavated in 1903 in the "Alice and Gwendoline Cave", County Clare. The bone has cut marks showing it was butchered when fresh and gave a date of around 10,500 BC, showing humans were in Ireland at that time.[14] In contrast, a flint worked by a human found in 1968 at Mell, Drogheda, that is much older, probably well pre-dating 70,000 BC, is normally regarded as having been carried to Ireland on an ice sheet, probably from what is now the bottom of the Irish Sea.[15] A British site on the eastern coast of the Irish Sea, dated to 11,000 BC, indicated people were in the area eating a marine diet including shellfish. These modern humans may have also colonised Ireland after crossing a southern, now ice-free, land bridge that linked south-east Ireland and Cornwall, if it existed, or more likely, by boat. In the south, the Irish Sea facing South Wales was at the least a good deal narrower than today until 12,000 BC;[10] in the north, the sea-crossing to Kintyre in Scotland, though much too deep to have ever been a land bridge, is even today only twelve miles at its shortest point and would then have been less.[10] These people may have found few resources outside of coastal shellfishing and acorns, and so may not have continually occupied the region. The early coastline of Ireland is now almost entirely under the sea, so evidence of coastal populations is lost,[10] though ways of investigating undersea sites are being explored. The return of freezing conditions in the Younger Dryas, which lasted from 10,900 BC to 9700 BC, may have depopulated Ireland. During the Younger Dryas, sea levels continued to rise and no ice-free land bridge between Great Britain and Ireland ever returned.[16] Mesolithic (8000–4000 BC)[edit] Main article: Irish Mesolithic Reconstruction of a hunter-gatherer hut and canoe, Irish National Heritage Park The last ice age fully came to an end in Ireland about 8000 BC.[17] Until the single 2016 Palaeolithic dating described above, the earliest evidence of human occupation after the retreat of the ice was dated to the Mesolithic, around 7000 BC.[18] Although sea levels were still lower than they are today, Ireland was very probably already an island by the time the first settlers arrived by boat, very likely from Britain.[10] The earliest inhabitants of the island were seafarers who depended for much of their livelihood upon the sea, and later inland settlements or camps were usually close to water.[19] Although archaeologists believe Mesolithic people heavily relied on riverine and coastal environments, ancient DNA indicates they had probably ceased contact with Mesolithic societies on the island of Britain and further afield.[20] Evidence for Mesolithic hunter-gatherers has been found throughout the island: a number of the key early Mesolithic excavations are the settlement site at Mount Sandel in County Londonderry (Coleraine); the cremations at Hermitage, County Limerick on the bank of the River Shannon; and the campsite at Lough Boora in County Offaly. As well as these, early Mesolithic lithic scatters have been noted around the island, from the north in County Donegal to the south in County Cork.[21] The population has been tentatively estimated at around 8,000. The Moss-side hoard of Mesolithic Bann flake tools and blades, Ulster Museum.[22] The hunter-gatherers of the Mesolithic era lived on a varied diet of seafood, birds, wild boar and hazelnuts.[23][24] There is no evidence for deer in the Irish Mesolithic and it is likely that the first red deer were introduced in the early stages of the Neolithic.[25] The human population hunted with spears, arrows and harpoons tipped with small stone blades called microliths, while supplementing their diet with gathered nuts, fruit and berries. They lived in seasonal shelters, which they constructed by stretching animal skins or thatch over wooden frames. They had outdoor hearths for cooking their food. During the Mesolithic the population of Ireland was probably never more than a few thousand. Surviving artefacts include small microlith blades and points, and later larger stone tools and weapons, in particular the versatile Bann flake.[26] Neolithic (4000–2500 BC)[edit] Many areas of Europe entered the Neolithic with a 'package' of cereal cultivars, pastoral animals (domesticated oxen/cattle, sheep, goats), pottery, weaving, housing and burial cultures, which arrive simultaneously, a process that begins in central Europe as LBK (Linear Pottery culture) about 6000 BC. Within several hundred years this culture is observed in northern France. An alternative Neolithic culture, La Hoguette culture, that arrived in France's northwestern region appears to be a derivative of the Ibero Italian-Eastern Adriatic Impressed Cardial Ware culture (Cardium pottery). The La Hoguette culture, like the western Cardial culture, raised sheep and goats more intensely. By 5100 BC there is evidence of dairy practices in southern England, and modern English cattle appear to be derived from "T1 Taurids" that were domesticated in the Aegean region shortly after the onset of the Holocene. These animals were probably derived from the LBK cattle. Around 4300 BC cattle arrived in northern Ireland during the late Mesolithic period. The red deer was introduced from Britain about this time.[25] Reconstruction of an early Irish farmer's hut, Irish National Heritage Park. From around 4500 BC a Neolithic package that included cereal cultivars, housing culture (similar to those of the same period in Scotland) and stone monuments arrived in Ireland. Sheep, goats, cattle and cereals were imported from southwestern continental Europe, after which the population rose significantly. The earliest clear proof of farmers in Ireland or Great Britain is from Ferriter's Cove on the Dingle Peninsula, where a flint knife, cattle bones and a sheep's tooth were found and dated to c. 4350 BC.[27] At the Céide Fields in County Mayo, an extensive Neolithic field system (arguably the oldest known in the world) has been preserved beneath a blanket of peat. Consisting of small fields separated from one another by dry-stone walls, the Céide Fields were farmed for several centuries between 3500 and 3000 BC. Wheat and barley were the principal crops cultivated. Pottery made its appearance around the same time as agriculture. Ware similar to that found in northern Great Britain has been excavated in Ulster (Lyle's Hill pottery) and in Limerick. Typical of this ware are wide-mouthed, round-bottomed bowls.[28] This follows a pattern similar to western Europe or gradual onset of Neolithic, such as seen in La Hoguette Culture of France and Iberia's Impressed Cardial Ware Culture. Cereal culture advance markedly slows north of France; certain cereal strains such as wheat were difficult to grow in cold climates—however, barley and German rye were suitable replacements. It can be speculated[by whom?] that the DQ2.5 aspect of the AH8.1 haplotype may have been involved in the slowing of cereal culture into Ireland, Scotland and Scandinavia since this haplotype confers susceptibility to a Triticeae protein induced disease as well as Type I diabetes and other autoimmune diseases that may have arisen as an indirect result of Neolithisation.[citation needed] Some regions of Ireland showed patterns of pastoralism that indicated that some Neolithic peoples continued to move and indicates that pastoral activities dominated agrarian activities in many regions or that there was a division of labour between pastoral and agrarian aspects of the Neolithic. At the height of the Neolithic the population of the island was probably in excess of 100,000, and perhaps as high as 200,000. But there appears to have been an economic collapse around 2500 BC, and the population declined for a while. Monuments[edit] The most striking characteristic of the Neolithic in Ireland was the sudden appearance and dramatic proliferation of megalithic monuments. The largest of these tombs were clearly places of religious and ceremonial importance to the Neolithic population, and were probably communal graves used over a long period. In most of the tombs that have been excavated, human remains—usually, but not always, cremated—have been found. Grave goods—pottery, arrowheads, beads, pendants, axes, etc.—have also been uncovered. These megalithic tombs, more than 1,200 of which are now known, can be divided for the most part into four broad groups, all of which would originally have been covered with earth, that in many cases has been eroded away to leave the impressive stone frameworks: Types of Irish megalithic tombs Creevykeel court cairn, County Sligo. Knowth, a passage tomb at Brú na Bóinne. Poulnabrone dolmen, a portal tomb at The Burren. Glantane East wedge tomb. The entrance passage to Newgrange, and the entrance stone Court cairns – These are characterised by the presence of an entrance courtyard. They are found almost exclusively in the north of the island and are thought to include the oldest specimens. North Mayo has many examples of this type of megalith – Faulagh, Kilcommon, Erris. Passage tombs – These constitute the smallest group in terms of numbers, but they are the most impressive in terms of size and importance. They are also found in much of Europe, and in Ireland are distributed mainly through the north and east, the biggest and most impressive of them being found in the four great Neolithic "cemeteries" of the Boyne (Brú na Bóinne, a World Heritage Site), Loughcrew (both in County Meath), Carrowkeel and Carrowmore (both in County Sligo). The most famous of them is Newgrange, one of the oldest astronomically aligned monuments in the world. It was built around 3200 BC. At the winter solstice the first rays of the rising sun still shine through a light-box above the entrance to the tomb and illuminate the burial chamber at the centre of the monument. Another of the Boyne megaliths, Knowth, has been claimed to contain the world's earliest map of the Moon carved into stone. Portal tombs – These tombs include the well known dolmens. They consist of three or more upright stones supporting a large flat horizontal capstone (table). They were originally covered with earth to form a tumulus, but often their covering has now eroded to leave the impressive main stone structure. Most of them are to be found in two main concentrations, one in the southeast of the island and one in the north. The Knockeen and Gaulstown Dolmens in County Waterford are exceptional examples. Wedge tombs – The largest and most widespread of the four groups, the wedge tombs are particularly common in the west and southwest. County Clare is exceptionally rich in them. They are the latest of the four types and belong to the end of the Neolithic. They are so called from their wedge-shaped burial chambers. The theory that these four groups of monuments were associated with four separate waves of invading colonists still has its adherents today, but the growth in population that made them possible need not have been the result of colonisation: it may simply have been the natural consequence of the introduction of agriculture. Portable artefacts[edit] The Malone Hoard of 19 luxury polished Antrim porcellanite axe-heads, dated 4,500-2,500 BC, found in Belfast, Ulster Museum. The stone axe was the primary and essential tool for farming, carefully made in a variety of styles, and often polished. The products of axe factories next to sources of porcellanite, an especially good stone, were traded across Ireland; the main ones were Tievebulliagh and Rathlin Island, both in County Antrim.[29] There were also imports from Britain, including products of the Langdale axe industry of the English Lake District. There was a much rarer class of imported prestige axe head made from jadeite from north Italy; these may have been slowly traded across Europe to reach Ireland over a period reaching into centuries, and show no signs of use.[30] Miniature axes, too small to be useful, were made, and a "tiny porcellanite axe" has been found in a passage tomb; another example has a hole for a cord, and may have been worn as jewellery or an amulet. Other stone shapes made were chisels, adzes, maces and spearheads. Only one decorated macehead has been found, in one of the tombs at Knowth, but it is extremely fine. Some finds may also be miniature maceheads.[31] Pierced beads and pendants are found, and two necklaces of shells (from Phoenix Park in Dublin) are very carefully made, with graded periwinkle shells; these were on the remains of two males. As an example of the exceptional preservation sometimes possible in items found in anaerobic bogs, part of a finely woven bag with circular handles has survived; it used reedy plant material wound round thin strips of wood. Decorated pottery, apparently made for funerary rather than domestic use, appears to imitate basketry patterns.[32] Copper and Bronze Ages (2500–500 BC)[edit] Gold lunula, a type of ornament produced in the Bronze Age British Isles, especially Ireland. This example, probably made 2400-2000 BC, was found in Blessington, eastern Ireland. British Museum Metallurgy arrived in Ireland with new people, generally known as the Bell Beaker People from their characteristic pottery, in the shape of an inverted bell.[33] This was quite different from the finely made, round-bottomed pottery of the Neolithic. It is found, for example, at Ross Island, and associated with copper mining there, which had begun by at least 2,400 BC.[34] There is some disagreement about when speakers of a Celtic language first arrived in Ireland. It is thought by some scholars to be associated with the Beaker People of the Bronze Age, but the more mainstream view is, or at least used to be, that "Celts" arrived much later at the beginning of the Iron Age.[35] The Bronze Age began once copper was alloyed with tin to produce true bronze artefacts, and this took place around 2000 BC, when some "Ballybeg-type" flat axes and associated metalwork were produced. The tin needed to be imported, normally from Cornwall. The period preceding this, in which Lough Ravel and most Ballybeg axes were produced, and which is known as the Copper Age or Chalcolithic, commenced about 2500 BC. Bronze was used for the manufacture of both weapons and tools. Swords, axes, daggers, hatchets, halberds, awls, drinking utensils and horn-shaped trumpets are just some of the items that have been unearthed at Bronze Age sites. Irish craftsmen became particularly noted for the horn-shaped trumpet, which was made by the cire perdue, or lost wax, process. Copper used in the manufacture of bronze was mined in Ireland, chiefly in the southwest of the island, while the tin was imported from Cornwall in Britain. The earliest known copper mine in these islands was located at Ross Island, at the Lakes of Killarney in County Kerry; mining and metalworking took place there between 2400 and 1800 BC. Another of Europe's best-preserved copper mines has been discovered at Mount Gabriel in County Cork, which was worked for several centuries in the middle of the second millennium.[36] Mines in Cork and Kerry are believed to have produced as much as 370 tonnes of copper during the Bronze Age. Ireland was also rich in native gold, and the Bronze Age saw the first extensive working of this precious metal by Irish craftsmen. More Bronze Age gold hoards have been discovered in Ireland than anywhere else in Europe. Irish gold ornaments have been found as far afield as Germany and Scandinavia, and gold-related trade was very possibly a major factor in the Bronze Age Irish economy. the Gleninsheen Gorget, 800-700 BC, National Museum of Ireland, no. 12 in A History of Ireland in 100 Objects.[37] In the early stages of the Bronze Age the gold ornaments included simple but finely decorated gold lunulae, a distinctively Irish type of object later made in Britain and continental Europe, and disks of thin gold sheet. Many of these seem to have been long in use before they were deposited. Later the thin twisted torc made its appearance; this was a collar consisting of a bar or ribbon of metal, twisted into a spiral. Other types of gold jewellery made in Ireland during the Bronze Age, most shared with Britain, include earrings,[38] sun disks,[39] bracelets, clothes fasteners, and in the Late Bronze Age, the distinctively Irish large "gorgets",[40] and bullae amulets.[41] After the Bronze Age goldwork almost ceased to be produced in Ireland;[42] the Irish deposits may well have been essentially exhausted. Twisted Gold Pennanular Ring, Late Bronze Age, Hunt Museum, Limerick. Construction of wedge tombs tailed off from about 2,200 BC,[43] and while the previous tradition of large scale monument building was much reduced, existing earlier megalithic monuments continued in use in the form of secondary insertions of funerary and ritual artefacts. Towards the end of the Bronze Age the single-grave cist made its appearance. This consisted of a small rectangular stone chest, covered with a stone slab and buried a short distance below the surface. The body might be cremated, or not. Decorated pots often accompanied the remains,[44] and later cremated remains were placed inside the urn, which was turned upside-down, and might also have grave goods of various sorts.[43] Numerous stone circles were also erected at this time, chiefly in Ulster and Munster. Crannogs are timber homes built in shallow lakes for security, often with a narrow walkway to the shore. Some use or extend natural islets, and the largest probably housed a number of families, and animals. It is thought that most of the 1,200-odd crannogs in Ireland were begun in the Bronze Age, although many sites seem to have been used, continuously or intermittently, over very long periods, even into medieval times. The large Dowris Hoard, originally of over 200 items, mostly in bronze, has given its name to the Dowris Phase or period, as a term for the final phase of the Irish Bronze Age, about 900-600 BC. With 48 examples, the hoard contained all but two of the known examples of the distinctive "crotals", bronze rattles in the shape of a bull's testicle, as well as 26 horns or trumpets, weapons, and vessels.[45] The rather earlier Dunaverney flesh-hook (perhaps 1050–900 BC) is suggestive of a culture where elite feasting was important, and reflects influence from continental Europe; very large riveted bronze cauldrons were also made.[46] Large numbers of bronze weapons were produced, and typical sword shapes changed from shorter ones for stabbing and thrusting on foot, to longer ones, perhaps for a mounted warrior to slash with.[47] This is one example of a Dowris Phase design type originating in the Hallstatt culture of continental Europe, probably transmitted via southern Britain; chapes for scabbards is another.[48] During the Bronze Age, the climate of Ireland deteriorated and extensive deforestation took place. The population of Ireland at the end of the Bronze Age was probably in excess of 100,000, and may have been as high as 200,000. It is possible that it was not much greater than it had been at the height of the Neolithic.[citation needed] In Ireland the Bronze Age lasted until c. 500 BC, later than continental Europe and also Britain.[49] End of the Dunaverney flesh-hook Part of the Dowris Hoard Tongue-shaped bronze dagger, Hunt Museum[50] Late Bronze Age bracelet from Castlederg, c. 950-800 BC Gold Dress Fastener, Clones, County Monaghan, 800-700 BC Late Bronze Age gold "gorget", 800-700 BC, found in County Clare. NMI, Dublin Iron Age (500 BC – AD 400)[edit] Tribes of Ireland according to Ptolemy's Geographia (written c. 150 AD).[51] The Irish Iron Age has long been thought to begin around 500 BC and then continue until the Christian era in Ireland, which brought some written records and therefore the end of prehistoric Ireland. This view has been somewhat upset by the recent carbon-dating of the wood shaft of a very elegant iron spearhead found in the River Inny, which gave a date of between 811 and 673 BC. This may further erode the belief, still held by some, that the arrival of iron-working marked the beginning of the arrival of the Celts (i.e. speakers of the Proto-Celtic language) and thus Indo-European speakers, to the island.[52] Alternatively, many hold the view that this happened with the bearers of the Bell Beaker culture, probably Indo-European speaking, reaching Ireland during the earlier stage of the Bronze Age.[53] The Celtic languages of Britain and Ireland, also known as Insular Celtic, can be divided into two groups, Goidelic and Brittonic. When primary written records of Celtic first appear in about the fifth century, Gaelic or Goidelic, in the form of Primitive Irish, is found in Ireland, while Brittonic, in the form of Common Brittonic, is found in Britain. The Iron Age includes the period in which the Romans ruled most of the neighbouring island of Britain. Roman interest in the area led to some of the earliest written evidence about Ireland. The names of its tribes were recorded by the geographer Ptolemy in the 2nd century AD.[54] The recorded tribes of Ireland included at least three with names identical or similar to British or Gaulish tribes: the Brigantes (also the name of the largest tribe in northern and midland Britain), the Manapii (possibly the same people as the Menapii, a Belgic tribe of northern Gaul) and the Coriondi (a name similar to that of Corinion, later Cirencester and the Corionototae of northern Britain). Up to about 150 BC there are many finds that show stylistic influence from continental Europe (as in the preceding Dowris Phase), and some direct imports. After that date relationships with British styles predominate, perhaps reflecting some movement of people. The Keshcarrigan Bowl, possibly made in Britain, is an example of this. Another cup found in Fore, County Westmeath does seem to be an import.[55] Gold model boat from the Broighter Hoard, c. 100 BC. Examples from Iron Age Ireland of La Tène style, the term for Iron Age Celtic art, are very few, to a "puzzling" extent,[56] although some of these are of very high quality, such as a number of scabbards from Ulster and the Petrie Crown, apparently dating to the 2nd century AD. This was well after Celtic art elsewhere had been subsumed into Gallo-Roman art and its British equivalent.[57] Despite this it was in Ireland that the style seemed to revive in the early Christian period, to form the Insular art of the Book of Kells and other well-known masterpieces, perhaps under influence from Late Roman and post-Roman Romano-British styles. The 1st century BC Broighter Gold hoard, from Ulster, includes a small model boat, a spectacular torc with relief decoration influenced by classical style, and other gold jewellery probably imported from the Roman world, perhaps as far away as Alexandria.[58] The headland of Drumanagh, near Dublin and not yet fully excavated, may have represented a centre for trade with Roman Britain. Drumanagh is an example of the coastal promontory fort, using cliff headlands with a narrow neck to reduce the extent of fortification necessary. In Ireland these seem to be mainly a feature of the Iron Age,[59] with some perhaps dating to the Bronze Age, and also continuing to be used into the Early Medieval period. Although today seen as mostly dating from the early historic period, some of the perhaps 60,000 ringforts or raths in Ireland date back to the Late Iron Age. These vary greatly in size and function, with smaller ones a single-family farmstead (with slaves), or merely an enclosure for animals, and larger ones clearly having a wider political and military significance.[60] Model reconstruction of the circular building at Navan Fort, c. 100 BC. There are several ringforts in the complex topping the Hill of Tara, which seems to have its origins in the late Iron Age, although the site also includes a Neolithic passage grave and other earlier tombs.[59] This is one of a number of major sites connected in later literature and mythology with kingship, and probably had a ritual and religious significance, though it is now impossible to be clear as to what this was. Navan Fort (Emain Macha), another major hilltop site, had a very large circular building constructed on it about 100 BC. It was forty metres across, with 275 tree-posts in rings. The largest was the central post, a tree felled about 95 BC. Within the century following the whole building was destroyed, apparently in a ritual fashion.[61] Other large-scale constructions, requiring a good degree of social organization, include linear earthworks such as the Black Pig's Dyke and Cliadh Dubh, probably representing boundaries, and acting as hindrances to cattle-raids, and "toghers" or wooden trackways across boggy areas,[59] of which the best-known is the Corlea Trackway, a corduroy road dated to 148-147 BC, and about a kilometre long and some three metres wide.[62] The late Iron Age saw sizeable changes in human activity. Thomas Charles-Edwards coined the phrase "Irish Dark Age" to refer to a period of apparent economic and cultural stagnation in late prehistoric Ireland, lasting from c. 100 BC to c. AD 300.[63] Pollen data extracted from Irish bogs indicate that "the impact of human activity upon the flora around the bogs from which the pollen came was less between c. 200 BC and c. AD 300 than either before or after."[64] The third and fourth centuries saw a rapid recovery.[64] The reasons for the decline and recovery are uncertain, but it has been suggested that recovery may be linked to the "Golden Age" of Roman Britain in the third and fourth centuries. The archaeological evidence for trade with, or raids on, Roman Britain is strongest in northern Leinster, centred on modern County Dublin, followed by the coast of County Antrim, with lesser concentrations in the Rosses on the north coast of County Donegal and around Carlingford Lough. As Roman Britain collapsed politically, there was even settlement by Irish people, and leaders, in Wales and western Britain.[65] Inhumation burials may also have spread from Roman Britain, and had become common in Ireland by the fourth and fifth centuries.[66] It was also during this time that some protohistoric records begin to appear. Early Irish literature was not written down until much later, in the Early Medieval period, but many scholars are ready to accept that the saga cycles preserve in some form elements from much earlier, that give some insights into the world of the last elites of prehistoric Ireland. Bog bodies[edit] The bog body called Clonycavan Man, died 392 to 201 BC, NMI The large areas of bog in Ireland have produced over a dozen ancient bog bodies, mostly from the Iron Age. Some were found and reburied before archaeological and scientific investigation was possible. Some survive as skeletons only, but the best-preserved have retained their flesh, hair, and clothing. The oldest appears to be the Neolithic Stoneyisland Man, perhaps the victim of a canoeing accident around 3320–3220 BC. Cashel Man died violently about 2500-2000 BC in the early Bronze Age, and is one of the possible ritual killings; it is now thought these were deposed kings sacrificed after being seen to fail in their rule, perhaps after crop failures.[67] Two Iron Age examples of apparent elite victims of ritual killing are Old Croghan Man and Clonycavan Man, both from approximately 400 to 175 BC.[68] Other bodies appear to have been normal burials. Collections[edit] Almost all prehistoric Irish finds remain in the British Isles. Some are in local museums, but much the most significant collections are in Dublin, Belfast and London. The first "national" collection for Irish antiquities was the British Museum in London, where many finds from before and after it was established in 1753 have ended up. However, from the foundation of the Dublin Royal Irish Academy in 1785 there was a local rival, which became the main destination of objects that were newly-found, or appeared on the market. The Dublin Society also formed a collection, though this was less important for antiquities. The society was founded in 1731, and by 1733 had opened a museum. Both these collections were transferred to the new "Museum of Science and Art", now the National Museum of Ireland, by 1890.[69] A legal dispute in which the Crown challenged the British Museum's purchase of the Broighter Hoard was won in 1903, and marked the acceptance on all sides of the Dublin museum as the Irish national collection.[70] This was a hoard found in what became Northern Ireland after Irish independence. Northern Ireland had seen its many important finds of antiquities passing to first London and then Dublin, and the Ulster Museum was only recognized as a national museum for antiquities in 1961. This had developed out of the collections of the Belfast Natural History Society, later renamed the Belfast Municipal Museum and Art Gallery, and was renamed again in 1961. Despite this, the pace of new finds has meant that it has an important collection. Notes[edit] ^ "New Discovery Pushes Back Date of Human Existence in Ireland by 2500 years", Irish Archaeology ^ 100 objects, "Mesolithic fish trap" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 92, 3:4 ^ Herity and Eogan, start of Ch. 2 ^ Clark, Peter U.; Dyke, Arthur S.; Shakun, Jeremy D.; Carlson, Anders E.; Clark, Jorie; Wohlfarth, Barbara; Mitrovica, Jerry X.; Hostetler, Steven W.; McCabe, A. Marshall (2009). "The Last Glacial Maximum". Science. 325 (5941): 710–714. Bibcode:2009Sci...325..710C. doi:10.1126/science.1172873. PMID 19661421. S2CID 1324559. ^ a b Alcibiades (27 February 2019). "Prehistoric Ireland – Formation of an Island". About History. Retrieved 2 July 2019. ^ Farmer, G. Thomas; Cook, John (2013). Climate Change Science: A Modern Synthesis: Volume 1 - The Physical Climate. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 409. ISBN 9789400757578. Retrieved 2 July 2019. ^ Stephens, Nicholas; Herries Davies, G. L. (1978). Ireland: The geomorphology of the British Isles. London: Methuen. ISBN 978-0-416-84640-9. ^ Greenwood, Sarah L., Clark, Chris D., "Reconstructing the last Irish Ice Sheet 2: a geomorphologically-driven model of ice sheet growth, retreat and dynamics", Quaternary Science Reviews, Volume 28, Issues 27–28, December 2009, Pages 3101-3123, online ^ a b c d e Edwards, R.J., Brooks, A.J. (2008) "The Island of Ireland: Drowning the Myth of an Irish Land-bridge?" In: Davenport, J.J., Sleeman, D.P., Woodman, P.C. (eds.), Mind the Gap: Postglacial Colonisation of Ireland. Special Supplement to The Irish Naturalists’ Journal, pp 19-34, "The Island of Ireland: Drowning the Myth of an Irish Land-bridge?" Accessed 21 December 2018. ^ An older view was that a land bridge to the English West Country existed until about 14,000 BC. See: K. Lambeck, P. Johnston, C. Smither, K. Fleming and Y. Yokoyama, Late Pleistocene and Holocene sea-level change, Annual Report of the Research School of Earth Sciences, ANU College of Physical & Mathematical Sciences, Canberra, 1995. ^ Owen, James (13 March 2008). "Snakeless in Ireland: Blame the Ice Age, Not St. Patrick". National Geographic. Retrieved 27 April 2016. ^ Cunliffe, 2012, p. 56. ^ "New Discovery Pushes Back Date of Human Existence in Ireland by 2500 years", Irish Archaeology; BBC (21 March 2016). "Earliest evidence of humans in Ireland". Retrieved 27 April 2016. ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 45, 2:3 - they date it to 400,000-300,000 BC; picture and different account ^ Tanabe, Susumu; Nekanishi, Toshimichi; Yasui, Satoshi (14 October 2010). "Relative sea-level change in and around the Younger Dryas inferred from late Quaternary incised valley fills along the Japan sea". Quaternary Science Reviews. 29 (27–28): 3956–3971. Bibcode:2010QSRv...29.3956T. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2010.09.018. ^ Herity and Eogan, Start of Ch. 2 ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 45 ^ Herity and Eoghan, Chapter 2 ^ Sheridan, Alison (June 2020). "Incest uncovered at the elite prehistoric Newgrange monument in Ireland". Nature. 582 (7812): 347–349. doi:10.1038/d41586-020-01655-4. PMID 32555481. S2CID 219730055. ^ Driscoll, K. The Early Prehistory in the West of Ireland: Investigations into the Social Archaeology of the Mesolithic, West of the Shannon, Ireland (2006). ^ BBC, A History of the World in 100 Objects ^ Woodman, Peter (1985). Excavations at Mount Sandel, 1973-77, County Londonderry. HM Stationery Office. ^ Perri, Angela R.; Power, Robert C.; Stuijts, Ingelise; Heinrich, Susann; Talamo, Sahra; Hamilton-Dyer, Sheila; Roberts, Charlotte (2018-09-01). "Detecting hidden diets and disease: Zoonotic parasites and fish consumption in Mesolithic Ireland". Journal of Archaeological Science. 97: 137–146. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2018.07.010. ISSN 0305-4403. ^ a b "Kerry red deer ancestry traced to population introduced to Ireland by ancient peoples over 5,000 years ago". Retrieved 6 November 2012. ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 45-46, 2:1 ^ "Prehistoric Genocide in Ireland?" (PDF). Ireland's DNA. Retrieved 27 June 2015. ^ 100 objects, "Neolithic Bowl" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 46-47, 2:4 ^ 100 objects, "Ceremonial Axehead", Wallace and O'Floinn, 46, 2:5 ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 46-47, 2:1-9; 100 objects, "Flint Macehead" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 48, 2:10-14; 100 objects, "Neolithic Bag" ^ Michael Herity and George Eogan, Ireland in Prehistory (1996), p.114; M.J. O'Kelly, Bronze-age Ireland, in A New History of Ireland, vol 1: Prehistoric and early Ireland, edited by Dáibhí Ó Cróinín (Royal Irish Academy 2005). ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 49 ^ J.X.W.P. Corcoram, "The origin of the Celts", in Nora Chadwick, The Celts (1970); David W. Anthony, The Horse, the Wheel and Language: How Bronze-Age riders from the Eurasian steppes shaped the modern world (2007). ^ Michael Herity and George Eogan, Ireland in Prehistory (1996), pp.115–6. ^ "A History of Ireland in 100 Objects" website ^ 100 objects, "Basket Earrings" ^ 100 objects, "Pair of Gold Discs" ^ 100 objects, "Gleninsheen Gold Gorget" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 49-50, 2:15-21, 2:28-29 (Early to Middle) and 87-90, 3:6-24 (Late); 100 objects, "Coggalbeg Gold Hoard" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 93 ^ a b Wallace and O'Floinn, 51 ^ 100 objects, "Bronze Age Funerary Pots" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 86, 91, 125-126 ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 90-91, 125; 100 objects, "Castlederg Bronze Cauldron" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 53, 90 ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 125 ^ Ó Cróinín, p. lx. ^ Harbison, Peter. (1970). Two prehistoric bronze weapons from Ireland in the Hunt collection. [Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland]. OCLC 1000908777. ^ After Duffy (ed.), Atlas of Irish History, p. 15. ^ 100 objects, "Iron Spearhead" ^ A New History of Ireland, Volume I: Prehistoric and Early Ireland. Dáibhí Ó Cróinín (Editor). ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 171 ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 127, 4:8; 100 objects, "Keshcarrigan Bowl" ^ Ó Cróinín, p. lx, "puzzling" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 126-127, 130-131, 4:5, 4:18; 100 objects, "Petrie 'Crown'" ^ Ó Cróinín, 137–152; Wallace and O'Floinn, 128-129, 4:10-14; 100 objects, "Broighter Boat" ^ a b c Wallace and O'Floinn, 126 ^ Charles-Edwards, 151; Wallace and O'Floinn, 126 ^ Charles-Edwards, 146-147 ^ Megalithic Ireland.com, Corlea Trackway ^ Charles-Edwards, p. 145. ^ a b Charles-Edwards, p. 148. ^ Charles-Edwards, 155-162, map 8; 100 objects, "Cunorix Gravestone" ^ Charles-Edwards, pp. 175–176. ^ Kingship and Sacrifice, NMI; "Laois 'bog body' said to be world's oldest", The Irish Times. 2 August 2013. ^ 100 objects, "Armlet, Old Croghan Man" ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 4-9 ^ Wallace and O'Floinn, 8 References[edit] "100 objects", A History of Ireland in 100 Objects, An Post, The Irish Times, National Museum of Ireland and the Royal Irish Academy, 2017 Thomas Charles-Edwards, Early Christian Ireland, Cambridge, 2000 Driscoll, K. The Early Prehistory in the West of Ireland: Investigations into the Social Archaeology of the Mesolithic, West of the Shannon, Ireland (2006). Herity, M. and G. Eogan. Ireland in Prehistory. (1996) Routledge. ISBN 0-415-04889-3 Ó Cróinín, Dáibhí, ed. (2008). A New History of Ireland: Prehistoric and early Ireland, (Volume 1 series), Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-922665-2. Wallace, Patrick F., O'Floinn, Raghnall eds. Treasures of the National Museum of Ireland: Irish Antiquities, 2002, Gill & Macmillan, Dublin, ISBN 0717128296 The book is chapters of text, followed by commentary on the illustrations and then a section with the illustrations, cross-referred by chapter and picture numbers, e.g. "3:13" Further reading[edit] Dardis GF (1986). "Late Pleistocene glacial lakes in South-central Ulster, Northern Ireland". Ir. J. Earth Sci. 7: 133–144. Barry, T. (ed.) A History of Settlement in Ireland. (2000) Routledge. ISBN 0-415-18208-5. Bradley, R. The Prehistory of Britain and Ireland. (2007) Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-84811-3. Coffey, G. Bronze Age in Ireland (1913) Driscoll, K. The Early Prehistory in the West of Ireland: Investigations into the Social Archaeology of the Mesolithic, West of the Shannon, Ireland (2006). Flanagan L. Ancient Ireland. Life before the Celts. (1998). ISBN 0-312-21881-8 Thompson, T. Ireland’s Pre-Celtic Archaeological and Anthropological Heritage. (2006) Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 0-7734-5880-8. Waddell, J., The Celticization of the West: an Irish Perspective, in C. Chevillot and A. Coffyn (eds), L' Age du Bronze Atlantique. Actes du 1er Colloque de Beynac, Beynac (1991), 349–366. Waddell, J.,The Question of the Celticization of Ireland, Emania No. 9 (1991), 5–16. Waddell, J., 'Celts, Celticisation and the Irish Bronze Age', in J. Waddell and E. Shee Twohig (eds.), Ireland in the Bronze Age. Proceedings of the Dublin Conference, April 1995, 158–169. Archaeology[edit] Arias, J. World Prehistory 13 (1999):403–464.The Origins of the Neolithic Along the Atlantic Coast of Continental Europe: A Survey. Bamforth and Woodman, Oxford J. Arch. 23 (2004): 21–44. Tool hoards and Neolithic use of the landscape in north-eastern Ireland. Clark (1970) Beaker Pottery of Great Britain and Ireland of the Gulbenkain Archaeological Series, Cambridge University Press. Waddell, John (1998). The prehistoric archaeology of Ireland. Galway: Galway University Press. hdl:10379/1357. Genetics[edit] McEnvoy; et al. (2004). "The Longue Durée of Genetic Ancestry: Multiple Genetic Marker Systems and Celtic Origins on the Atlantic Facade of Europe". Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75 (4): 693–704. doi:10.1086/424697. PMC 1182057. PMID 15309688. Finch; et al. (1997). "Distribution of HLA-A, B and DR genes and haplotypes in the Irish population". Exp. Clin. Immunogenet. 14 (4): 250–263. PMID 9523161. Williams; et al. (2004). "High resolution HLA-DRB1 identification of a caucasian population". Human Immunology. 65 (1): 66–77. doi:10.1016/j.humimm.2003.10.004. PMID 14700598. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Prehistory of Ireland. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Ask about Ireland, Flora and fauna The Flandrian: the case for an interglacial cycle Ireland's history in maps : Ancient Ireland Postcards of the Prehistoric Monuments of Ireland John Waddell's publications on prehistory of Ireland Treasures of early Irish art, 1500 B.C. to 1500 A.D., an exhibition catalogue from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF) Prehistoric Waterford Brú na Bóinne/ Newgrange website v t e Ireland topics Republic of Ireland topics Northern Ireland topics History Timeline Prehistory Protohistory Early history Gaelic Ireland / Lordship of Ireland 800–1169 1169–1536 Kingdom of Ireland 1536–1691 1691–1801 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 1801–1923 United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland since 1922 Irish Free State (1922–1937) Ireland (since 1922) Events Battles of Tara / Glenmama / Clontarf Norman invasion Bruce campaign Black Death Tudor conquest Desmond Rebellions Spanish Armada Tyrone's Rebellion Flight of the Earls Plantation of Ulster 1641 Rebellion / Confederate War Cromwellian conquest / Settlement of 1652 Williamite War Penal Laws First Great Famine 1798 Rebellion Act of Union (1800) 1803 Rebellion Tithe War Second Great Famine Land War Fenian Rising Dublin Lock-out Home Rule crisis Easter Rising War of Independence Anglo-Irish Treaty Civil War The Emergency IRA Northern Campaign IRA Border Campaign The Troubles Peace process Economy of the Republic of Ireland Celtic Tiger Post-2008 Irish economic downturn Post-2008 Irish banking crisis Other topics List of conflicts in Ireland List of Irish tribes List of Irish kingdoms List of High Kings Gaelic clothing and fashion List of World Heritage Sites in the Republic of Ireland Geography Natural Climate Coastline Extreme points Fauna Islands Loughs Mountains Rivers list List of national parks of the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland Human Architecture Notable buildings Tallest buildings and structures Cities Counties Demographics of the Republic of Ireland / of Northern Ireland Ports Provinces ROI–UK border Towns Tourist attractions Transport Politics Ideologies Nationalism Republicanism Ulster loyalism Unionism Republic of Ireland Constitution Economy Education Foreign relations Government local Oireachtas parliament Dáil Éireann (lower house) Seanad Éireann (upper house) President Northern Ireland Assembly D'Hondt method Economy Education Government local Peace process Culture Cuisine Food List of dishes Barmbrack Bacon and cabbage Boxty Champ Coddle Colcannon Drisheen Irish fry Skirts and kidneys Soda bread Spice Bag Stew Drinks Coffee Cream Guinness Mist Poitín Tea Whiskey Dance Jig Sean-nós Set dancing Stepdance Festivals Imbolc Saint Patrick's Day Bealtaine The Twelfth Lúnasa Rose of Tralee Samhain / Halloween Wren Day Languages Hiberno-English Irish Shelta Ulster Scots Literature Annals Fiction Gaeilge Poetry Theatre Triads Music Ballads Céilí Folk music session Instruments Rock music Traditional singing Mythology Cycles Fenian Mythological Ulster Aos Sí Echtrai Immrama Tuatha Dé Danann Legendary creatures People Anglo-Irish Gaels Gaelic Ireland Hiberno-Normans Irish diaspora List of Irish people Travellers Ulster Scots Sport Association football Camogie Gaelic football Gaelic handball Hurling Martial arts Road bowling Rounders Rugby union Symbols Brighid's Cross Cláirseach County coats of arms Flags N. Ireland flags issue Irish Wolfhound National coat of arms Red Hand Shamrock Other Calendar Cinema of Ireland Homelessness Names Place names in Ireland / outside Ireland Prostitution (Republic) / in Northern Ireland Public holidays in the Republic of Ireland / in Northern Ireland Public houses Squatting  Ireland portal v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pit Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear Spear-thrower baton harpoon woomera Schöningen spears Projectile points Arrowhead Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Site Plano Transverse arrowhead Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Pyramid Dwellings Neolithic architecture British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mud brick Mehrgarh Neolithic long house Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Stone roof Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Oldest surviving buildings Megalithic architectural elements Midden Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Linear Jōmon Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine Winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Golden hats Guardian stones Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurines Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court tomb Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Tumulus Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Astronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language trepanning Prehistoric medicine Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Prehistoric music Alligator drum flutes Divje Babe flute gudi Prehistoric numerals Origin of religion Paleolithic religion Prehistoric religion Spiritual drug use Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism v t e History of Ireland Chronology Prehistory Protohistory 400–800 800–1169 1169–1536 1536–1691 1691–1801 1801–1923 Timeline of Irish history Peoples and polities Gaelic Ireland Lordship of Ireland Kingdom of Ireland United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Irish Republic Irish Free State Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland Topics Conflicts Clans Kingdoms States Gaelic monarchs British monarchs Economic history History of the Irish language  Ireland portal v t e History of the British Isles Overview United Kingdom England Isle of Wight Isles of Scilly Scotland Shetland Orkney Inner Hebrides Outer Hebrides Wales Anglesey Northern Ireland Ireland Isle of Man (Mann) Channel Islands Jersey Guernsey Prehistoric period Prehistoric Britain Prehistoric England Prehistoric Scotland Prehistoric Shetland Prehistoric Orkney Prehistoric Wales Prehistoric Ireland Prehistoric Mann Classical period Roman Britain Roman Scotland Roman Wales Protohistoric Ireland, Roman Ireland End of Roman rule Sub-Roman Britain Medieval period Medieval England Early medieval England High medieval England Late medieval England Medieval Scotland Early medieval Scotland High medieval Scotland Late medieval Scotland Medieval Wales Early medieval Wales High medieval Wales Late medieval Wales Medieval Ireland Early medieval Ireland High medieval Ireland Late medieval Ireland Medieval Mann Early modern period Early modern Britain Early modern England Early modern Scotland Early modern Wales Early modern Ireland Early modern Mann Late modern period United Kingdom (since 1707) Victorian period Edwardian period First World War Interwar period Second World War Post-war period (political history) Post-war period (social history) Late modern Ireland Late modern Mann