This article is about the prophet. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). "Isaias", "Esaias", and "Yeshayahu" redirect here. For the given name, see Isaias (given name). For the 2020 hurricane, see Hurricane Isaias. Israelite prophet Isaiah Fresco from the Sistine Chapel ceiling by Michelangelo Prophet Born 8th century BC Judah Died 7th century BC Venerated in Judaism Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy[1] Islam[2] Feast May 9[3] Major works Book of Isaiah Isaiah[a] was the 8th-century BC Israelite prophet after whom the Book of Isaiah is named.[7][8] Within the text of the Book of Isaiah, Isaiah himself is referred to as "the prophet",[9] but the exact relationship between the Book of Isaiah and any such historical Isaiah is complicated. The traditional view is that all 66 chapters of the book of Isaiah were written by one man, Isaiah, possibly in two periods between 740 BC and c. 686 BC, separated by approximately 15 years, and that the book includes dramatic prophetic declarations of Cyrus the Great in the Bible, acting to restore the nation of Israel from Babylonian captivity. Another widely held view is that parts of the first half of the book (chapters 1–39) originated with the historical prophet, interspersed with prose commentaries written in the time of King Josiah a hundred years later, and that the remainder of the book dates from immediately before and immediately after the end of the exile in Babylon, almost two centuries after the time of the historical prophet.[b] Contents 1 Biography 2 In Christianity 2.1 Latter Day Saint movement 3 In Islam 4 In rabbinic literature 4.1 Origin and calling 4.2 His death 5 Archaeology 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Biography[edit] Russian icon of the Prophet Isaiah, 18th century (iconostasis of Transfiguration Church, Kizhi monastery, Karelia, Russia) Painting of Isaiah by Antonio Balestra The first verse of the Book of Isaiah states that Isaiah prophesied during the reigns of Uzziah (or Azariah), Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, the kings of Judah (Isaiah 1:1). Uzziah's reign was 52 years in the middle of the 8th century BC, and Isaiah must have begun his ministry a few years before Uzziah's death, probably in the 740s BC. Isaiah lived until the fourteenth year of the reign of Hezekiah (who died 698 BC). He may have been contemporary for some years with Manasseh. Thus Isaiah may have prophesied for as long as 64 years.[10] According to some modern interpretations, Isaiah's wife was called "the prophetess" (Isaiah 8:3), either because she was endowed with the prophetic gift, like Deborah (Judges 4:4) and Huldah (2 Kings 22:14–20), or simply because she was the "wife of the prophet".[10][11] They had two sons, naming the eldest Shear-jashub, meaning "A remnant shall return" (Isaiah 7:3), and the youngest, Maher-Shalal-Hash-Baz, meaning, "Spoil quickly, plunder speedily" (Isaiah 8:3). Isaiah receives his vision of the Lord's house. A stained glass window at St. Matthew's German Evangelical Lutheran Church in Charleston, South Carolina. Soon after this, Shalmaneser V determined to subdue the kingdom of Israel, taking over and destroying Samaria (722 BC). So long as Ahaz reigned, the kingdom of Judah was untouched by the Assyrian power. But when Hezekiah gained the throne, he was encouraged to rebel "against the king of Assyria" (2 Kings 18:7), and entered into an alliance with the king of Egypt (Isaiah 30:2–4). The king of Assyria threatened the king of Judah, and at length invaded the land. Sennacherib (701 BC) led a powerful army into Judah. Hezekiah was reduced to despair, and submitted to the Assyrians (2 Kings 18:14–16). But after a brief interval, war broke out again. Again Sennacherib led an army into Judah, one detachment of which threatened Jerusalem (Isaiah 36:2–22; 37:8). Isaiah on that occasion encouraged Hezekiah to resist the Assyrians (37:1–7), whereupon Sennacherib sent a threatening letter to Hezekiah, which he "spread before the LORD" (37:14).[10] Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying: "Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel: Whereas thou hast prayed to Me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, this is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee. Whom hast thou taunted and blasphemed? And against whom hast thou exalted thy voice? Yea, thou hast lifted up thine eyes on high, even against the Holy One of Israel!" (37:21–23) According to the account in 2 Kings 19 (and its derivative account in 2 Chronicles 32) an angel of God fell on the Assyrian army and 185,000 of its men were killed in one night. "Like Xerxes in Greece, Sennacherib never recovered from the shock of the disaster in Judah. He made no more expeditions against either Southern Palestine or Egypt."[10][12] The remaining years of Hezekiah's reign were peaceful (2 Chr 32:23–29). Isaiah probably lived to its close, and possibly into the reign of Manasseh. The time and manner of his death are not specified in either the Bible or other primary sources.[10] Later Jewish tradition says that he suffered martyrdom by being sawn in two under the orders of Manasseh.[13] The book of Isaiah, along with the book of Jeremiah, is distinctive in the Hebrew bible for its direct portrayal of the "wrath of the Lord" as presented, for example, in Isaiah 9:19 stating, "Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire."[14] In Christianity[edit] Representation of the Prophet Isaiah illustrating a 14th-century prose translation of the Gospels The Ascension of Isaiah, a pseudepigraphical Christian text dated to sometime between the end of the 1st century and the beginning of the 3rd, gives a detailed story of Isaiah confronting an evil false prophet and ending with Isaiah being martyred – none of which is attested in the original Biblical account. Gregory of Nyssa (c. 335–395) believed that the Prophet Isaiah "knew more perfectly than all others the mystery of the religion of the Gospel". Jerome (c. 342–420) also lauds the Prophet Isaiah, saying, "He was more of an Evangelist than a Prophet, because he described all of the Mysteries of the Church of Christ so vividly that you would assume he was not prophesying about the future, but rather was composing a history of past events."[15] Of specific note are the songs of the Suffering Servant, which Christians say are a direct prophetic revelation of the nature, purpose, and detail of the death of Jesus Christ. The Book of Isaiah is quoted many times by New Testament writers.[16] Ten of those references are about the Suffering Servant, how he will suffer and die to save many from their sins, be buried in a rich man's tomb, and be a light to the Gentiles. The Gospel of John says that Isaiah "saw Jesus' glory and spoke about him."[17][non-primary source needed] The Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates Saint Isaiah the Prophet on May 9.[18] Latter Day Saint movement[edit] The Book of Mormon quotes Jesus Christ as stating that "great are the words of Isaiah", and that all things prophesied by Isaiah have been and will be fulfilled.[19] The Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants also quote Isaiah more than any other prophet from the Old Testament.[20] Additionally, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consider the founding of the church by Joseph Smith in the 19th century to be a fulfillment of Isaiah 11, the translation of the Book of Mormon to be a fulfillment of Isaiah 29,[21] and the building of Latter-day Saint temples as a fulfillment of Isaiah 2:2.[22] In Islam[edit] Isaiah, or his Arabic name أشعياء (transliterated: Ishaʻyā'), is not mentioned by name in the Quran or the Hadith, but appears frequently as a prophet in Islamic sources, such as Qisas Al-Anbiya and Tafsir.[23] Tabari (310/923) provides the typical accounts for Islamic traditions regarding Isaiah.[24] He is further mentioned and accepted as a prophet by other Islamic scholars such as Ibn Kathir, Al-Tha`labi and Kisa'i and also modern scholars such as Muhammad Asad and Abdullah Yusuf Ali.[25] According to Muslim scholars, Isaiah predicted the coming of Jesus and Muhammad, although the reference to Muhammad is disputed by other religious scholars.[26] Isaiah's narrative in Islamic literature can be divided into three sections. The first establishes Isaiah as a prophet of Israel during the reign of Hezekiah; the second relates Isaiah's actions during the siege of Jerusalem by Sennacherib; and the third warns the nation of coming doom.[27][24] Paralleling the Hebrew Bible,[28] Islamic tradition states that Hezekiah was king in Jerusalem during Isaiah's time. Hezekiah heard and obeyed Isaiah's advice, but could not quell the turbulence in Israel.[29] This tradition maintains that Hezekiah was a righteous man and that the turbulence worsened after him. After the death of the king, Isaiah told the people not to forsake God, and warned Israel to cease from its persistent sin and disobedience. Muslim tradition maintains that the unrighteous of Israel in their anger sought to kill Isaiah.[29] In a death that resembles that attributed to Isaiah in Lives of the Prophets, Muslim exegesis recounts that Isaiah was martyred by Israelites by being sawn in two.[29] In the courts of Al-Ma'mun, the seventh Abbasid caliph, Ali al-Ridha, the great grandson of Muhammad and prominent scholar (Imam) of his era, was questioned by the High Jewish Rabbi to prove through the Torah that both Jesus and Muhammad were prophets. Among his several proofs, the Imam references the Book of Isaiah, stating "Sha‘ya (Isaiah), the Prophet, said in the Torah concerning what you and your companions say: ‘I have seen two riders to whom (He) illuminated earth. One of them was on a donkey and the other was on a camel. Who is the rider of the donkey, and who is the rider of the camel?'" The Rabbi was unable to answer with certainty. Al-Ridha goes on to state that "As for the rider of the donkey, he is ‘Isa (Jesus); and as for the rider of the camel, he is Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family. Do you deny that this (statement) is in the Torah?" The Rabbi responds "No, I do not deny it." [30] In rabbinic literature[edit] Allusions in Jewish rabbinic literature to Isaiah contain various expansions, elaborations and inferences that go beyond what is presented in the text of the Bible itself. Origin and calling[edit] According to the ancient rabbis, Isaiah was a descendant of Judah and Tamar,[31] and his father Amoz was the brother of King Amaziah.[32] While Isaiah, says the Midrash, was walking up and down in his study he heard God saying, "Whom shall I send?" Then Isaiah said, "Here am I; send me!" Thereupon God said to him," My children are troublesome and sensitive; if you are ready to be insulted and even beaten by them, you may accept My message; if not, you would better renounce it".[33] Isaiah accepted the mission, and was the most forbearing, as well as the most patriotic, among the prophets, always defending Israel and imploring forgiveness for its sins. When Isaiah said, "I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips",[34] he was rebuked by God for speaking in such terms of His people.[35] His death[edit] It is related in the Talmud that Rabbi Simeon ben Azzai found in Jerusalem an account wherein it was written that King Manasseh killed Isaiah. King Manasseh said to Isaiah, "Moses, your master, said, 'No man may see God and live';[36] but you have said, 'I saw the Lord seated upon his throne'";[37] and went on to point out other contradictions—as between Deuteronomy 4:7 and Isaiah 40:6; between Exodus 33:23 and 2 Kings 20:6. Isaiah thought: "I know that he will not accept my explanations; why should I increase his guilt?" He then uttered the tetragrammaton, a cedar-tree opened, and Isaiah disappeared within it. King Manasseh ordered the cedar to be sawn asunder, and when the saw reached his mouth Isaiah died; thus was he punished for having said, "I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips".[38] A somewhat different version of this legend is given in the Jerusalem Talmud.[39] According to that version Isaiah, fearing King Manasseh, hid himself in a cedar-tree, but his presence was betrayed by the fringes of his garment, and King Manasseh caused the tree to be sawn in half. A passage of the Targum to Isaiah quoted by Jolowicz[40] states that when Isaiah fled from his pursuers and took refuge in the tree, and the tree was sawn in half, the prophet's blood spurted forth. The legend of Isaiah's martyrdom spread to the Arabs[41] and to the Christians as, for example, Athanasius the bishop of Alexandria (c. 318) wrote, "Isaiah was sawn asunder".[42] According to rabbinic literature, Isaiah was the maternal grandfather of Manasseh of Judah.[43] Archaeology[edit] In February 2018, archaeologist Eilat Mazar announced that she and her team had discovered a small seal impression which reads "[belonging] to Isaiah nvy" (could be reconstructed and read as "[belonging] to Isaiah the prophet") during the Ophel excavations, just south of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.[44] The tiny bulla was found "only 10 feet away" from where an intact bulla bearing the inscription "[belonging] to King Hezekiah of Judah" was discovered in 2015 by the same team.[45] Although the name "Isaiah" in the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet is unmistakable, the damage on the bottom left part of the seal causes difficulties in confirming the word "prophet" or a name "Navi", casting some doubts whether this seal really belongs to the prophet Isaiah.[46] Notes[edit] ^ (US: /aɪˈzeɪ.ə/ or UK: /aɪˈzaɪ.ə/;[4] Hebrew: יְשַׁעְיָהוּ‎‎, Modern: Yešayahu, Tiberian: Yəšạʻyā́hû; Syriac: ܐܹܫܲܥܝܵܐ‎ ˀēšaˁyā; Greek: Ἠσαΐας, Ēsaïās; Latin: Isaias; Arabic: إشعيا Ašaʿyāʾ or šaʿyā;[5] "Yah is salvation"[6]) ^ See the article "Book of Isaiah" for an extended overview of theories of its composition. References[edit] ^ The Departure of Isaiah the Prophet. ^ Historical Dictionary of Prophets in Islam and Judaism, B. M. Wheeler, Appendix II ^ St. John the Baptist Byzantine Catholic Cathedral, Holy Prophet Isaiah ^ Wells, John C. (1990). "Isaiah". Longman pronunciation dictionary. Harlow, England: Longman. p. 378. ISBN 978-0-582-05383-0. ^ Rippin, A., “S̲h̲aʿyā”, in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs. ^ New Bible Dictionary, Second Edition, Tyndale Press, Wheaton, IL, 1987. ^ The Scofield Study Bible III, NKJV, Oxford University Press ^ De Jong, Matthijs J., Isaiah Among The Ancient Near Eastern Prophets: A Comparative Study of the Earliest Stages of the Isaiah Tradition and the Neo-Assyrian Prophecies, BRILL, 2007, pp. 13–17 ^ Isaiah 38:1 ^ a b c d e  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Easton, Matthew George (1897). Easton's Bible Dictionary (New and revised ed.). T. Nelson and Sons. Missing or empty |title= (help) ^ Coogan, Michael D. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament, Oxford University Press, 2009, p.273. ^ Sayce, Archibald Henry, The Ancient Empires of the East. Macmillan, 1884, p. 134. ^ Babylonian Talmud, Yevamot 49b ^ Isaiah 9:19. ^ The Lives of the Holy Prophets, Holy Apostles Convent, ISBN 0-944359-12-4, page 101. ^ Graham, Ron. "Isaiah in the New Testament - Quotations Chart - In Isaiah Order". ^ John 12:41 ^ "Prophet Isaiah in the Eastern Orthodox Church". Orthodox Church of America. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. ^ "3 Nephi 23:1-3". ^ "churchofjesuschrist.org - Isaiah". ^ "Encyclopedia of Mormonism, "Isaiah"". ^ "churchofjesuschrist.org - Temples". ^ Encyclopedia of Islam ^ a b Jane Dammen McAuliffe Encyclopaedia of the Qurʾān Volume 2 Georgetown University, Washington DC p. 562-563 ^ The Holy Qur'an: Text, Translation and Commentary, Note. 2173 to 17:4: "The Book is the revelation given to the Children of Israel. Here it seems to refer to the burning words of Prophets like Isaiah. For example, see Isaiah, chap, 24. or Isaiah 5:20–30, or Isaiah 3:16–26." ^ Encyclopedia of Islam, Shaya, Online Web. ^ Tabari, History of the Prophets and Kings, i, 638–45 ^ Isaiah 38. ^ a b c Stories of the Prophets, Ibn Kathir, Isaiah bin Amoz ^ al-Qurashi, Baqir Shareef (2001). The life of Imam 'Ali Bin Musa al-Ridha. Qum: Ansariyan Publications. p. 121. ISBN 978-9644383298. ^ Sotah 10b ^ Talmud tractate Megillah 15a ^ Leviticus Rabbah 10 ^ Isaiah 6:5 ^ Shir haShirim Rabbah 1:6 ^ Exodus 33:20 ^ Isaiah 6:1 ^ Yevamot 49b ^ Yerushalmi, Sanhedrin 10 ^ "Die Himmelfahrt und Vision des Prophets Jesajas," p. 8 ^ "Ta'rikh," ed. De Goeje, i. 644 ^ Athanasius (2018). On the Incarnation. GLH Publishing. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-948648-24-0. ^ ""Hezekiah". Jewish Encyclopedia". www.jewishencyclopedia.com. 1906. ^ Mazar, Eilat. Is This the "Prophet Isaiah’s Signature?" Biblical Archaeology Review 44:2, March/April May/June 2018. ^ In find of biblical proportions, seal of Prophet Isaiah said found in Jerusalem. By Amanda Borschel-Dan. The Times of Israel. 22 February 2018. Quote: "Chanced upon near a seal identified with King Hezekiah, a tiny clay piece may be the first-ever proof of the prophet, though a missing letter leaves room for doubt." ^ "Isaiah’s Signature Uncovered in Jerusalem: Evidence of the prophet Isaiah?" By Megan Sauter. Bible History Daily. Biblical Archeology Society. 22 Feb 2018. Quote by Mazar: "Because the bulla has been slightly damaged at end of the word nvy, it is not known if it originally ended with the Hebrew letter aleph, which would have resulted in the Hebrew word for "prophet" and would have definitively identified the seal as the signature of the prophet Isaiah. The absence of this final letter, however, requires that we leave open the possibility that it could just be the name Navi. The name of Isaiah, however, is clear."  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Singer, Isidore; et al., eds. (1901–1906). "Isaiah". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. Further reading[edit] Baltzer, Klaus (2001). Deutero-Isaiah: A Commentary on Isaiah 40–55. Minneapolis: Fortress Press. Buck, Christopher (1990). The Anatomy of Figuration: Maimonides’ Exegesis of Natural Convulsions in Apocalyptic Texts (Guide II.29). University of Calgary. Childs, Brevard S. (2001). Isaiah: a commentary. Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22143-0. Church, Brooke Peters (1953). The Private Lives of the Prophets and the Times in Which They Lived. New York: Rinehart. Cohon, Beryl D. (1939). The Prophets: Their Personalities and Teachings. New York: Scribner. Herbert, Arthur Sumner (1975). The book of the prophet Isaiah: Commentary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-08624-0. Herbert, Arthur Sumner (1975). The book of the Prophet Isaiah, chapters 40–66. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-20721-8. Kraeling, Emil G. (1969). The Prophets. Chicago: Rand McNally. Miscall, Peter D. (1993). Isaiah. Sheffield, England: JSOT Press. ISBN 978-1-85075-435-0. Quinn-Miscall, Peter D. (2001). Reading Isaiah: poetry and vision. Louisville: Westminster Press. ISBN 978-0-664-22369-4. Phillips, J. B. (1963). Four Prophets, Amos, Hosea, First Isaiah, Micha: A Modern Translation from the Hebrew. New York: Macmillan. Sawyer, John F. A. (1996). The fifth gospel: Isaiah in the history of Christianity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-44007-3. Scott, R. B. Y. (1968). The Relevance of the Prophets. Macmillan: London. Smith, J. M. Powis (1941). The Prophets and Their Times. Chicago: University of Chicago. External links[edit] Quotations related to Isaiah at Wikiquote Works related to Isaiah at Wikisource Media related to Isaiah (Biblical figure) Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Book of Isaiah ספר ישעיהו‎ Sefer Yeshayahu By number Chapter Proto-Isaiah 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 Deutero-Isaiah 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 Trito-Isaiah 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 Verse Isaiah 1:18 7:14 8:3 9:6 60:3 Places Ar-Moab Arabia Aram Arnon Ashdod Assyria Babylon Bashan Bozrah Brook of Egypt Canaan Carmel Chaldea Dibon Dimon Edom Eglaim Egypt Ethiopia Heshbon Horonaim Israel Javan Jazer Jerusalem Kir-Moab Lebanon Lud Medeba Medes Merodach-baladan Moab Nebo Nile Nimrim Noph Ophir Samaria Sela Sharon Shiloah Sodom and Gomorrah Tarshish Pul Tubal Zion Zoan Zoar Terminology Leviathan Maher-shalal-hash-baz Pele-joez-el-gibbor-abi-ad-sar-shalom Servant songs Persons Abraham Ahaz Amoz Bel Cyrus David Hephzibah Hezekiah Immanuel Isaiah Jacob Jesse Jotham Judah Noah Nebo Pekah Pharaoh Rezin Sargon Shebna Tartan Uzziah Wikisource texts Book of Isaiah (Hebrew) Septuagint (Greek) Vulgate (Latin) Wycliffe / King James / American Standard / World English Bible (English) ← Song of Songs (Song 8) Bible portal Book of Jeremiah (chapter 1) → v t e Prophets in the Hebrew Bible Pre-Patriarchal Abel Kenan Enoch Noah (in rabbinic literature) Patriarchs / Matriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob Levi Joseph Sarah Rebecca Rachel Leah Israelite prophets in the Torah Moses (in rabbinic literature) Aaron Miriam Eldad and Medad Phinehas Mentioned in the Former Prophets Joshua Deborah Gideon Samson Eli Elkanah Hannah Abigail Samuel Gad Nathan David Solomon Jeduthun Ahijah Shemaiah Elijah Elisha Iddo Hanani Jehu Micaiah Jahaziel Eliezer Zechariah ben Jehoiada Huldah Major Isaiah (in rabbinic literature) Jeremiah Ezekiel Daniel (in rabbinic literature) Minor Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah (in rabbinic literature) Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Noahide Beor Balaam Job (in rabbinic literature) Other Amoz Beeri Baruch Agur Uriah Buzi Mordecai Esther (in rabbinic literature) Ezra Nehemiah Ruth Oded Azariah Italics indicate persons whose status as prophets is not universally accepted. v t e Extra-Quranic prophets of Islam In Stories of the Prophets Enoch Eber Khidr Joshua Samuel Saul Gideon Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel Ezra Daniel In Islamic tradition Amos Seth Shem Eli Ahijah Shemaiah Iddo Haggai Hanani Jehu Melchizedek Micaiah Nahum Eliezer Zechariah ben Jehoiada Uriah Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah Berechiah Joel Obadiah Micah Habakkuk Zephaniah Malachi Hanzalah Khaled bin Sinan In Quranic exegesis Abel Saduq, Masduq, and Shalum Hosea Zechariah, son of Berechiah Italics = While the figure has been revered by many Muslims as a saint, status as a prophet is not accepted by all. v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Congregation for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization: Servant of God   →   Venerable   →   Blessed   →   Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Louis Bertrand Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Seraphim of Sarov Theophanes the Confessor Disciples Apollos Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs Joan of Arc John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Lübeck martyrs Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of China Martyrs of Japan Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Missionaries Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Damien of Molokai Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nico of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Dalua Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Genevieve Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti Teresa of Calcutta Narcisa de Jesús Rose of Lima See also Calendar of saints Congregation for the Causes of Saints Fourteen Holy Helpers Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Virtuous pagan  Catholic Church portal  Saints portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125