Ivan Tsarevich riding the Gray Wolf by Viktor Vasnetsov, 1889 The Flying Carpet (Carpet-plane) by Viktor Vasnetsov, 1880 API * Son of the Tsar Russian regent prince Prince (Vondareyvich of Russia) Sects Russian Orthodoxy Folklore coronation 1234 BC-AD Successor Vondareyvich Arivean Josev (1st reign) Son of the Russian Tsar Successor Vondareyvich Arivean Josev (2nd, 3rd and 4th reigns). although Josev was a Full-partial Protestant Christian Spouse Princess Marya Morevna Mount Gray wolf, magical carpet Tradition's facts Main was he married his sister Morevna[citation needed] Religion Christianity Ivan Tsarevich (Russian: Ива́н Царе́вич or Иван-царевич) is one of the main heroes of Russian folklore, usually a protagonist, often engaged in a struggle with Koschei. Along with Ivan the Fool, Ivan Tsarevich is a placeholder name rather than a certain character. Tsarevich is a title given to the sons of tsars. He is often, but not always, the youngest son of three. In the tale "The Three Tsardoms", he is a son of Nastasya the Golden Braid. Different legends describe Ivan as having various wives, including Yelena the Beautiful, Vasilisa the Wise and Marya Morevna.[1] Ivan is sometimes depicted with magic abilities and has the Sword Kladenets. Ivan is the main hero of Russian folktales. He is almost always portrayed as either the third son of a peasant family or the third son of a king. In the latter stories, he is called Ivan Tsarevich, which means "tsar's son." Ivan is one of the most common Russian names. The friends and foes of Ivan Tsarevich are often mythic figures, from magical animals to deathless beings. The most famous folktale featuring Ivan as the protagonist is "Tsarevitch Ivan, the Firebird and the Gray Wolf". In this story, Ivan was aided by a magical wolf as he captured the firebird and won the hand of a beautiful tsarevna. The firebird inspired Igor Stravinsky's ballet of the same name. In another famous tale, part of which was also used by Stravinsky in The Firebird, Ivan Tsarevich married a warrior princess, Maria Morevna, who was kidnapped by the immortal being called Koschei the Deathless. In this tale, the animal helpers were a lion, a bird and a magical horse that belonged to Baba Yaga. It was on this horse that Ivan defeated Koschei. Ivan the peasant's son has as many tales as Ivan Tsarevich. One of the best known is the story "the Little Humpbacked Horse", in which a magical, talking horse helped Ivan to become a hero and marry the princess he loved.[2] Tales about Ivan Tsarevich include "Ivan Tsarevich and the Grey Wolf", "Tsarevna the Frog", "The Sea Tsar and Vasilisa the Wise", "The Tale about Rejuvenating Apples and the Life Water", and "The Death of Koschei the Immortal (also known as "Marya Morevna")." References[edit] ^ Russian Fairy Tales. Pantheon. 1945. ISBN 9780394730905. ^ Ivanits, Linda J (1989-02-15). Russian Folk Belief. ISBN 9780765630889. v t e Slavic folklore Deities Dažbog Belobog1 Chernobog Devana1 Hors2 Kresnik Jarilo Mat Zemlya Lada1 Lel and Polel1 Marzanna Mokosh Niya2 Perun Porenut Porewit Radegast1 Rod2 Rugiewit Simargl Stribog Svarog2 Svarožic Svetovid Triglav Veles Yarovit Yesha1 Zorya Živa Legendary heroes Alyosha Popovich Burislav Damned Jerina Dobrynya Nikitich Dragon of Bosnia Ilya Muromets Ivan Kosančić Ivan Tsarevich Kyi, Shchek and Khoryv Lech, Czech, and Rus Libuše Mikula Selyaninovich Mila Gojsalić Milan Toplica Miloš Obilić Misizla Nikita the Tanner Popiel Prince Marko Sadko Solovey-Razboynik Svyatogor Vasilisa the Beautiful Volga Svyatoslavich Unquiet dead Vila Drekavac Kikimora Mavka Upyr Place spirits Bannik Bolotnik Cornflower Wraith Domovoy Dvorovoi Lady Midday Leshy Ovinnik Polevik Vodyanoy Shubin Entities Ala Alkonost Baba Yaga Babay Baš Čelik Bauk Berehynia Bies Black Arab Błędnica Blud Boginki Bukavac Chernava Cikavac Chort Čuma Dola Dukljan Dziwożona Fern flower-Chervona Ruta Firebird Gamayun Ispolin Karzełek Koschei Krsnik Likho Likhoradka Mare Meduza Nav Nocnitsa Psoglav Raróg Rahmans Raskovnik Rozhanitsy Rusalka Samodiva Sirin Shishiga Skrzak Strzyga Stuhać Sudice Tintilinić Topielec Ved Vesna Zduhać Zmey Ritual figures Baba Marta German Dodola Koliada Kupala Marzanna Maslenitsa Jarilo Mythological places Alatyr Buyan Kingdom of Opona Kitezh Lukomorye Vyraj Related topics Book of Veles Creation myth Films based on Slavic mythology Russian traditions and superstitions Ukrainian folklore Serbian folk astronomy Slavic fairies Slavic fantasy Slavic paganism Bogatyr Volkhv Notes: 1 historicity of the deity is dubious; 2 the deity status is dubious. This article about a fictional character is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e