For the 2002 film, see Jaani Dushman: Ek Anokhi Kahani. Jaani dushman Theatrical release poster Directed by Rajkumar Kohli Produced by Rajkumar Kohli Written by Inder Raj Anand (dialogues) Screenplay by Jaggiram Paul Charandas Shokh Story by Hakim Lata Starring Sunil Dutt Sanjeev Kumar Jeetendra Shatrughan Sinha Rekha Reena Roy Neetu Singh Vinod Mehra Music by Laxmikant–Pyarelal Cinematography Baldev Singh Edited by Shyam Production company Shankar Movies Release date 25 May 1979 Running time 153 minutes Country India Language Hindi Jaani Dushman (transl. Mortal Enemy) is a 1979 Indian Hindi-language horror film produced and directed by Rajkumar Kohli under the Shankar Movies banner. It features an ensemble cast including Sunil Dutt, Sanjeev Kumar, Jeetendra, Shatrughan Sinha, Vinod Mehra, Rekha, Neetu Singh and Reena Roy and music composed by Laxmikant–Pyarelal. The film is recorded as a Super Hit at the box office.[1] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Soundtrack 3.1 Trivia 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] Jwala Prasad is to marry the girl of his dreams. On the day of the marriage, his wife is dressed all in red, mixes poison in the milk, and Jwala becomes a monster, and continues to terrorize the region, first abducting brides dressed in red and killing them. When a groom confronts and kills the monster, it leaves the body of Jwala Prasad and possesses the body of his killer. Years later, another man has now killed this creature, and the monster has possessed the man's body, and it is again on a killing spree. The suspense mounts as one by one the brides are killed off and no one seems to have a clue. Everybody seems to be suspect, including the village Priest, the Thakur, his son, and several other people. The suspense is unraveled in the end and the monster is made to promise that he will no longer possess any person and will not carry on with his killing spree. Cast[edit] Sunil Dutt Sanjeev Kumar as Thakur Jeetendra Shatrughan Sinha Vinod Mehra Rekha Reena Roy Neetu Singh Bindiya Goswami Vikram Yogita Bali Sarika Amrish Puri Raza Murad as Jwala Prasad/Monster Shakti Kapoor Mac Mohan Madan Puri Jagdeep Paintal Roopesh Kumar Murad Premnath Aruna Irani Jayshree T. Sulochana Latkar Indrani Mukherjee Sheetal Aarti Shobhini Singh Neeta Mehta Soundtrack[edit] All lyrics by: Verma Malik Song Singer "Saare Rishte Naate Todke" Lata Mangeshkar "O Meri Jaan, Bol Meri Jaan, Teri Aankhon Ne Jaane Kya Jaadu Kiya" Kishore Kumar, Anuradha Paudwal "Dekha Na Saiyan Hamaar Jaisa, Naata Nahin Koi Pyar Jaisa" Asha Bhosle, Kishore Kumar, Mahendra Kapoor "Aisi Waisi Na Samajh Sajna" Asha Bhosle "Tere Haathon Mein Pehnaake Chudiyan" Asha Bhosle, Mohammed Rafi "Chalo Re, Doli Uthao Kahaar" Mohammed Rafi Trivia[edit] Two of the movie songs were listed in Binacca Chart of 1979; "Chalo Re, Doli Uthao Kahaar" by Mohammed Rafi and "Oh Meri Jaan" by Kishore Kumar and Anuradha Paudwal. References[edit] ^ "FRIDAY REVIEW-Jaani Dushman (1979)". The Hindu. 20 November 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Jaani Dushman at IMDb