Jason Bulmahn Jason Bulmahn on August 6, 2010 at the Gen Con Ennies awards show Born United States Occupation Game designer Subject Role-playing games Notable works Pathfinder Roleplaying Game Jason Bulmahn is a game designer who has written or contributed to several works. Career[edit] Jason Bulmahn coordinated the world's largest organized play D&D campaign for the RPGA (Living Greyhawk),[citation needed] and then joined Paizo Publishing as the managing editor of Dragon in 2004.[1] In 2007, Bulmahn took over as lead designer of Paizo Publishing, LLC.[2] Within two months of Wizards of the Coast's August 2007 announcement of D&D fourth edition, Bulmahn began working on a new edition of the d20 system that updated and polished the rules, and that he referred to as "a small side project".[3]:416 When Paizo decided not to wait any longer to see how Wizards of the Coast would allow third-party publishers to support their new game, Paizo turned Bulmahn's side project into a complete RPG to give them their own set of core rules for the d20 game system; Paizo thus announced the Pathfinder Roleplaying Game on March 18, 2008.[3]:417 Bulmahn became the lead designer of the Pathfinder Roleplaying Game.[4] The Beta version of the Pathfinder RPG received the gold ENnie award for "best free product or web enhancement" in 2008.[5] He has also written or contributed to Pathfinder books such as Carnival of Tears,[6] as well as Dragon and Dungeon articles and books such as Secrets of Xen'drik, Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk,[7] Dungeonscape, and Elder Evils. His RPG design credits include the Pathfinder Roleplaying Game Core Rulebook, Bestiary, Ultimate Guides, the Advanced Player's Guide, the Beginner Box, and 2013's Mythic Adventures. His work has earned one Origins Award and numerous ENnie Awards, including Best Game and Product of the Year for that past three years in a row. He is the publisher of Minotaur Games, a company dedicated to creating products compatible with the Pathfinder Roleplaying Game as well as card and board games. References[edit] ^ "Roll them bones!". RPGamer's "The Saving Throw". September 5, 2008. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011. Retrieved November 25, 2008. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Jason Bulmahn at LinkedIn. Retrieved on November 25, 2008. ^ a b Shannon Appelcline (2011). Designers & Dragons. Mongoose Publishing. ISBN 978-1-907702-58-7. ^ "Pathfinder RPG Advanced Players Guide Opening for Playtest". Purple Pawn. November 11, 2009. ^ Pathfinder Roleplaying Game (2008 Paizo Publishing edition) at RPGnet's RPG game index. Retrieved on November 25, 2008. ^ "Jason Bulmahn". Pen & Paper RPG database. Archived from the original on 2008-09-21. Retrieved November 25, 2008. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Martin Drury. "RPGamer review". Archived from the original on 2008-07-09. Retrieved 2008-11-26. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Codex of the Infinite Pains, Jason Bulmahn's RPG blog. Minotaur Games website. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This biographical article relating to a role-playing game designer is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e