American illustrator and comic book artist For the football managers, see Jeff Butler (football manager) and Geoff Butler. Jeff Butler Born (1958-02-26) February 26, 1958 (age 63) Madison, Wisconsin, U.S. Nationality American Known for Comics, Fantasy art Spouse(s) Laurel Layman (1985-) Jeff Butler (born February 26, 1958, in Madison, Wisconsin)[1] is an American illustrator and comic book artist. Butler worked with the art department of TSR, Inc. for 5 years, illustrating products for the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game and the Marvel Super Heroes role playing game, as well as Dragonlance novels. Contents 1 Early life 2 Career 3 References 4 External links Early life[edit] Jeff Butler was born in Madison, Wisconsin on February 26, 1958. He grew up playing sports, "But I was always drawing things when I was young. I was a mischievous little boy, and my mother used to stick me in the corner with paper and a pencil and tell me to draw to keep me quiet. Then came the comic books when I was a little older, much to the chagrin of my father. Mom thought the comic books were teaching me to read, but my father, who is a sportswriter for a Madison newspaper, thought they were no good for me."[1] Butler elaborates on his comics pastime, "At first, I read all the DC Comics I could get my hands on, and then moved on to Marvel Comics ... I used to practice drawing the figures from the comic books." In high school, Butler continued drawing as well as his sports activities. "Oh geez, this is so corny, but I was the football captain who went out with the cheerleading captain."[1] In junior high and high school (at Madison West High School),[2] Butler discovered fantasy through the Conan the Barbarian paperback books, and later Fritz Leiber and Lord of the Rings books. In college, Butler studied sports illustration and did some portrait work, as well as doing some illustrations for newspapers, magazines, and posters on the side, and a Budweiser poster for the university football team. "I was a fine arts major in college (University of Wisconsin–Madison), but I ended up splitting my time between the university and Madison Area Technical College (MATC) so I could get some commercial art instruction."[1] Butler played quarterback for the Wisconsin Badgers at university in 1977, but stopped because of a series of concussions.[2] While in school, Butler met Mike Baron, who created the Nexus comic book with Steve Rude for Capital Comics.[1] Baron sought Butler out after seeing a poster Butler had created for a UW-Madison fraternity rush.[2] Butler and Baron collaborated for Capital, creating The Badger. "I worked on the first few issues of the comic book, but Capital was having some cash flow problems at the time, so they put their titles up for sale."[1] Career[edit] One of Butler's teachers from MATC told him about a job opening for an artist at TSR in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin. He interviewed with the company, and was hired in February 1984. "When I first came to TSR, the Marvel Super Heroes Game was just starting to roll, so I had lots of fun those first few months doing the kind of comic book art I loved. Now, I like working on the Marvel paintings for the book covers. I can flesh things out and make these characters look real."[1] Butler also worked on black-and-white art for Dungeons & Dragons products and the Dragonlance series, and did color work such as the Conan Role-Playing Game box cover.[1] Butler married his high school sweetheart (the cheerleading captain), Laurel Layman in 1985.[1] After leaving TSR in 1989,[2] Butler worked as a freelance illustrator and comic book artist for nine years, working on projects including The Green Hornet,[3] Godzilla, Hercules, Xena, Jurassic Park and the monthly Ghostwriter strip for the Children's Television Workshop magazine, Kid City.[4] His Hercules drawings appeared in a 1996 issue of TV Guide.[2] Butler joined the Raven Software art staff in the fall of 1997 after returning to his native Madison with his family, and began learning computer game art. Butler served as the 2-D Art Lead on Heretic II and has worked on other games such as Soldier of Fortune and Star Trek, Elite Force. Butler has been part of the art team for Star Wars Jedi Knight II: Jedi Outcast, X-Men Legends, X-Men Legends II: Rise of Apocalypse, Marvel: Ultimate Alliance, and has been part of the core team for X-Men Origins: Wolverine and Wolfenstein.[4] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i "TSR Profiles". Dragon. Lake Geneva, Wisconsin: TSR, Inc. (#122): 68. June 1987. ^ a b c d e Kassulke, Natasha (June 12, 1997). "Local artist serious about comic books", Wisconsin State Journal, p. 2. ^ (February 2, 1990). "Buzz by for look at Green Hornet", St. Petersburg Times, p. 41. ^ a b http://www.mobygames.com/developer/sheet/view/developerId,148807/ External links[edit] "Jeff Butler at the RPG DB". Archived from the original on March 10, 2005. Jeff Butler at the Grand Comics Database Jeff Butler at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125