Jiangshi fiction or goeng-si fiction in Cantonese, is a literary and cinematic genre of horror based on the jiangshi of Chinese folklore, a reanimated corpse controlled by Taoist priests that resembles the zombies and vampires of Western fiction. The genre first appeared in the literature of the Qing Dynasty and the jiangshi film (traditional Chinese: 殭屍片; simplified Chinese: 僵尸片; pinyin: Jiāngshīpiàn) is a staple of the modern Hong Kong film industry. Hong Kong jiangshi films like Mr. Vampire and Encounters of the Spooky Kind follow a formula of mixing horror with comedy and kung fu. Contents 1 History 1.1 Literature 1.2 Hong Kong cinema 1.3 Television series 1.4 Video games 2 See also 3 Notes and references 3.1 Citations 3.2 Bibliography History[edit] Literature[edit] Derived from Chinese folklore, jiangshi fiction first appeared in the literature of the Qing Dynasty. The jiangshi is a corpse reanimated by a Taoist priest. The priest commands the jiangshi and directs it to a location for a proper burial. Jiangshi hop as they move and are able to absorb qi, the essence of the living.[1] The ties between jiangshi and vampires, and the English translation of jiangshi as "hopping vampire", may have been a marketing ploy manufactured by Hong Kong studios eager to enter Western markets.[2] Unlike vampires, jiangshi do not drink blood[3] or desire immortality.[4] Fictional accounts of jiangshi were included in Qing collections of ghost stories and other supernatural tales. They are featured in the story A Corpse's Transmutation (Shibian) in the Shuyiji collection, A Vampiric Demon (Jiangshi gui) and Spraying Water (Penshui) in Pu Songling's Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio,[5] and The Demonic Corpse (Jiangshi gui) in Dongxuan Zhuren's Shiyiji.[6] In Spraying Water, the animated corpse spews a liquid that kills the wife of a government official and her two servants.[7] A traveler is chased by a jiangshi in A Corpse's Transmutation, which killed three of his companions.[8] There are thirty stories of jiangshi in Zi Bu Yu, written by Yuan Mei.[9] Qing writer Ji Xiaolan provides a detailed description of jiangshi folklore in his book Yuewei Caotang Biji.[10] Hong Kong cinema[edit] Sammo Hung directed Encounters of the Spooky Kind and produced Mr. Vampire. A number of monster films were produced before the jiangshi boom of the 1980s and the 1990s. The earliest concerning vampires is Midnight Vampire (午夜殭屍) directed in 1936 by Yeung Kung-Leung. Vampire films were also made in the 1970s,[11] which merged the vampires of Western horror with the martial arts of Hong Kong kung fu films.[12] The jiangshi films of the 1980s were a departure from the Dracula-like vampires of its predecessors.[13] Cinematic portrayals of jiangshi show the corpses wearing traditional changshan garments with a talisman placed on its head that allows the Taoist priest to control the cadaver.[14] The tropes expropriated from Western horror were fewer, but still visibly present. The cloak, a motif from Hollywood's adaptations of Dracula, appears in the jiangshi films Vampire vs Vampire and A Bite of Love.[15] Encounters of the Spooky Kind, directed by Sammo Hung in 1980, was the first film based on the jiangshi of Chinese legends and the progenitor of the genre in the Hong Kong film industry. The film is an early example of kung fu horror comedy in Hong Kong and the jiangshi of the film are played by martial artists. A sequel, Encounters of the Spooky Kind II, was directed by Ricky Lau in 1990.[16] Mr. Vampire, directed by Ricky Lau, was the breakthrough success of the genre. The film established many of the genre's recognizable tropes. The protagonist is a Taoist priest, skilled in casting magical spells and performing kung fu, who uses supernatural powers to control the undead. He is assisted by incompetent sidekicks, whose antics are a source of comic relief, and must face a vengeful ghost.[17] In later jiangshi films, jiangshi interact and exist alongside Western vampires.[18] In the 1989 film Vampire vs. Vampire, a Taoist priest and childlike jiangshi encounter a British vampire. The jiangshi saves the priest when his spells for taming the jiangshi are fruitless against the vampire. The trope of jiangshi children, an allusion to a similar character in Mr. Vampire II, shows an awareness in jiangshi films of the genre by referencing its past cliches.[19] Jiangshi films declined in popularity around the mid-1990s.[20] There was a brief resurgence in jiangshi and vampire films during the early 2000s. Tsui Hark produced The Era of Vampires in 2002 and The Twins Effect, directed by Dante Lam and Donnie Yen, was released in 2003.[21] The Era of Vampires was not a comedy like earlier jiangshi films, a move that provoked criticisms from the genre's fans who felt that the film was trying to appeal to a more "Hollywood" demographic.[22] In 2009, Katy Chang made Nanjing Road, a jiangshi horror movie set against China's economic expansion.[23] In 2013, Juno Mak made Rigor Mortis as a tribute to earlier series such as Mr. Vampire. In 2014, Daniel Chan made Sifu vs Vampire. Jiangshi films have attracted an international audience since its heyday. In the West, the genre is popular because it both resembles and is distinct from the monsters of European and American folklore.[24] It is also popular in the Chinese diaspora and in southeast Asia.[25] Television series[edit] The Jackie Chan Adventures episode "Chi of the Vampire" involves the heroes encountering a Jiangshi, which drains qi from Tohru, Jade, and Uncle; which also turns Uncle into a vampire slave. After the stolen qi is returned, the Jiangshi is destroyed by sunlight, much like a Western vampire. Jiangshi appear in Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness, in the episode "The Po Who Cried Ghost". Jiangshi appear in Dragon Ball Super where they are depicted as human-type Earthlings transformed into Jiangshi by witchcraft using special paper talismans. This technique is used by former Crane School student Yurin to take revenge on Tienshinhan by turning his students and Master Roshi into Jiangshi. However Goku manages to defeat Jiangshi Max Power Master Roshi due to Yurin failing to command Roshi to counter Goku's Kamehameha. Tien and Goku foil Yurin's plot and allows the transformed students to return to normal. However the students destroyed a nearby town while in Jiangshi form forcing Tien to take part in the Tournament of Power to pay to fix the damages. Video games[edit] In Touhou Shinreibyou ~ Ten Desires, the boss of the 3rd stage, Yoshika Miyako, is a jiangshi. Hsien-Ko from the Darkstalkers fighting game series is a jiangshi. The video game Sleeping Dogs, which takes place in Hong Kong, features an expansion called Nightmare in North Point. The expansion is based on Chinese horror and folklore and features jiangshi as enemies to fight. The hero Mei from the Blizzard video game Overwatch has a Jiangshi-inspired skin for the Halloween Terror 2017 in-game event, as well as a "hopping" emote where she will hop continuously in a straight line with her arms outstretched. Jiangshi (going by their Japanese names of Kyonshi) are the primary enemies in the Nintendo Entertainment System video game, Phantom Fighter. However, they are mistakenly referred to as zombies instead of vampires. Jiangshi appear as enemies in the Chai Kingdom, the fourth and final world of the 1989 Nintendo Game Boy video game Super Mario Land. Jiangshi are featured as enemies in the game Spelunky. They can be found as early as the second area of the game. The Tale of the Dragon DLC for the strategy game Age of Mythology: Extended Edition, which features units based on various mythical creatures, has the Jiangshi as a possible unit for the god Shennong.[26] Jiangshi appeared as a secret and optional miniboss in Castlevania: Order of Ecclesia. In Kingdom Hearts II, the Nightwalker Heartless enemies, which primarily appear in the Land of Dragons world based on Mulan (1998 film), are based on Jiangshi. A Jiangshi-inspired hat, the Kyonshi Hat, was added on October 5, 2018 to Splatoon 2 as part of a Halloween event. Jiangshi are playable zombies in Counter-Strike Online in some modes: Zombie:The Hero, Zombie-Z, Zombie 2 Norowara and Kyonpan, two unused Pokémon from Pokémon Gold and Silver, are based on the jiangshi.[27] In the science fiction horror game SOMA, there are reanimated corpse monsters who act like ghosts and are referred to as Jiangshi. An insect (praying mantis) inspired version of the Jiangshi appears in Sucker Punch Productions' 2005 video game, Sly 3: Honor Among Thieves in the heist episode A Cold Alliance, they are the only non-Chinese Zodiac inspired enemy to appear in the enemy boss General Tsao's entourage. See also[edit] Zombie film Notes and references[edit] Citations[edit] ^ Stokes 2007, p. 448 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 209 ^ Lam 2009, pp. 46-51 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 208 ^ Chiang 2005, p. 99 ^ Chiang 2005, p. 106 ^ Chiang 2005, pp. 97-98 ^ Chiang 2005, pp. 104-106 ^ Chiang 2005, p. 99 ^ Chiang 2005, pp. 99-100 ^ Stokes 2007, p. 448 ^ Lam 2009, pp. 46-51 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 208 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 216 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 205 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 215 ^ Lam 2009, pp. 46-51 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 218 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 220 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 225 ^ Stokes 2007, p. 449 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 225 ^ https://www.amazon.com/Nanjing-Road-Official-Pirate-Edition/dp/B0023W64TY ^ Lam 2009, pp. 46-51 ^ Hudson 2009, p. 205 ^ https://store.steampowered.com/app/355960/Age_of_Mythology_EX_Tale_of_the_Dragon/?curator_clanid=5856339 ^ "Old Pokémon Gold and Silver Demo Discovered; Prototype Pokémon Unveiled -". mxdwn Games. 2018-06-01. Retrieved 2019-09-23. Bibliography[edit] Chiang, Sing-Chen Lydia (2005). Collecting the Self: Body and Identity in Strange Tale Collections of Late Imperial China. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-14203-9. Hudson, Dale (2009). "Modernity as Crisis: Goeng Si and Vampires in Hong Kong Cinema". In John Edgar Browning and Caroline Joan (Kay) Picart (ed.). Draculas, Vampires, and Other Undead Forms: Essays on Gender, Race and Culture. Lanham, Md.: The Scarecrow Press. pp. 203–234. ISBN 978-0-8108-6923-3. Lam, Stephanie (2009). "Hop on Pop: Jiangshi Films in a Transnational Context". CineAction (78): 46–51. Stokes, Lisa Odham (2007). Historical Dictionary of Hong Kong Cinema. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8108-5520-5. v t e Horror fiction Speculative fiction Media Comics Films Magazines Television programs Video games survival Types Body Comedy Zombie comedy Cosmic Dark fantasy Dark romanticism Erotic guro Ghost Giallo Gothic American Southern Southern Ontario Space Suburban Tasmanian Urban Japanese Korean Lovecraftian Monsters Jiangshi Vampire Werewolf Occult detective Organ transplantation Psychological Splatterpunk Survival Techno Weird fiction Weird menace Weird West Zombie apocalypse Related genres Black comedy Fantasy Fantastique Mystery Supernatural Thriller Science fiction Other Grand Guignol Writers Conventions LGBT themes characters Macabre Horror icon Related Pulp magazine Monster erotica Internet Speculative Fiction Database Category Portal v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie