Japanese film, TV, games, and theatre genre This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Actors playing samurai and ronin at Kyoto's Eigamura film studio Jidaigeki (時代劇, lit. "period drama") is a genre of film, television, video game, and theatre in Japan. Literally meaning "period dramas", they are most often set during the Edo period of Japanese history, from 1603 to 1868. Some, however, are set much earlier—Portrait of Hell, for example, is set during the late Heian period—and the early Meiji era is also a popular setting. Jidaigeki show the lives of the samurai, farmers, craftsmen, and merchants of their time. Jidaigeki films are sometimes referred to as chambara movies, a word meaning "sword fight", though chambara is more accurately a subgenre of jidaigeki. Jidaigeki rely on an established set of dramatic conventions including the use of makeup, language, catchphrases, and plotlines. Contents 1 Types 1.1 Sengoku-jidai 2 Roles 2.1 Warriors 2.2 Craftsmen 2.3 Merchants 2.4 Governments 2.5 Other 3 Conventions 3.1 Proverbs and catchphrases 4 Famous jidaigeki 4.1 Films 4.2 Video games 4.3 Anime and manga 4.4 Live action television 5 Famous directors 6 Prominent jidaigeki actors 7 Influence 8 References 9 External links Types[edit] Actor Kotaro Satomi on the set of Mito Kōmon Many jidaigeki take place in Edo, the military capital. Others show the adventures of people wandering from place to place. The long-running television series Zenigata Heiji and Abarenbō Shōgun typify the Edo jidaigeki. Mito Kōmon, the fictitious story of the travels of the historical daimyō Tokugawa Mitsukuni, and the Zatoichi movies and television series, exemplify the traveling style. Another way to categorize jidaigeki is according to the social status of the principal characters. The title character of Abarenbō Shōgun is Tokugawa Yoshimune, the eighth Tokugawa shōgun. The head of the samurai class, Yoshimune assumes the disguise of a low-ranking hatamoto, a samurai in the service of the shogun. Similarly, Mito Kōmon is the retired vice-shogun, masquerading as a merchant. In contrast, the coin-throwing Heiji of Zenigata Heiji is a commoner, working for the police, while Ichi (the title character of Zatoichi), a blind masseur, is an outcast, as were many disabled people in that era. In fact, masseurs, who typically were at the bottom of the professional food chain, was one of the few vocational positions available to the blind in that era. Gokenin Zankurō is a samurai but, due to his low rank and income, he has to work extra jobs that higher-ranking samurai were unaccustomed to doing. Whether the lead role is samurai or commoner, jidaigeki usually reach a climax in an immense sword fight just before the end. The title character of a series always wins, whether using a sword or a jutte (the device police used to trap, and sometimes to bend or break, an opponent's sword). Sengoku-jidai[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Sengoku-jidai (Warring States era setting) is a Japanese genre that has been used as the setting for novels, films, video games, anime and manga. It bears some parallels with the Western; Akira Kurosawa's Seven Samurai, for example, was remade in a Western setting as The Magnificent Seven. Roles[edit] Among the characters in jidaigeki are a parade of people with occupations unfamiliar to modern Japanese, and especially to foreigners. Here are a few. Warriors[edit] Main article: Samurai cinema The warrior class included samurai, hereditary members in the military service of a daimyō or the shōgun (themselves samurai). Rōnin, samurai without masters, were also warriors, and like samurai, wore two swords; they were, however, without inherited employment or status. Bugeisha were men, or in some stories women, who aimed to perfect their martial arts, often by traveling throughout the country. Ninja were the secret service, specializing in stealth, the use of disguises, explosives, and concealed weapons. Craftsmen[edit] Craftsmen in jidaigeki included metalworkers (often abducted to mint counterfeit coins), bucket-makers, carpenters and plasterers, and makers of woodblock prints for art or newspapers. Merchants[edit] In addition to the owners of businesses large and small, the jidaigeki often portray the employees. The bantō was a high-ranking employee of a merchant, the tedai, a lower helper. Many merchants employed children, or kozō. Itinerant merchants included the organized medicine-sellers, vegetable-growers from outside the city, and peddlers at fairs outside temples and shrines. In contrast, the great brokers in rice, lumber and other commodities operated sprawling shops in the city. Governments[edit] In the highest ranks of the shogunate were the rojū. Below them were the wakadoshiyori, then the various bugyō or administrators, including the jisha bugyō (who administered temples and shrines), the kanjō bugyō (in charge of finances) and the two Edo machi bugyō. These last alternated by month as chief administrator of the city. Their role encompassed mayor, chief of police, and judge, and jury in criminal and civil matters. Ban'ya, Toei Uzumasa Studios The machi bugyō oversaw the police and fire departments. The police, or machikata, included the high-ranking yoriki and the dōshin below them; both were samurai. In jidaigeki, they often have full-time patrolmen, okappiki and shitappiki, who were commoners. (Historically, these people were irregulars, called to service only when necessary.) Zenigata Heiji is an okappiki. The police lived in barracks at Hatchōbori in Edo. They manned ban'ya, the watch-houses, throughout the metropolis. The jitte was the symbol of the police, from yoriki to shitappiki. A separate police force handled matters involving samurai. The ōmetsuke were high-ranking officials in the shogunate; the metsuke and kachi-metsuke, lower-ranking police who could detain samurai. Yet another police force investigated arson-robberies, while Shinto shrines and Buddhist temples fell under the control of another authority. The feudal nature of Japan made these matters delicate, and jurisdictional disputes are common in jidaigeki. Edo had three fire departments. The daimyō-bikeshi were in the service of designated daimyōs; the jōbikeshi reported to the shogunate; while the machi-bikeshi, beginning under Yoshimune, were commoners under the administration of the machi-bugyō. Thus, even the fire companies have turf wars in the jidaigeki. Licensed quarter on a set at Toei Uzumasa Studios, Kyoto Each daimyō maintained a residence in Edo, where he lived during sankin-kōtai. His wife and children remained there even while he was away from Edo, and the ladies-in-waiting often feature prominently in jidaigeki. A high-ranking samurai, the Edo-garō, oversaw the affairs in the daimyō's absence. In addition to a staff of samurai, the household included ashigaru (lightly armed warrior-servants) and chūgen and yakko (servants often portrayed as flamboyant and crooked). Many daimyōs employed doctors, goten'i; their counterpart in the shogun's household was the okuishi. Count on them to provide the poisons that kill and the potions that heal. Other[edit] The cast of a wandering jidaigeki encountered a similar setting in each han. There, the karō were the kuni-garō and the jōdai-garō. Tensions between them have provided plots for many stories. Conventions[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2006) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There are several dramatic conventions of jidaigeki: The heroes often wear eye makeup, and the villains often have disarranged hair. A contrived form of old-fashioned Japanese speech, using modern pronunciation and grammar with a high degree of formality and frequent archaisms. In long-running TV series, like Mito Kōmon and Zenigata Heiji, the lead and supporting actors sometimes change. This is done without any rationale for the change of appearance. The new actor simply appears in the place of the old one and the stories continue. This is similar to the James Bond film series or superhero films, in contrast with e.g. the British television program Doctor Who. In a sword fight, when a large number of villains attacks the main character, they never attack at once. The main character first launches into a lengthy preamble detailing the crimes the villains have committed, at the end of which the villains then initiate hostilities. The villains charge singly or in pairs; the rest wait their turn to be dispatched and surround the main character until it is their turn to be easily defeated. Sword fights are the grand finale of the show and are conducted to specially crafted theme music for their duration. On television, even fatal sword cuts draw little blood, and often do not even cut through clothing. Villains are chopped down with deadly, yet completely invisible, sword blows. Despite this, blood or wounding may be shown for arrow wounds or knife cuts. In chambara films, the violence is generally considerably stylized, sometimes to such a degree that sword cuts cause geysers of blood from wounds. Dismemberment and decapitation are common as well. Proverbs and catchphrases[edit] Authors of jidaigeki work pithy sayings into the dialog. Here are a few: Tonde hi ni iru natsu no mushi: Like bugs that fly into the fire in the summer (they will come to their destruction) Shishi shinchū no mushi: A wolf in sheep's clothing (literally, a parasite in the lion's body) Kaji to kenka wa Edo no hana: Fires and brawls are the flower of Edo Ōedo happyaku yachō: "The eight hundred neighborhoods of Edo" Tabi wa michizure: "Travel is who you take with you" In addition, the authors of series invent their own catchphrases called kimarizerifu that the protagonist says at the same point in nearly every episode. In Mito Kōmon, in which the eponymous character disguises himself as a commoner, in the final sword fight, a sidekick invariably holds up an accessory bearing the shogunal crest and shouts, Hikae! Kono mondokoro ga me ni hairanu ka?: "Back! Can you not see this emblem?", revealing the identity of the hitherto unsuspected old man with a goatee beard. The villains then instantly surrender and beg forgiveness. Likewise, Tōyama no Kin-san bares his tattooed shoulder and snarls, Kono sakurafubuki o miwasureta to iwasane zo!: "I won't let you say you forgot this cherry-blossom blizzard!" After sentencing the criminals, he proclaims, Kore nite ikken rakuchaku: "Case closed." The kimarizerifu betrays the close connection between the jidaigeki and the comic-book superhero.[citation needed] Famous jidaigeki[edit] For other works set in (or largely in) the Edo period, see Edo period in popular culture. Films[edit] Main article: List of jidaigeki films Video games[edit] The following are Japanese video games in the jidaigeki genre. Downtown Special: Kunio-kun no Jidaigeki dayo Zen'in Shūgō—sequel to Downtown Nekketsu Monogatari (River City Ransom in America) set in feudal Japan. Genji: Dawn of the Samurai Hakuōki series Kengo series Live A Live at the "Secret Orders" Scenario Ni-Oh series Ninja Gaiden series "Ninja Ryukenden", "Legend of the Ninja Dragon Sword" in Japan Nobunaga's Ambition series "Nobunaga no Yabō" in Japan Onimusha series Ryū ga Gotoku Kenzan! Ryū ga Gotoku Ishin! Samurai, a Sega arcade action game released in March 1980.[1] Samurai Shodown series Samurai Warriors "Sengoku Musō" in Japan Samurai Warriors 2 "Sengoku Musō 2" in Japan Samurai Warriors 3 "Sengoku Musō 3" in Japan Samurai Warriors 4 "Sengoku Musō 4" in Japan Samurai Warriors 2: Empires series "Sengoku Musō 2: Empires" in Japan Samurai Warriors: Chronicles "Sengoku Musō: Kuronikuru" in Japan Samurai Warriors: Katana "Sengoku Musō: Katana" in Japan Samurai Warriors: Spirit of Sanada "Sengoku Musō: Sanada Maru" in Japan Sekiro Sengoku Ace Soul of the Samurai Tenchu series The Last Blade series Warriors Orochi series Way of the Samurai series Although jidaigeki is essentially a Japanese genre, there are also Western games that use the setting to match the same standards. Examples are Ghost of Tsushima, Shogun: Total War series or Japanese campaigns of Age of Empires III. Anime and manga[edit] Azumi Basilisk Dororo Fire Tripper Gintama Hakuouki Shinsengumi Kitan Hyouge Mono Intrigue in the Bakumatsu – Irohanihoheto InuYasha Kaze Hikaru Lone Wolf and Cub Mushishi Ninja Scroll Oi! Ryoma Otogizoshi Princess Mononoke Rakudai Ninja Rantarō Rurouni Kenshin Samurai 7 Samurai Champloo Samurai Executioner Shigurui Shōnen Onmyōji The Yagyu Ninja Scrolls Samurai Deeper Kyo Sword of the Stranger Vagabond Live action television[edit] Title Network Notable cast Duration Notes Akakage, The Masked Ninja Fuji TV Yūzaburō Sakaguchi, Yoshinobu Kaneko, Fuyukichi Maki 1967–1968 Mito Kōmon TBS Eijirō Tōno, Ichirō Nakatani, Ryōtarō Sugi, Kōtarō Satomi 1969~2011 Ōedo Sōsamō TV Tokyo Tetsurō Sagawa, Takeya Nakamura, Ryō Kurosawa 1970–1980 Ōoka Echizen TBS Go Kato, Takashi Yamaguchi 1970-99 Daichūshingura NTV Toshiro Mifune, Tetsuya Watari, Masakazu Tamura 1971 Kogarashi Monjirō Fuji TV Atsuo Nakamura 1972 Ronin of the Wilderness NTV Toshiro Mifune 1972-1974 Hissatsu Shikakenin TV Asahi Ken Ogata, Yoichi Hayashi, Sō Yamamura 1972–1973 Kaiketsu Lion-Maru Fuji TV Tetsuya Ushio, Akiko Kujō, Norihiko Umechi, Kiyoshi Kobayashi 1972–1973 Nemuri Kyōshirō Kansai TV Masakazu Tamura 1972 Fuun Lion-Maru Fuji TV Tetsuya Ushio, Kazuo Kamoshida, Masaki Hayasaki 1973 Lone Wolf and Cub NTV Kinnosuke Yorozuya 1973~1976 Hissatsu Shiokinin TV Asahi Tsutomu Yamazaki, Masaya Oki, Makoto Fujita 1973 Oshizamurai Kiichihōgan NTV Tomisaburo Wakayama, Shintaro Katsu 1973-74 Tasukenin Hashiru TV Asahi Takahiro Tamura, Ichirō Nakatani, So Yamamura, Hiroshi Miyauchi 1973–1974 Zatoichi Fuji TV Shintaro Katsu 1974~1979 Amigasa Jūbei Fuji TV Hideki Takahashi, Chiezō Kataoka, Mikio Narita, Shigeru Tsuyuguchi 1974 Kaze to Kumo to Niji to NHK Go Katou, Ken Ogata, Sayuri Yoshinaga, keiju Kobayashi 1975 Onihei Hankachō NET Tetsurō Tamba, Takahiro Tamura, Akihiko Hirata, Ichirō Nakatani 1975 Edo no Kaze Fuji TV Yūzō Kayama, Keiju Kobayashi, Shigeru Tsuyuguchi 1975–1979 Shin Hissatsu Shiokinin TV Asahi Tsutomu Yamazaki, Shōhei Hino, Makoto Fujita 1973 Abarenbō Shōgun TV Asahi Ken Matsudaira 1978–2003 The Yagyu Conspiracy FUJI TV Sonny Chiba, Hiroyuki Sanada, Mikio Narita, So Yamamura 1978-79 Akō Rōshi (1979 TV series) TV Asahi Kinnosuke Yorozuya, Masakazu Tamura, Mikio Narita, Ken Matsudaira 1979 Hissatsu Shigotonin TV Asahi Makoto Fujita, Gorō Ibuki, Kunihiko Mitamura 1979–1981 Edo no Gekitou Fuji TV Keiju Kobayashi, Shigeru Tsuyuguchi, Yosuke Natsuki 1979 Shadow Warriors Fuji TV Sonny Chiba, Mikio Narita, Hiroyuki Sanada, Shōhei Hino 1980–1985 Ōoku TV Asahi Tomisaburō Wakayama, Tetsurō Tamba, Masaya Oki, Masahiko Tsugawa 1983 Sanada Taiheiki NHK Tsunehiko Watase, Tetsurō Tamba, Masao Kusakari 1985 Dokuganryū Masamune NHK Ken Watanabe, Shintaro Katsu, Masahiko Tsugawa, Kin'ya Kitaōji 1987 Onihei Hankachō Fuji TV Kichiemon Nakamura, Meiko Kaji 1989–2016 Kumokiri Nizaemon Fuji TV Tsutomu Yamazaki, Atsuo Nakamura 1994 Aoi (TV series) NHK 2000 Hōjō Tokimune NHK 2001 Toshiie to Matsu NHK 2002 Musashi NHK 2003 Ōoku (2003 TV series) FujiTV 2003 Shinsengumi! NHK 2004 Yoshitsune (TV series) NHK 2005 Kōmyō ga Tsuji NHK 2006 Fūrin Kazan NHK Sonny Chiba, Tatsuya Nakadai, Ken Ogata 2007 Kagerō no Tsuji Inemuri Iwane Edo Zōshi NHK 2007-2010 Atsuhime (TV series) NHK 2008 Nene: Onna Taikōki TV Tokyo 2009 Tenchijin NHK 2009 Jin TBS Takao Ōsawa, Miki Nakatani, Haruka Ayase 2009–2011 Ryōmaden NHK 2010 Gō (TV series) NHK 2011 Taira no Kiyomori (TV series) NHK 2012 Yae's Sakura NHK 2013 Gunshi Kanbei NHK 2014 Hana Moyu NHK 2015 Kabukimono Keiji NHK Tatsuya Fuji, Shōhei Hino 2015 Sanada Maru (TV series) NHK 2016 Naotora: The Lady Warlord NHK 2017 Segodon NHK 2018 Kirin ga Kuru NHK 2020 Famous directors[edit] Names are in Western order, with the surname after the given name. Hideo Gosha Kon Ichikawa Hiroshi Inagaki Akira Kurosawa Masaki Kobayashi Shozo Makino Kenji Misumi Kenji Mizoguchi Kihachi Okamoto Kimiyoshi Yasuda Akira Inoue Tomu Uchida Eiichi Kudo Tokuzō Tanaka Masahiro Takase Koreyoshi Kurahara Kazuo Ikehiro Prominent jidaigeki actors[edit] Tsumasaburō Bandō Denjirō Ōkōchi Chiyonosuke Azuma Utaemon Ichikawa Ryūtarō Ōtomo Kanjūrō Arashi Jūshirō Konoe Ryūnosuke Tsukigata Chiezō Kataoka Ichikawa Raizō VIII Hashizo Okawa Yorozuya Kinnosuke Toshiro Mifune Shintaro Katsu Tomisaburo Wakayama Kōtarō Satomi Asahi Kurizuka Hiroki Matsukata Masakazu Tamura Kin'ya Kitaōji Sonny Chiba Hideki Takahashi Ken Matsudaira Influence[edit] Star Wars creator George Lucas has admitted to being inspired significantly by the period works of Akira Kurosawa, and many thematic elements found in Star Wars bear the influence of Chanbara filmmaking. In an interview, Lucas has specifically cited the fact that he became acquainted with the term jidaigeki while in Japan, and it is widely assumed that he took inspiration for the term Jedi from this.[2][3][4] References[edit] ^ "1980". Sega Arcade History. Famitsu DC (in Japanese). Enterbrain. 2002. pp. 40-42 (40). ^ Duggan, Jedi M. "History of the Jedi & The Jedi Religion". Jedi Sanctuary. Archived from the original on 2007-06-30. Retrieved 2007-07-19. ^ "Trivia for Star Wars (1977)". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved 2007-07-19. ^ "Star Wars: The Legacy Revealed". 2007-05-28. about 90 minutes in. The History Channel. Missing or empty |series= (help)CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] A Man, a Blade, an Empty Road: Postwar Samurai Film to 1970 by Allen White, this article discusses specific chanbara films, their distinction from regular jidai-geki, and the evolution of the genre. Gerow, Aaron, ed. (2012). The Sword and The Screen: The Japanese Period Film 1915-1960. Yale University Council on East Asian Studies. Program for a jidaigeki film series sponsored by the Yale CEAS and the National Film Archive of Japan. TOEI KYOTO STUDIO PARK v t e Cinema of Japan Studios Awards Blue Ribbon Awards Bunshun Kiichigo Awards Directors Guild of Japan New Directors Award Elan d'or Awards Golden Arrow Award Hochi Film Award Kinema Junpo Award Japan Academy Film Prize Japanese Film Critics Awards Japanese Professional Movie Awards Akira Kurosawa Memorial Short Film Competition Mainichi Film Awards Genres Anime Gendai-geki Jidaigeki Samurai cinema J-horror Pink film Science fiction Cyberpunk Kaiju Tokusatsu Shomin-geki Tendency film Yakuza film (Gokudō) Films By decade pre-1910 1910s 1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s By year 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Lists List of highest-grossing films in Japan List of highest-grossing anime films List of highest-grossing Japanese live-action films List of Japanese submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film Other Box office Anime News Network Crunchyroll Japanese New Wave Zainichi cinema v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125