This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Jodocus Hondius Jodocus Hondius on a 1619 engraving Born 14 October 1563 Wakken, Belgium Died 12 February 1612(1612-02-12) (aged 48) Amsterdam, The Netherlands Scientific career Fields Cartography Influences Gerardus Mercator Influenced Jan Janssonius, Henricus Hondius II Jodocus Hondius (Latinized version of his Dutch name: Joost de Hondt) (14 October 1563 – 12 February 1612) was a Flemish engraver and cartographer. He is sometimes called Jodocus Hondius the Elder to distinguish him from his son Jodocus Hondius II. Hondius is best known for his early maps of the New World and Europe, for re-establishing the reputation of the work of Gerard Mercator, and for his portraits of Francis Drake. One of the notable figures in the Golden Age of Dutch/Netherlandish cartography (c. 1570s–1670s), he helped establish Amsterdam as the center of cartography in Europe in the 17th century. Contents 1 Biography 2 Links with Richard Norwood 3 Portrayal of Globes in Vermeer's The Astronomer and The Geographer 4 Honours 5 See also 6 References 7 Literature 8 External links Biography[edit] Hondius was born in Wakken and grew up in Ghent. In his early years he established himself as an engraver, instrument maker and globe maker. In 1584 he moved to London to escape religious difficulties in Flanders. In 1587 in London he married Colette van den Keere, son of Hendrik, an engraver of metal type, and collaborated with her brother Pieter, also a mapmaker and engraver.[1][2] Hondius map of the bay of New Albion on the Pacific coast of America While in England, Hondius was instrumental in publicizing the work of Francis Drake, who had made a circumnavigation of the world in the late 1570s. In particular, in 1589 Hondius produced a now famous map of the bay of New Albion, where Drake briefly established a settlement on the west coast of North America. Hondius's map was based on journal and eyewitness accounts of the trip and has long fuelled speculation about the precise location of Drake's landing, now thought to be at Drakes Estero in California. Hondius is also thought to be the artist of several well-known portraits of Drake that are now in the National Portrait Gallery in London. Hondius's (or his predecessors') use of multiple sources can be illustrated by this map of Asia, which shows Beijing three times: twice as Khanbaliq (Combalich in the land of "Kitaisk" on the Ob River, and Cambalu, in "Cataia") and once as Paquin (Beijing), in the prefecture of Xuntien (Shuntian) In 1593 he moved to Amsterdam, where he remained until the end of his life. In co-operation with the Amsterdam publisher Cornelis Claesz. in 1604 he purchased the plates of Gerard Mercator's Atlas from Mercator's grandson. Mercator's work had languished in comparison to the rival Theatrum Orbis Terrarum by Ortelius. Hondius republished Mercator's work with 36 additional maps, including several which he himself had produced. Despite the addition of his own contributions, Hondius gave Mercator full credit as the author of the work, listing himself as the publisher. Hondius's new edition of Mercator's work was a great success, selling out after a year. Hondius later published a second edition, as well as a pocket version Atlas Minor. The maps have since become known as the "Mercator/Hondius series".[citation needed] Hondius was a cousin of Abraham Goos, and he taught Goos mapmaking and engraving.[3] In the French edition of the Atlas Minor we find one of the first instances of a thematic map using map symbols. This is a map entitled Designatio orbis christiani (1607) showing the dispersion of major religions.[4] Between 1605 and 1610 he was employed by John Speed to engrave the plates for Speed's The Theatre of the Empire of Great Britaine. Leo Belgicus (1611). Hondius died, aged 48, in Amsterdam. After his death, his publishing work in Amsterdam was continued by his widow, two sons, Jodocus II and Henricus, and son-in-law Johannes Janssonius, whose name appears on the Atlas as co-publisher after 1633.[5] Eventually, starting with the first 1606 edition in Latin, about 50 editions of the Atlas were released in the main European languages. In the Islamic world, the atlas was partially translated by the Turkish scholar Kâtip Çelebi. The series is sometimes called the "Mercator/Hondius/Janssonius" series because of Janssonius's later contributions. Links with Richard Norwood[edit] Mappa Aestivarum Insularum, alias Barmudas dictarum ... (c. 1633). Hondius's Mappa Aestivarum Insularum, alias Barmudas dictarum ... (Amsterdam c. 1633) is a famous map of Bermuda. The 'Sea Venture' under Sir George Somers was wrecked off Bermuda in 1609 and the surviving Englishmen divided the island into Tribes (later Parishes) and Shares, which are individually listed with their owners at the foot of the map. Shortly afterwards the Bermudas were granted to the Virginia Company, hence various references to the company on the map including the distance to the Roanoke Colony in Virginia. The miniature map with its own scale, top left, shows the island's position relative to the Virginian coast. Hondius derived his map from Richard Norwood's survey which was carried out in 1622 and published by John Speed in 1627. Unlike this entry, which has Hondius working from survey material ten years after he died, it remains one of the most accurate and decorative maps of the period. Portrayal of Globes in Vermeer's The Astronomer and The Geographer[edit] Scholars have argued that the globes depicted in celebrated 17th-century painter Johannes Vermeer's 1668 The Astronomer and 1669 The Geographer were based on a pair of globes by Hondius.[6] Close inspection of these two globes reveals striking similarities to a pair of globes made in 1618 by Hondius. The globes were made as pendants, one depicting the earth while the other depicted the constellations. In Vermeer's The Astronomer the scholar consults a version of Hondius' celestial globe and in The Geographer Hondius' terrestrial globe can be seen placed atop the back cabinet. A version of Hondius' celestial globe can be found in the Scheepvaartmuseum in Amsterdam and the terrestrial globe can be found in The Hispanic Society Museum & Library in New York City. Honours[edit] Hondius Inlet in Antarctica is named after Jodocus Hondius. See also[edit] Cartography in the Dutch Republic Henricus Hondius II Jan Janssonius Mercator-Hondius Atlas Theatrum artis scribendi Golden Age of Netherlandish cartography (also known as the Golden Age of Dutch and Flemish cartography) Dutch celestial cartography in the Age of Exploration (Early systematic mapping of the far southern sky, c. 1595–1599) Constellations created and listed by Dutch celestial cartographers References[edit] ^ Sutton, Elizabeth (2012). Early Modern Dutch Prints of Africa. pp. 29–30. ISBN 9781409439707. ^ Hind, Arthur (1952). Engraving in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries: Part I. Cambridge University Press. pp. 203–4. ^ Aa, A. J. van der (1862). "Abraham Goos". Biographisch woordenboek der Nederlanden. 7. pp. 291–92. ^ Van der Dussen, Jan and Kevin Wilson (1995). The History of the Idea of Europe. Routledge. p. 28. ^ "Venezuela with the Southern Part of New Andalusia". World Digital Library. 1612–1699. Retrieved 2013-10-25. ^ Welu, James (1977). Vermeer and Cartography. Boston: Boston University. Literature[edit] Peter van der Krogt (ed.): Koeman's atlantes Neerlandici, Vol. 1: The folio atlases published by Gerard Mercator, Jodocus Hondius, Henricus Hondius, Johannes Janssonius and their successors, 't Goy-Houten 1997, ISBN 90-6194-268-3 External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. No openlibrary ID. Works by or about API at Internet Archive v t e Early modern Netherlandish cartography, geography and cosmography (c. 16th–18th centuries) Notable people Cornelis Anthonisz. Theodor de Bry Franciscus Monachus Gemma Frisius Gaspard van der Heyden Gerard Mercator Abraham Ortelius Christophe Plantin Pieter van den Keere Lucas Waghenaer Jan Huyghen van Linschoten Petrus Bertius Pieter Bast Willem Barentsz Adriaen Block Hendrik Brouwer Willem Janszoon Abel Tasman Jacob van Deventer Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser Johannes van Keulen Frederick de Houtman Christiaan Huygens Willebrord Snel van Royen Hessel Gerritsz Abraham Goos Pieter Goos Petrus Plancius Jodocus Hondius Henricus Hondius II Hendrik Hondius I Willem Blaeu Johannes Blaeu Johannes Janssonius Andreas Cellarius Gerard de Jode Cornelis de Jode Michiel van Langren Jacob Floris van Langren Pieter van der Aa Pieter Nuyts Adriaan Reland Johannes Ruysch François Valentijn Claes Visscher Nicolaes Visscher I Nicolaes Visscher II Frederik de Wit Cornelis van Wytfliet Notable works Itinerario (1596 book) Oud en Nieuw Oost-Indiën (1724 book) Leo Belgicus Mercator's 1569 World Map Atlas Cosmographicae (Mercator's 1596 World Atlas) Theatrum Orbis Terrarum (Theatre of the Orb of the World) Speculum Orbis Terrarum (1578) Mercator-Hondius Atlas Atlas Blaeu-Van der Hem Atlas Maior Atlas van Loon Spieghel der Zeevaerdt (Mariner's Mirror) Atlas de Wit Atlas Minor Atlas Novus Beudeker Collection Blaeu Atlas of Scotland Caert van't Landt van d'Eendracht Klencke Atlas Speculum Orbis Terrae (1593) Tasman Map (c. 1644) Van Langren's map of the Moon Harmonia Macrocosmica Dutch-created constellations (include: Apus, Camelopardalis, Chamaeleon, Cancer Minor, Columba, Dorado, Gallus, Grus, Hydrus, Indus, Jordanus, Monoceros, Musca / Apis, Musca Borealis / Apes, Phoenix, Tigris, Triangulum Australe, Tucana, Volans) Main centres Leuven (Old University of Leuven) Antwerp Amsterdam (Dutch Golden Age) General Dutch school of cartography Flemish cartography Golden Age of Dutch cartography / Golden Age of Netherlandish cartography (c. 1570s–1670s) Netherlandish school of cartography Cartography in the Dutch Republic Astronomy in the Dutch Republic Dutch celestial cartography in the Age of Discovery Cartography of the Netherlands (history of surveying and creation of maps of the Netherlands) Cartography of Belgium (history of surveying and creation of maps of Belgium) Cartography of the Low Countries (history of surveying and creation of maps of the Low Countries) Dutch celestial and lunar cartography in the Age of Exploration (Dutch systematic mapping of the far southern sky, c. 1595–1599) Dutch commercial cartography in the Age of Discovery Dutch corporate cartography in the Age of Discovery Dutch maritime/nautical cartography in the Age of Discovery Golden Age of Dutch exploration and discovery (c. 1590s–1720s) Constellations created and listed by Dutch celestial cartographers Triangulation (surveying) Waggoner (nautical) Mercator projection Atlas Continental drift (hypothesis/theory) Optical telescope (invention and history of the telescope) Modern use of the term 'landscape/landschap' (etymology) Renaissance cartography Baroque cartography Related Search for the Northeast Passage Search for the Northwest Passage Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of Svalbard (cartography of Svalbard/Spitsbergen) Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of Jan Mayen (cartography of Jan Mayen) European exploration and mapping of Southern Africa Search for the Great Southern Land/Great Unknown South Land (Terra Australis Nondum Cognita/Terra Australis Incognita) European maritime exploration of Australia (Janszoon voyage of 1605–06, Brouwer Route, Hartog's Plate, Eendrachtsland, Anthoonij van Diemens Landt, Nova Hollandia/Nieuw Holland) European land exploration of Australia Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of Australasia (cartography of Australasia) Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of Nova Hollandia (cartography of New Holland / Australia) Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of Tasmania/Van Diemen's Land (cartography of Tasmania) Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of the Australian continent (cartography of the Australian continent) Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of the Australian mainland (cartography of the Australian mainland) Dutch discovery, exploration and mapping of Nova Zeelandia (cartography of New Zealand) Dutch exploration and mapping of Formosa/Taiwan (cartography of Taiwan) Dutch exploration and mapping of the East Indies (cartography of the East Indies) Dutch exploration and mapping of Southern Africa (cartography of Southern Africa) Dutch exploration and mapping of South Africa (cartography of South Africa) Dutch exploration and mapping of the Americas Dutch exploration and mapping of the Pacific Dutch discovery and exploration of Easter Island VOC cartography (cartography in the VOC World) WIC/GWIC cartography (cartography in the WIC/GWIC World) Dutch colonial cartography Science and technology in the Dutch Republic (Golden Age of Dutch science and technology) Influences Early modern Iberian (Spanish and Portuguese) cartography Early modern Italian cartography Renaissance cartography Influenced History of cartography (First true atlas in the modern sense, 1570) History of geography (First undisputed non-Indigenous discovery, exploration and mapping of Australasia, including the Australian continent and New Zealand, excluding New Guinea, 1606–1646) History of geodesy and surveying (First published systematic uses of the triangulation method in modern surveying and mapmaking, 1533–1615) History of navigation (First published use of the Mercator projection for maritime navigation, 1569; Discovery of the Brouwer Route, 1611) History of hydrography (First printed nautical atlas in the modern sense, 1584) History of selenography / lunar cartography (First published scientific map of the Moon with a topographical nomenclature, 1645) History of uranography / celestial cartography (First documented systematic mapping of the far southern sky, 1595–1599) History of astronomy (88 modern constellations / IAU-recognized constellations) History of cosmography Field of studies Notable scholars Bibliography Atlantes Neerlandici (book) Monumenta Cartographica Neerlandica (book) Grote Atlas van de Verenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie (book) Grote Atlas van de West-Indische Compagnie (book) Caert-Thresoor: Tijdschrift voor de Geschiedenis van de Kartografie (journal) Explokart (research programme at Utrecht University) Brussels Map Circle (previously the Brussels International Map Collectors' Circle) Australia on the Map (history and heritage division of the Australasian Hydrographic Society) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125