John Ferriar MD John Ferriar Born 1761 Jedburgh, Roxburghshire Died 4 February 1815 Manchester, Lancashire Alma mater University of Edinburgh Occupation Physician Poet John Ferriar (1761–4 February 1815), was a Scottish physician and a poet, most noted for his leadership of the Manchester Infirmary, and his studies of the causes of diseases such as typhoid. Contents 1 Background 2 Manchester Board of Health 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Background[edit] Ferriar was born near Jedburgh, Roxburghshire in 1761. He obtained his MD at the University of Edinburgh in 1781, and became a physician (and later senior physician) at the Manchester Infirmary, from 1789 until 1815. Manchester Board of Health[edit] In 1795, he helped to set up a Board of Health in Manchester which rented houses in Portland Street for use as a fever hospital. He described to the Committee for the Regulation of the Police the appalling living conditions of the poor in cellars without lighting, sanitation or ventilation. People newly arrived from the country were particularly vulnerable to fevers. Consequently, he introduced many sanitary reforms.[1] His obituary, published in 1815, read: Died, on the 4th of February, aged 52, JOHN FERRIAR, M. D. Senior Physician of the Manchester Infirmary. The eminent rank which he held in his profession, not only in that town and its immediate neighbourhood, but through a widely extended district of the surrounding country, was founded on long and general experience of the efficacy of his counsels. He was endowed by nature with an acute and vigorous understanding, which he had matured by a life of diligent study, and of careful and well-digested observation, into a judgment unusually correct and prompt in its decisions. The purposes of his sagacious mind were pursued, also, with a steadiness of determination which generally secured their accomplishment; and unexpected difficulties, in the treatment of diseases, he encountered with firmness, and with great fertility of invention. As a professional author he had obtained a high station, and the world is indebted to him for a large fund of valuable knowledge, conveyed in a style, which, for perspicuity, aud for manly strength and simplicity, deserves to be proposed as a model to medical writers. His character as a polite scholar will be preserved, in the literary annals of his country, by writings, in which he has displayed correct taste, extensive and various readings and original views of the subjects of his investigations. In the relations of private life he will long be remembered as a man of inflexible honour and integrity; a faithful arid steady friend; find a tender and most indulgent parent.[2] Works[edit] His essay on Massinger was reprinted in Gifford's edition (1805), and his other published works includes Medical Histories and Reflections 1792-5-8, and Illustrations of Sterne 1798. In 1813, he also published An essay towards a theory of apparitions in which he argued that apparitions could be explained by optical illusions.[3] References[edit] ^ Brockbank, William (1952). Portrait of a Hospital. London: William Heinemann. p. 28–38. ^ "Biographical Notice of the Late John Ferriar, M.D." in Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, Vol. 11, 2nd edition (1815) p. 263. ^ "Review: An Essay towards a Theory of Apparitions by John Ferriar, M. D." The Quarterly Review. 9: 304–312. July 1813. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Biography of John Ferriar John Ferriar's Medical histories and reflections (Philadelphia, 1816) Professional and academic associations Preceded by Thomas Barnes Secretary of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society 1787–92 Succeeded by James Watt Jnr v t e Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society Presidents 18th Century Peter Mainwaring James Massey Thomas Percival 19th Century Thomas Percival George Walker Thomas Henry John Hull Thomas Henry John Dalton Edward Holme Eaton Hodgkinson John Moore William Fairbairn James Prescott Joule Edward William Binney Robert Angus Smith Edward Schunck James Prescott Joule Edward William Binney James Prescott Joule Edward Schunck Edward William Binney James Prescott Joule Edward William Binney Edward William Binney Henry Enfield Roscoe William Crawford Williamson Robert Dukinfield Darbishire Balfour Stewart Osborne Reynolds Edward Schunck Arthur Schuster Henry Wilde Edward Schunck James Cosmo Melvill 20th Century Horace Lamb Charles Bailey William Boyd Dawkins William Bailey Harold Baily Dixon Francis Jones Frederick Ernest Weiss Francis Nicholson S. J. Hickson William Thomson Grafton Elliot Smith Henry Alexander Miers Thomas Coward Harold Baily Dixon Aloysius Cortie Herbert Levinstein Lawrence Bragg C. E. Stromeyer Bernard Mouat Jones John Allan Reginald James R. H. Clayton Douglas Hartree H. J. Fleure Michael Polanyi T. B. L. Webster Eric James Horace Hayhurst Geoffrey Jefferson Peter Venables F. C. Toy C. E. Young Henry Lipson Leonard Cohen Margaret Pilkington Horace Hayhurst Brian Rodgers G. N. Burkhardt G. J. Kynch E. N. Abrahart A. E. R. Goulty Henry Lipson H. M. Fairhurst D. G. Wilson L. J. R. Postle Netar Mallick B. S. H. Rarity P. G. Livesey D. S. L. Cardwell E. F. Cass Alexander Donnachie Dianne Wilson 21st Century I. E. Gillespie A. G. D. Yeaman K. D. Buckley Vivienne Blackburn Mary, Lady Mallick D. J. Higginson K. M. Letherman Netar Mallick D. M. Leitch S. R. Hilton Awards Honorary Membership Dalton Medal Lectures Wilde Joule Dalton Percival Manchester Publications Memoirs and Proceedings Who's Who of Greater Manchester Category United Kingdom portal Biography portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125