Author of the Book of Revelation "John the Divine" and "John the Revelator" redirect here. For other uses of John the Divine, see John the Divine (disambiguation). For other uses of John the Revelator, see John the Revelator (disambiguation). For other people called Saint John, see Saint John (disambiguation). Saint John of Patmos Saint John the Evangelist on Patmos by Hieronymus Bosch, 1505 Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Major works Book of Revelation Part of a series of articles on John in the Bible Saint John the Evangelist, Domenichino Johannine literature Gospel Epistles First Second Third Revelation Events Authorship Apostle Beloved disciple Evangelist Patmos Presbyter Related literature Apocryphon Acts Signs Gospel See also Johannine community Logos Holy Spirit in Johannine literature John's vision of the Son of Man New Testament people named John v t e John of Patmos (also called John the Revelator, John the Divine, John the Theologian, and possibly John the Apostle) could be the author named as John in the Book of Revelation. The text of Revelation states that John was on Patmos, a Greek island where, by most biblical historians, he is considered to have been exiled as a result of anti-Christian persecution under the Roman emperor Domitian.[1][2] Christian tradition has considered the Book of Revelation's writer to be John the Evangelist, supposed author of the Gospel of John. However, a minority of senior clerics and scholars, such as Eusebius (d. 339/340), recognize at least one further John as a companion of Jesus, John the Presbyter. Some Christian scholars since medieval times separate the disciple from the writer of Revelation.[3][4] Contents 1 Island of Patmos 2 Book of Revelation 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Island of Patmos[edit] John is considered to have been exiled to Patmos during a time of persecution under the Roman rule of Domitian in the late 1st century. Revelation 1:9 states: "I, John, both your brother and companion in tribulation...was on the island that is called Patmos for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus Christ." Adela Yarbro Collins, a biblical scholar at Yale Divinity School, writes: Early tradition says that John was banished to Patmos by the Roman authorities. This tradition is credible because banishment was a common punishment used during the Imperial period for a number of offenses. Among such offenses were the practices of magic and astrology. Prophecy was viewed by the Romans as belonging to the same category, whether Pagan, Jewish, or Christian. Prophecy with political implications, like that expressed by John in the Book of Revelation, would have been perceived as a threat to Roman political power and order. Three of the islands in the Sporades were places where political offenders were banished. (Pliny, Natural History 4.69–70; Tacitus, Annals 4.30)[5] According to Tertullian (in The Prescription of Heretics) John was banished after being plunged into boiling oil in Rome and suffering nothing from it.[6] Book of Revelation[edit] The author of the Book of Revelation identifies himself only as "John".[7] Traditionally, this was often believed to be the same person as John the Apostle (John, son of Zebedee), one of the apostles of Jesus, to whom the Gospel of John was also attributed.[7] The early-2nd-century writer, Justin Martyr, was the first to equate the author of Revelation with John the Evangelist.[8] Other early Christian writers, however, such as Dionysius of Alexandria and Eusebius of Caesarea, noting the differences in language and theological outlook between this work and the Gospel,[9] discounted this possibility, and argued for the exclusion of the Book of Revelation from the canon as a result.[10] The early Christian writer Papias appeared in his writings to distinguish between John the Evangelist and John the Elder,[11] and many biblical scholars now contend that the latter was the author of Revelation.[12][13][14] See also[edit] Authorship of the Johannine works References[edit] ^ Souvay, Charles. "Patmos." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 12 Jan. 2009 ^ Phillips, J. B. "Book 27 - Book of Revelation". 12 January 1962. People, Places, Customs, Concepts, Journeys - the New Testament with integrated notes and maps 1962. ^ Stephen L Harris, Understanding the Bible, (Palo Alto: Mayfield, 1985), 355 ^ Ehrman, Bart D. (2004). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford. p. 468. ISBN 0-19-515462-2. ^ Adela Collins. (1985). "Patmos" [In] Paul J. Achtemeier [Ed.]. (1985) Harper's Bible Dictionary. San Francisco, CA: Harper & Row. p. 755. ^ Litfin, Bryan. After Acts: Exploring the Lives and Legends of the Apostles. Chicago, IL: Moody Publishers, 2015 ^ a b "Revelation, Book of." Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 ^ Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho, 81.4 ^ Ben Witherington, Revelation, (Cambridge University Press) page 2. ^ Ehrman, Bart D. (2000). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 432. ISBN 0-19-515462-2. ^ Richard Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses (William B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2006) ^ Robert H. Mounce, The Book of Revelation (Wm B. Eerdmans Publications) page 10. ^ Harris, Stephen L., Understanding the Bible. Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985. p. 355 ^ Ehrman, Bart D. (2004). The New Testament: A Historical Introduction to the Early Christian Writings. New York: Oxford. p. 468. ISBN 0-19-515462-2. External links[edit] Quotations related to API at Wikiquote v t e Twelve Apostles of Jesus Apostles Andrew Bartholomew Nathanael James, son of Alphaeus the Less James, son of Zebedee John Beloved Evangelist Patmos Judas Iscariot Judas Thaddaeus Matthew Philip Simon Peter Simon the Zealot Thomas Later Seventy disciples Matthias Paul conversion James, brother of Jesus Barnabas Related Commissioning of the Twelve calling of the disciples calling of Matthew Mission Discourse coming persecutions Holy Kinship Last Supper Great Commission Apostolic Age Apostolic see Acts of the Apostles Pentecost Dispersion Pauline epistles Tombs Apostolic succession Apostles' Creed v t e Book of Revelation Bible (New Testament) Revelation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Places Armageddon Asia Babylon Egypt Ephesus Euphrates Jerusalem Laodicea Patmos Pergamum Philadelphia Sardis Smyrna Sodom Thyatira Persons Asher Balak Balaam Benjamin David Gad Issachar Jesus Christ Jezebel John Joseph Judah Levi Manasseh Michael Naphtali Reuben Simeon Zebulun Events/ Terms/ Phrases Abaddon/Apollyon Alpha and Omega Beast Book of Life Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Four Living Creatures Lake of Fire Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Revelation 12 sign prophecy Seven bowls Seven churches of Asia Seven seals Seven trumpets Son of Man Three Angels' Messages Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse Wormwood Related Authorship John of Patmos Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version ← Epistle of Jude Bible portal v t e New Testament people Jesus Christ In Christianity Historical Life of Jesus in the New Testament Gospels Individuals Alphaeus Anna the Prophetess Annas Barabbas Bartimaeus Blind man (Bethsaida) Caiaphas Celidonius Cleopas Clopas Devil Penitent thief ("Dismas") Elizabeth Gabriel Impenitent thief ("Gestas") Jairus' daughter Joanna John the Baptist Joseph Joseph of Arimathea Joses Jude Lazarus Legion Luke Lysanias Malchus Martha Mary, mother of Jesus Mary Magdalene Mary, mother of James Mary of Bethany Mary of Clopas Naked fugitive Son of Nain's widow Nicodemus (Nicodemus ben Gurion) Salome Samaritan woman Satan Simeon Simon, brother of Jesus Simon of Cyrene Simon the Leper Simon the Pharisee Susanna Syrophoenician woman Theophilus Zacchaeus Zebedee Zechariah Multiple people named James people named John people named Judas or Jude people named Mary people named Simon Groups Angels Jesus's brothers Demons Disciples Evangelists Female disciples of Jesus God-fearers Herodians Magi Myrrhbearers Nameless Pharisees Proselytes Sadducees Samaritans Sanhedrin Scribes Seventy disciples Shepherds Women at the crucifixion Zealots Apostles Andrew Bartholomew Nathanael James, son of Alphaeus Less James, son of Zebedee John Evangelist Patmos "Disciple whom Jesus loved" Judas Iscariot Judas Thaddaeus Matthew Philip Simon Peter Simon the Zealot Thomas Acts Aeneas Agabus Ananias (Damascus) Ananias (Judaea) Ananias son of Nedebeus Apollos Aquila Aristarchus Barnabas Blastus Cornelius Damaris Demetrius Dionysius Dorcas Elymas Egyptian Ethiopian eunuch Eutychus Gamaliel James, brother of Jesus Jason Joseph Barsabbas Judas Barsabbas Judas of Galilee Lucius Luke Lydia Manaen (John) Mark Evangelist cousin of Barnabas Mary, mother of (John) Mark Matthias Mnason Nicanor Nicholas Parmenas Paul Philip Priscilla Prochorus Publius Rhoda Sapphira Sceva Seven Deacons Silas / Silvanus Simeon Niger Simon Magus Sopater Sosthenes Stephen Theudas Timothy Titus Trophimus Tychicus Zenas Romans Herod's family Gospels Antipas Archelaus Herod the Great Herodias Longinus Philip Pilate Pilate's wife Quirinius Salome Tiberius Acts Agrippa Agrippa II Berenice Cornelius Drusilla Felix Festus Gallio Lysias Paullus Epistles Achaicus Alexander of Ephesus Alexander the Coppersmith Andronicus Archippus Aretas IV Artemas Carpus Claudia Crescens Demas Diotrephes Epaphras Epaphroditus Erastus Eunice Euodia and Syntyche Herodion Hymenaeus Jesus Justus John the Presbyter Junia Linus Lois Mary Michael Nymphas Olympas Onesimus Onesiphorus Pudens Philemon Philetus Phoebe Quartus Sosipater Tertius Tryphena and Tryphosa Revelation Antipas Four Horsemen Apollyon Two witnesses Woman Beast Three Angels Whore of Babylon Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125