Jurassic City Official poster Directed by Sean Cain Produced by Anthony Fankhauser Written by Sean Cain Starring Ray Wise Kevin Gage Vernon Wells Robert LaSardo Music by Mario Salvucci Cinematography Stuart Brereton Edited by Sean Cain Distributed by Vertical Entertainment Release date February 3, 2015 (2015-02-03) Running time 88 minutes Country United States Language English Jurassic City is a 2015 American action film written, edited, and directed by Sean Cain. The film, produced by Anthony Fankhauser, stars Ray Wise, Kevin Gage, Vernon Wells, Robert LaSardo, Dana Melanie, Sofia Mattsson, Kayla Carlyle, Monique Parent, and Jack Forcinito. The film was released direct-to-DVD on January 9, 2015 in Japan,[1] and on February 3rd in the United States.[2] The film is a mockbuster of the Jurassic Park series. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 References 4 External links Plot[edit] When a top secret Black Ops facility is breached from within by genetically modified Monolophosaurus, a final shipment is re-routed to a nearby prison to secure a half dozen of the beasts. A trio of sorority girls (who are temporary 'guests' after getting busted for high-jinx after a particularly obnoxious party) find themselves trapped in the prison when these dinosaurs escape and go on a vicious rampage killing 90% of the prison population including the guards. Forced to team up with the remaining prisoners they find themselves pushed deeper and deeper into the bowels of the prison to find a way out. Only they aren't sure if their new 'friends' are any better than the Monolophosaurus who plan on eating them. And to make matters worse the Black Ops organization enters the prison not only to collect their 'property', but also permanently silence anyone with knowledge of the situation. Cast[edit] Ray Wise as Warden Lewis Kevin Gage as Doyle Vernon Wells as Agent LaFranco Robert LaSardo as Corporal Ignacio Dana Melanie as Pippi Sofia Mattsson as Stephanie Kayla Carlyle as Sarah Jack Forcinito as Captain Talbot Monique Parent as Scarlett Vanessa V. Johnston as Erika Kelcey Watson as Armstrong Timothy Muskatell as Bear Jimmy Williams as Manny Trista Robinson as Kris References[edit] ^ "Exclusive: Jurassic City gets a trailer, poster and release date; Director Sean Cain talks!". DreadCentral.com. Retrieved 2015-01-08. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Jurassic City Trailer: Dinosaurs Invade Los Angeles!". Movieweb.com. Retrieved 2015-01-09. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Jurassic City at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes