Illustration from first edition of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Contemporary fantasy Comedy Creatures Fantastic Fantastique Fantasy of manners History Historical fantasy Lovecraftian horror Magic Magic system Magician Races Religious themes Sources Tropes Worlds Subgenres Bangsian fantasy‎ Dark fantasy‎ Dieselpunk‎ Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairy tales‎ Gaslamp fantasy Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction‎ Grimdark Hard fantasy Heroic fantasy High fantasy‎ Historical fantasy‎ Isekai Kaiju‎ LitRPG Low fantasy Magic realism‎ Magical girl‎ Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Romantic fantasy‎ Science fantasy‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Steampunk‎ Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban fantasy‎ Weird fiction‎ Weird West‎ Wuxia‎ Fandom Harry Potter fandom Tolkien fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e Juvenile fantasy is children's literature with fantasy elements: fantasy intended for readers not yet adult. The protagonists are usually children or teens who have unique abilities, gifts, possessions or even allies that allow them to face powerful adversaries. Harry Potter is a powerful young wizard, one of the children of The Dark Is Rising series is an immature Old One with magical abilities, and in the His Dark Materials series the children have magical items and animal allies. The plot frequently incorporates a bildungsroman. In the earlier part of the 20th century, C. S. Lewis noted that fantasy was more accepted in juvenile literature, and therefore a writer interested in fantasy often wrote in it to find an audience.[1] Contents 1 Juvenile fantasy books and series 1.1 Forerunners 1.2 1900 to 1945 1.3 Post-War and 1950s 1.4 Late 20th Century 1.5 More recent titles and series 2 References Juvenile fantasy books and series[edit] Forerunners[edit] E. T. A. Hoffmann: The Nutcracker and the Mouse King Charles Kingsley: The Water-Babies George MacDonald: The Princess and the Goblin, The Light Princess, At the Back of the North Wind Lewis Carroll: Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, Through the Looking-glass Carlo Collodi: The Adventures of Pinocchio Kenneth Grahame: The Reluctant Dragon 1900 to 1945[edit] L. Frank Baum: The Wonderful Wizard of Oz and its many sequels Kenneth Grahame: The Wind in the Willows J.M. Barrie: Peter Pan; or, the Boy Who Wouldn't Grow Up E. Nesbit: Five Children and It, The Phoenix and the Carpet, The Story of the Amulet, The Enchanted Castle, The Magic City Rudyard Kipling: Puck of Pook's Hill and Rewards and Fairies Selma Lagerlöf: The Wonderful Adventures of Nils A. A. Milne: Winnie-the-Pooh, The House at Pooh Corner Zofia Kossak-Szczucka: The Troubles of a Gnome Erich Kästner: The 35th of May, or Conrad's Ride to the South Seas P. L. Travers: Mary Poppins series J. R. R. Tolkien: The Hobbit Antoine de Saint-Exupéry: The Little Prince Post-War and 1950s[edit] Jan Brzechwa: Pan Kleks trilogy C. S. Lewis: The Chronicles of Narnia Astrid Lindgren: Pippi Longstocking series, Mio, My Son, Karlsson-on-the-Roof series Robert A. Heinlein: the Heinlein juveniles, a set of 12 books that includes Starship Troopers T. H. White, The Sword in the Stone and Mistress Masham's Repose Tove Jansson: the Moomin series Mary Norton: The Borrowers series Late 20th Century[edit] Astrid Lindgren: Ronia, the Robber's Daughter, The Brothers Lionheart Michael Ende: Momo, The Neverending Story Susan Cooper: The Dark Is Rising Roald Dahl: Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, James and the Giant Peach, Matilda, The BFG and others Diana Wynne Jones: The Lives of Christopher Chant, Charmed Life Alan Garner: The Weirdstone of Brisingamen, The Owl Service Andre Norton: the Witch World series Ursula K. Le Guin: A Wizard of Earthsea and its sequels Brian Jacques: the Redwall series Anne McCaffrey: the Dragonriders of Pern Harper Hall trilogy Madeleine L'Engle: the Time Quartet Lloyd Alexander: The Prydain Chronicles Chris Van Allsburg: The Garden of Abdul Gasazi, Jumanji and Zathura, The Polar Express More recent titles and series[edit] James Gurney: Dinotopia series Philip Pullman: His Dark Materials, Clockwork and The Firework-Maker's Daughter J. K. Rowling: Harry Potter Holly Black and Tony DiTerlizzi: The Spiderwick Chronicles Cornelia Funke: The Thief Lord, Inkheart trilogy, Dragon Rider Mary Pope Osborne: The Magic Tree House series Tamora Pierce: The Song of the Lioness, Circle of Magic, and sequels Jonathan Stroud: Bartimaeus Sequence and Lockwood & Co. Rick Riordan: Camp Half-Blood Chronicles, The Kane Chronicles, and Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard Christopher Paolini: Eragon Angie Sage: Septimus Heap Erin Hunter: Warriors, Seekers, and Survivors series Brandon Mull: Fablehaven, Beyonders, and Five Kingdoms series Jennifer A. Nielsen: The False Prince trilogy Chris Colfer: The Land of Stories Tui T. Sutherland: Wings of Fire series Shannon Hale: The Goose Girl and sequels, Princess Academy References[edit] ^ C.S. Lewis, "On Juvenile Tastes", p 41, Of Other Worlds: Essays and Stories, ISBN 0-15-667897-7 v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category