This article is about the ancient city of Rhodes. For the town of ancient Crete, Greece, see Camirus (Crete). For the genus of shield-backed bugs in the family Scutelleridae, see Camirus (bug). "Kameiros" redirects here. For the modern municipality, see Kameiros (municipality). Camirus or Kamiros (Ancient Greek: Κάμιρος; /kəˈmaɪərəs/) or Cameirus or Kameiros (Κάμειρος) was a city of ancient Rhodes, in the Dodecanese, Greece. Its site is on the northwest coast of the island, 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) west of the modern village of Kalavarda. Contents 1 History 2 Gallery 3 Notable people 4 References 5 External links History[edit] The ancient city was built on three levels. At the top of the hill was the acropolis, with the temple complex of Athena Kameiras and the stoa. A covered reservoir having a capacity of 600 cubic meters of water—enough for up to 400 families—was constructed about the sixth century BC. Later, the stoa was built over the reservoir. The stoa consisted of two rows of Doric columns with rooms for shops or lodgings in the rear. The main settlement was on the middle terrace, consisting of a grid of parallel streets and residential blocks. On the lower terrace are found a Doric temple, probably to Apollo; the Fountain House, with the Agora in front of it; and Peribolos of the Altars, which contained dedications to various deities. During the prehistoric period the area was inhabited by Mycenaean Greeks. The city itself was founded by the Dorians. The temple foundations were begun at least as early as the eighth century BC. The earthquake of 226 BC destroyed the city and the temple. The earthquake of 142 AD destroyed the city for the second time.[1] The Acropolis was excavated by Alfred Biliotti and Auguste Salzmann between 1852 and 1864. Many of the finds from their digs are now kept in the British Museum in London.[2] In 1928 the Italian Archaeological School began a systematic excavation of the area together with restoration work which continued until the end of the Second World War. Gallery[edit] Panoramic view Fountain Square Staircase The Hierothyteion Main street Houses of the Hellenistic period Notable people[edit] Kamira, venerated in the town Peisander (7th century BC), epic poet References[edit] ^ P.H.Davies, Rhodes (Globetrotter Travel Guide, 2006), pages 57-58. ^ British Museum Collection External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Présentation de Camiros by Claire Tuan (French text and photographs) Ancient Kamiros on Discover Rhodes v t e Landmarks of Rhodes Rhodes city Acropolis of Rhodes Aquarium of Rhodes Evangelismos Church Medieval City Archaeological Museum of Rhodes Fortifications of Rhodes Grand Master's Palace Hafiz Ahmed Agha Library Kahal Shalom Synagogue La Juderia St. Francis of Assisi Cathedral Suleiman Mosque New Market (Mandraki) Port of Rhodes Puccini Theatre Rhodes Footbridge Rodini Park Temple of Aphrodite Rest of the island Archangelos Faliraki Ialysos Kameiros Kritinia Lindos (Acropolis of Lindos) Monolithos Petaloudes Prasonisi Events International Tour of Rhodes Medieval Rose Festival Past Colossus of Rhodes Coordinates: 36°20′9″N 27°55′17″E﻿ / ﻿36.33583°N 27.92139°E﻿ / 36.33583; 27.92139 Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This article about an island or other related place in the Ancient Aegean Sea is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e