Black Dragon founder and crime boss Kano Mortal Kombat character Kano in Mortal Kombat 11 (2019) First appearance Mortal Kombat (1992) Created by Ed Boon John Tobias Portrayed by Trevor Goddard (1995 film) Darren Shahlavi (Legacy) Josh Lawson (2021 film) Voiced by Michael Des Barres (MK:DotR) David Allen (2000–2006) Michael McConnohie (2008–2015) JB Blanc (MK11) Robin Atkin Downes (MKL:SR) Motion capture Richard Divizio (MK, MKII, MK3, UMK3, MKT, MKA)[1] Sorin Brouwers (MKvs.DCU, MK9) Derek Pratt (MK11) In-universe information Species Human Gender Male Weapon Raptor Knives[2] (MK, MK3, UMK3, MKT, MK:DA, MK:SM, MK:A) Origin Australia (Earthrealm)[3] Fighting styles Xing Yi (MK:DA, MK:A) Aikido (MK:DA) Kano is a fictional character from the Mortal Kombat fighting game and media franchise by NetherRealm Studios/Midway Games. He is one of the series' original characters, having made his debut in the first Mortal Kombat in 1992. A calculating Australian mercenary and member of the international crime cartel known as the Black Dragon, Kano is also the top fugitive and persistent nemesis of Sonya Blade and Jax Briggs of the Special Forces, which has been his primary storyline throughout the course of his Mortal Kombat series appearances. In Mortal Kombat 3, he becomes the general of Outworld emperor Shao Kahn's armies. In the 2011 series reboot, he additionally poses as a crooked Special Forces informant and serves as Shao Kahn's arms dealer. His most recognizable feature is his cybernetic metal faceplate that houses an infrared eye laser. Out of the seven original series characters, Kano has featured in the fewest Mortal Kombat games, though he was among the eleven characters who represented the franchise in the crossover game Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe. He has also appeared in alternate series media such as the first Mortal Kombat film, the animated series Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm, and the web series Mortal Kombat: Legacy; in addition to having a central role in the 1995 Mortal Kombat novel and featuring on official series merchandise. General and critical reception for the character has been mainly positive, but mixed in regards to his Fatality finishing moves. Contents 1 Appearances 1.1 Mortal Kombat games 1.2 Other games 1.2.1 Character design 1.2.2 Gameplay 1.3 Other media 1.4 Merchandise and promotion 2 Reception 2.1 Finishing moves 3 Notes 4 References Appearances[edit] Mortal Kombat games[edit] First depicted in the Mortal Kombat canon as a Japanese-American who was orphaned at a young age and fell into a life of crime,[note 1] Kano is the leader of the Black Dragon criminal empire, having been deported from both Japan and the United States, and becoming a wanted man in thirty-five other countries.[3] He made his first chronological series appearance in the 2000 platform game Mortal Kombat: Special Forces, freeing fellow Black Dragon cohorts No Face, Tasia, Jarek and Tremor from a Special Forces security facility under the pretense that they would reform the organization, though he really intended to use them as pawns to slow down any Special Forces agents who might pursue him. They killed an entire Special Forces unit at the site of the prison break before Kano headed to Outworld, where he recovered the Eye of Chitian, an artifact through which he would acquire incredible power. While Special Forces Major Jackson "Jax" Briggs gets ahold of the object first and transports himself and Kano back to Earthrealm, the latter soon escapes custody. It is additionally revealed in the game that Jax was responsible for the injury to Kano's eye that resulted in the installation of the faceplate. Kano entered the Mortal Kombat tournament in the original game (1992) after hearing rumors that tournament host Shang Tsung's palace was filled with gold and other riches, with the intention of looting it for the Black Dragon. However, he is fervently pursued by U.S. Special Forces officer Sonya Blade, who holds a personal grudge against Kano that was left unspecified in the game's storyline. He evaded capture by leaping onto Shang Tsung's junk bound for the tournament, and when Sonya tracks him onto the private island, she is captured and forced to compete. She and Kano were among the competition's few survivors, and during the final battle between Shang Tsung and Shaolin monk Liu Kang, Sonya reluctantly teams up with Kano to fight off the Shokan Prince Goro. During their battle, the island immediately self-destructs following Shang Tsung's defeat, trapping Kano and Sonya in the otherworldly dimension Outworld. They are both captured and spend the events of Mortal Kombat II (1993) chained and on display in Outworld emperor Shao Kahn's arena. In Mortal Kombat 3 (1995), Jax finds and rescues Sonya, as well as Kano in the process, enabling him to escape their clutches once again. Kano convinces Shao Kahn to spare his soul at the outset of the tyrant's invasion of Earth on the grounds that he can teach his armies how to use modern Earthrealm weaponry. However, Sonya tosses Kano to his apparent death from the roof of a high-rise, but he survives and is found by the centaur Motaro, who heals and imprisons him. Motaro is killed by the warrior Sheeva, who in turn frees Kano from his prison. During the events of Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance (2002), he and Sheeva originally hatched a plan to assassinate Shao Kahn, but Kano turns on her by preventing the attack. As a reward, he is promoted to general of Outworld's rapidly shrinking army before the invasion is defeated. Even in the face of overwhelming odds, Kano stood his ground and eventually managed to repel Princess Kitana and her Edenian-Shokan army. He returns to Shao Kahn's palace just as Shang Tsung and Quan Chi sprung their attack on the weakened emperor. After the battle, Kano declares his allegiance to the new rulers of Outworld, the Deadly Alliance. The two have Kano oversee the enslavement of a small village, who would construct a temple over Onaga's tomb to house a Soulnado. During its construction, Kano is assaulted by Li Mei, but Quan Chi intervenes, as the Alliance had made a deal with the Red Dragon leader Mavado to eliminate the swordsman Kenshi in exchange for the opportunity to fight and defeat Kano. Kano returns with the series' entire playable roster in Mortal Kombat: Armageddon (2006), in which the demigod Taven finds him being held prisoner by the Red Dragon Clan. Before escaping their facilities, Kano explains to Taven that the Red Dragon had been experimenting on him and their clansmen in an effort to create real-life genetically engineered dragons and human-dragon hybrids. Kano was among the eleven Mortal Kombat characters representing the franchise in the 2008 crossover fighter Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe. His official rival is The Joker, but he is not playable in the story mode. In the 2011 Mortal Kombat reboot, which retells the stories of the first three games, Kano was the Black Dragon's leader who had tricked the Special Forces by acting as an informant and deliberately feeding them false intelligence that led to the deaths of many of Sonya and Jax's comrades, establishing their vendetta against him. During the events of the first Shaolin tournament, Kano fights Sonya following her fight with the pompous actor Johnny Cage, but he is defeated.[5] While Kano is later beaten by Sonya again after Shang Tsung presents him to her as a challenge, the tournament host forbids her from arresting him.[6] Following this, Kano becomes Shao Kahn's arms supplier, giving his armies modern Earthrealm weaponry for his impending invasion.[7][8][9] After Kabal, a former Black Dragon member turned SWAT officer, is severely burned by the warrior Kintaro, Kano takes him away to restore his health alongside Shang Tsung and outfit him with a respirator, mask, and hookswords even in spite of his former ally's defection. However, Kabal is mortified by his condition and furious at Kano for siding against Earthrealm, so he bests him in combat and forces him to take him to Shao Kahn before knocking Kano out. Kano later joins Goro and Kintaro in holding a group of soldiers hostage before being frozen by the cyborg Sub-Zero. However, Kano manages to free himself and informs his ally Noob Saibot that Sub-Zero broke free of his controller, Sektor.[10] Kano returned for the series' tenth installment, Mortal Kombat X (2015). His confirmation for the game was leaked by the German version of GamePro, before his appearance was officially announced.[11] He first appears in a comic book prequel, set after Quan Chi launched his own invasion of Earthrealm. Kano joins Sub-Zero in infiltrating a Red Dragon base to retrieve a Kamidogu dagger, though the former sought to take it for himself. Once Sub-Zero finds the dagger, Kano steals it and injures Sub-Zero with it, unaware it contained a demon. The dagger possesses Sub-Zero and quickly injures Kano, leaving him to fall back as Sub-Zero escapes. Kano was later hired by Kotal alongside the gunmen Erron Black to capture Sonya and Jax's respective daughters, Cassie Cage and Jacqui Briggs. While they were successful, he and his fellow Black Dragons were ambushed by Mavado and the Red Dragon. Kano escaped after getting injured in the fight, leaving Black for dead. Sometime after the comic book, and during the main game, Kano infiltrated the Shaolin Temple and stole the fallen Elder God Shinnok's amulet for Shao Kahn's daughter, Mileena, to assist in a civil war against Outworld's new ruler, Kotal Kahn. He attempted to distract the new Kahn while Mileena set up an ambush, but Kotal realized Kano was going to betray him and defeated him. After he defeats Mileena, Kano retreats to Earthrealm. He infiltrated an Outworld refugee camp, but was caught by Kenshi and Sonya, who took him into custody. In Mortal Kombat 11 (2019), Kano escaped and aligned himself with the keeper of time Kronika. To assist her further by fixing and mass-producing Sektor, she also brought in a younger version of him.[12][13] Together, the two Kanos assaulted the Special Forces base and kidnapped younger versions of Johnny and Sonya to force them to fight for the Black Dragon's entertainment before Cassie rescued them. Amidst a stand-off, Sonya killed the younger Kano, erasing the present version from existence.[14][15] Other games[edit] He appears in the iOS game Batman: Arkham City Lockdown as an Easter egg fighting Batman in one of the levels.[16] In the indie game Punch Club, a fighter named Jax, who is designed after the Mortal Kombat 3 incarnation of Kano, makes an appearance in one of the game's gang turf war segments. Character design[edit] Vincent Proce's concept art featuring an alternative version of Kano for the original reboot game that was canceled in favor of Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe, in which Kano was a player character Kano was the final fighter to be added to the first game, where his role was to serve as the enemy of the female character Sonya.[17] Kano originally had a large helmet with two red eyes, a concept that was dropped in favor of a smaller metal piece over his right eye. The eye piece was at first envisioned as a simple eyepatch, but then it was turned into a metal plate inspired by Arnold Schwarzenegger's character in The Terminator.[18][19] In his Mortal Kombat: Deception biography card, Mortal Kombat co-creator Ed Boon described how Kano's bionic eye in the first game was created by cutting out a piece of a plastic mask and painting it a silver color, then attaching it with spirit gum to actor Richard Divizio's face, with the infrared eye added digitally. For the first game he wore a simple gray tunic that was changed to red and black for MK3; Divizio said, "I thought, 'Good, get rid of that white karate outfit!'" and remarked that his versus-screen pose in the game represented his "mean Kano face".[20] Kano's iconic heart-ripping finishing move was Divizio's idea inspired by the film Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom on which he insisted as a fan of Indiana Jones.[21] Kano's MK1 costume was revived as his alternate design for Deadly Alliance and Armageddon, and his main costume in both titles has him shirtless with a black vest, while he wears a cord around his neck that has a tuft of Sonya's hair attached.[22] His other constant in his series appearances, besides his eye, has been a bandolier worn across his chest that features a large glowing red implement; it has never served any purpose in the games, though it flashes a different color for each of his three gameplay variations for Mortal Kombat X. For an intended series reboot tentatively titled Mortal Kombat 8, former Midway Games concept artist Vincent Proce "dramatically revamped" Kano from a Black Dragon criminal into a "half Japanese, half U.S. military badass", complete with a more detailed faceplate and a simple white gi and red sash, while he went barefoot with his ankles heavily taped.[23] The reboot was canceled with Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe developed in its stead, and Kano was included in the game with his Black Dragon origins left intact. In all Mortal Kombat media from the first game up to Armageddon (save for the 1995 film), including the 1996 animated series and the 1995-96 theatrical show, Kano had either had a receding hairline or been completely bald (since Divizio had been going bald himself while filming for the first game and had shaved his head prior to shooting MK3) and his facial hair had regularly consisted of nothing more than stubble. However, in MKvsDC and the 2011 reboot, Kano was given a full head of hair and beard, and a cosmetic addition in the reboot was two large solid-black dragon tattoos that started at his chest and snaked around his arms, while his outfits in both games were throwbacks to the two-dimensional titles. As a nod to Trevor Goddard's performance as Kano in the first Mortal Kombat film, the character's nationality was changed from American to Australian, beginning with the cartoon in which he spoke with an Australian accent, and continuing with Kano's redesign in MKvsDC and thereafter that served as a visual tribute to the actor. Gameplay[edit] In the original Mortal Kombat, Kano's special moves were the Knife Throw, making him one of two characters in the game (besides Scorpion) whose projectile was a physical weapon, while his body-propel move, the Cannonball, saw him curl into a ball and launch himself at his opponent. Sega Visions called the Knife Throw "a strong distance weapon and easily thrown".[24] Kano also possessed one of the more graphic Fatalities in the game, which involved him plunging his hand into his opponent's chest and ripping out their still-beating heart. In the censored SNES version, he instead fractures the opponent's sternum with a deadly punch. Boon claimed that Sub-Zero's "Spine Rip" Fatality from the same game stood out more, because Kano's finisher did not have a "mark left on the opponent's body".[25] Kano was cut from the Game Gear version of Mortal Kombat due to memory constraints, while a still image of him wielding an automatic weapon in his arcade ending was removed from the Genesis version of the game.[26][27] Kano was not playable in Mortal Kombat II; according to series co-creator John Tobias in a 1994 interview with GamePro, in the first game, "Kano and Sonya were probably picked the least. We [Midway] still wanted to include them in the storyline, so we had them captured." He then confirmed that Kano and Sonya would return in a future installment.[28] Indeed, Kano and Sonya were playable in Mortal Kombat 3, where his moves from the first game were retained while he gained a new "Choke" maneuver where he lifted his opponents and then violently shook them. His Fatalities were far less graphic than in the first game, as he either exploded his opponent with a laser blast from his implant, or reached down their throat to pull out their entire skeleton and hold it aloft without any blood or gore present. The game featured the unplayable hidden character Noob Saibot, who was a silhouetted sprite of Kano before being switched to a traditional ninja palette swap in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 and the 1996 compilation title Mortal Kombat Trilogy, the latter of which featured the original MK1 Kano as a selectable along with the then-current version. Kano was the only one of the original seven characters who was omitted from Mortal Kombat 4 (1997), with new character Jarek debuting in his place. His role in the game was as the last surviving member of the Black Dragon following Kano's apparent death, and was being pursued by Sonya and Jax for "crimes against humanity". Jarek copied Kano's special moves as well as his "Heart Rip" and "Eye Laser" Fatalities despite possessing no cybernetic enhancements. He was not as well-received as his predecessor, and has not featured as a playable in the series again with the exception of Armageddon. His eye laser is available as a special move in Deadly Alliance, and he had a special with his knives called "Ear to Ear".[29] This was a reference to a scene in the 1995 movie in which Kano tells Sonya that he had used his knife to slit her partner's throat "from ear to ear". One of his fighting styles in the game, ironically, is aikido, which is a defensive martial art that protects the attacker from injury.[30] He was not included in Mortal Kombat: Deception, in which Kabal takes over as the new leader of the Black Dragon after reforming it with new characters Kobra and Kira as they feud with rival faction, the Red Dragon, but returned in Armageddon. According to Prima Games' official guide for the 2011 reboot game, Kano’s "'flinch and you will be comboed' style can be frustrating to play against, but if you are a die-hard Kano user back from the Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 days, you will find that Kano completely fits your style". The guide also determined him to not be overly formidable nor at a great disadvantage in matches against the other characters.[31] In Mortal Kombat X, as with all playable characters, Kano has three distinctive gameplay variations.[32] Other media[edit] In Malibu Comics' Mortal Kombat series, Kano appeared with all of the characters from the first game (minus Reptile) in the 1994 "Blood & Thunder" miniseries, the first issue of which borrowed liberally from John Tobias' MK comic in detailing his evading of Sonya and the Special Forces and getting into an altercation with Johnny Cage onboard Shang Tsung's ship before Cage knocks him out.[33] In the second issue, during one of only two organized tournament fights that commenced in the entire Malibu run, Kano kills Lance, Sonya's cybernetically armed partner who had accompanied her onto the island, by way of his "Heart Rip" Fatality. He later breaks into Shang Tsung's quarters and steals his mythical tome, the Tao te Zhan, which he manages to hide on his person just before he is caught by Goro and imprisoned in a dungeon with the rest of the series characters.[34] They all are pummeled by Goro in the following issue until Raiden comes to their rescue and breaks them out of the dungeon, but they wind up scattered throughout Outworld, and as a consequence, Kano is joined by Liu Kang, and their personalities clash from the start. Kano is still in possession of the book until it is taken by Scorpion; anxious to get it back, Kano attempts to ditch Liu Kang by scheming with a group of Outworld mutants into fighting them as a distraction, enabling him to stab his knife into Liu Kang's back and leave him for dead. In the sixth issue, he defeats Sub-Zero but is then beaten in battle by Sonya. The storyline ends with the Earth warriors victorious over the Outworlders and Kano taken into custody by Sonya and Jax, but he escapes, as detailed in a mini-story titled "Breakout" that was included in the first installment of the 1995 two-issue miniseries U.S. Special Forces, in which Kano was not featured, as the main villain therein was an original Black Dragon character named Rojack.[35] That same year, Kano was also featured in a three-issue miniseries titled Rayden & Kano, in which Raiden presents Kano with a magical sword called "Ebbonrule", in hopes that he would kill Shao Kahn with it in the name of personal redemption, but the opposite occurs as Kano gives the sword to Kahn instead in exchange for godlike powers. Kano was a featured character in the 1995 noncanonical Mortal Kombat novel written by Jeff Rovin, which is set before the events of the first game. He and several Black Dragon members (all originals exclusive to the book) are hired by Shang Tsung to locate a mystical amulet hidden somewhere in China. They come across a remote village in which Kung Lao resides, and Kano forces Kung Lao to accompany him on the journey. Unbeknownst to him, one of the Dragons is Sonya working undercover, as she has a personal interest in apprehending him after he had killed her fiancé several years earlier. However, Shang Tsung, Goro and Raiden interrupt the search, and Kano's Black Dragon cohorts are killed while Shang Tsung merges Kano with Kung Lao and sends the combined being to locate the amulet. After he and Kung Lao are returned to normal, Kano takes the amulet to Shang Tsung's palace, though he is assaulted by Goro after making physical contact with Shang Tsung. He then brawls with Sonya near the conclusion but the fight is inconclusive when he flees after she is momentarily distracted, thereby evading capture.[4] Trevor Goddard as Kano in Mortal Kombat (1995) In the 1995 Mortal Kombat movie, Kano was played by Trevor Goddard. The film expanded upon Kano's rivalry with Sonya from the games; she now sought vengeance against Kano for killing her (unnamed) partner. Shang Tsung hires Kano to lure Sonya into the Mortal Kombat tournament, promising to reward Kano's efforts after he presumably defeats Sonya, while demanding that she is "not to be harmed, only humiliated". Kano baits Sonya into boarding Shang Tsung's ship, and is later spotted by Cage, Sonya and Liu Kang conversing with Goro. When Sonya and Kano meet in battle, his earlier plan with Shang Tsung goes astray when he is defeated, and Shang Tsung betrays Kano by goading Sonya into finishing him; she complies by breaking his neck. Kano is described as wearing a business suit during the dining scene in the movie novelization, which also featured a detailed opening scene of an unsuccessful joint mission of arresting Black Dragon members by the Special Forces and an international task force, which culminates in Kano killing the task force's lieutenant who is designated therein as Sonya's murdered partner.[36][37] Kano is spared by Sonya in their fight, as she refuses to fall prey to Shang Tsung's scheme while declaring that nobody "owned" her, and at the end of the book, he is captured and handcuffed by Sonya.[36] Kano's wardrobe is minimalist in the film, as his game design was eschewed in favor of the character going shirtless with a simple brown vest, while he wears only a pair of pinstriped slacks, a metal choker and combat boots when he fights Sonya. The companion book published by Prima Lifestyles prior to the film's release said in his character profile: "A strapping English man talented in all forms of martial arts, he's particularly skilled with a knife. He seems to enjoy his cat-and-mouse game with Sonya, which began after he murdered her partner."[38] Kano was a main character in Mortal Kombat: Live Tour, and was portrayed by martial artists Joseph "Eddie" Acavedo and Mark Chemeleski.[39] The character appeared twice in the animated series Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm, and was voiced by Michael Des Barres. In the sixth episode ("Familiar Red"), he works with Shao Kahn in fooling the Earthrealm defenders into chasing phony dimensional rips across the globe, while a flashback scene (shown from Sonya's perspective and narrated by Jax) depicting Kano's offscreen killing of Sonya's Special Forces partner Wexler prior to the first tournament was shown; this segment included a continuity violation as Kano was shown with his MK3 design.[40] He confronts Kabal for the first time in the eleventh episode ("Amends") since Kabal's defection from the Black Dragon and his turn to the side of good, and his consequential disfigurement at the hands of Kahn's forces. Kano's Black Dragon comrades received a generic design of shaved heads and facial tattoos, and were operating an underground generator used for opening portals. They are easily disposed of by the Earth warriors at the conclusion and Kabal detonates the machine with a bomb, but Kano manages to escape.[41] British actor and martial artist Darren Shahlavi portrayed Kano in three episodes of the 2011 first season of director Kevin Tancharoen's Mortal Kombat: Legacy web series. He and the Black Dragon are shipping stolen robotics to an undisclosed location under the name "Cyber Initiative", and Kano takes Sonya hostage after she is caught infiltrating the large warehouse where the Dragons carry out their operations, and plans to kill her when the facility is raided by a SWAT team led by Jax and Stryker. During the assault, Kano engages Jax in combat but is defeated, taking a vicious punch to the temple from Jax in the process that dislodges his eye. He is later recovered by his henchmen and has his cybernetic eye surgically attached. Kano makes one last appearance in the ninth episode, which precedes the aforementioned events; the receiver of the robotics from the Black Dragon in the first episode was revealed to be the Lin Kuei headquarters. Robin Atkin Downes voices Kano in the 2020 animated film Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge.[42] Josh Lawson will play the character in the reboot film Mortal Kombat of the feature film series.[43] Merchandise and promotion[edit] Along with the original series characters, Kano was highlighted on an individual track from The Immortals' 1994 album Mortal Kombat: The Album. Titled "Use Your Might", it features a female vocalist singing the character's praises from a first-person perspective, citing him as "the strongest of them all" out of the other Mortal Kombat contestants. Hasbro released a 4" Kano action figure in 1994, packaged with a "Kombat Cycle" vehicle.[44] Jazwares released a Kano action figure that was part of their 2006 Shaolin Monks toyline (despite the figure sporting Kano's costume from Deadly Alliance),[45] in addition to a 6" twentieth-anniversary Kano figure in 2012.[46] Kano was one of twenty MK characters featured on 2.5" x 3.5" collectible magnets released by Ata-Boy Wholesale in 2011,[47] and licensed replicas of his "Raptor" knife from the first film, which was designed by Gil Hibben, were made available for purchase.[2] Kano makes a brief appearance in the 2012 animated film Wreck-It Ralph, voiced by Brian Kesinger. He performs the "Heart Rip" on House of the Dead zombie character Cyril while attending a "Bad-Anon" support group that featured villains from various classic video games.[48] Reception[edit] Kano placed 24th in UGO.com's 2012 selection of the series' top fifty characters,[49] and the site had additionally ranked him in 2011 as the seventh best cyborg character of all time, ahead of RoboCop and Star Trek character Seven of Nine.[50] Den of Geek placed him seventeenth in their 2015 ranking of the series' characters, commenting that "Kano is a special kind of scum, and the series is better for him existing ... [but] he probably wouldn’t rank quite as high if not for Trevor Goddard’s rocking performance in the first movie."[51] Josh Wirtanen of Cheat Code Central listed Kano as the fifth best Mortal Kombat character[52] while Game Revolution's Anthony Severino included in his 2011 "Top 10 Old School Mortal Kombat Characters" feature.[53] Saldana praised the character as "such a scene-stealer in the movie that the MK team retconned everything about Kano to fit that portrayal",[54] but Chris Buffa of Modojo.com included Kano in his "worst list" of characters from MK3 without explanation.[55] Finishing moves[edit] Kano is most notable for his Fatalities, which are regarded by various sources as among either the best or the worst in his series appearances. Russell Frushtick of UGO Networks rated the "Heart Rip" from the original Mortal Kombat second in his 2011 listing of the "Top 11 Mortal Kombat Fatalities", crediting it as singlehandedly "herald[ing] the birth of anti-video game violence advocates" and describing it as "ripping the beating heart out of an opponent's chest like he's some sort of Mola Ram".[49][56] Prima Games ranked it runner-up to Sub-Zero's "Spine Rip" in their 2014 selection of the series' top Fatalities.[57] GamePro, in 2008, rated the doctored version of the finisher from the censored Super NES version of the game, in which Kano instead smashes the opponent's rib cage with a deadly punch, first in their list of the series' twelve "lamest" Fatalities.[58] Craig Skistimas of ScrewAttack ranked his "Skeleton Removal" from Mortal Kombat 3 sixth on the site's "Top 10 Mortal Kombat Fatalities",[59] but Dan Ryckert of Game Informer included it among the most confusing MK finishers.[60] Kano's "Stomach Pounce" Fatality from Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe has been particularly criticized for its tameness in a Mortal Kombat title negatively received for its toned-down violence. It led to his second appearance on GamePro's "Top 12 Lamest Fatalities" listing (fifth), with the magazine commenting that "absolutely no effort was put in [by the developers in] creating it."[58] Game Informer rated it among the series' worst finishers,[61] and Game Rant chose it as the series' worst Fatality, adding that it had no connection to the character.[62] David Saldana of 1UP.com listed it among his selection of the MK series' worst Fatalities (seventh).[54] ScrewAttack used the "Stomach Pounce" as the representative of all of MKvsDC's finishers topping its 2011 list of the series' worst Fatalities.[63] We Got this Covered rated his "Heart Transplant" Fatality from the 2011 Mortal Kombat reboot — in which Kano barehandedly decapitates his opponent and then rips out their heart before shoving their head into their chest cavity — among the series' top finishers,[64] and Tony Searle of WhatCulture ranked it 18th in his 2014 list of the series' "20 Horrifically Stomach-Churning Fatalities."[65] Notes[edit] ^ His background was further detailed in a scene from Jeff Rovin's 1995 Mortal Kombat novel, when Goro explains to Shang Tsung, “Kano was only five years old when [the Black Dragon] found him, an orphan stealing from American soldiers and [Japanese] natives alike. He had the good fortune to steal from one of the members, who admired his skills and they took him in.”[4] References[edit] ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-04-02. Retrieved 2015-03-28.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ a b Mortal Kombat Raptor United Cutlery model UC0750MK Archived 2014-07-14 at the Wayback Machine - Chuckswagon.com. Retrieved on July 12, 2014. ^ a b Kano Mortal Kombat biography (John Tobias, 1992). ^ a b Rovin, Jeff. Mortal Kombat. Berkley Publishing (1995), ISBN 1572970596. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2011). Mortal Kombat. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 1: Johnny Cage. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2011). Mortal Kombat. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 2: Sonya. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2011). Mortal Kombat. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 7: Smoke. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2011). Mortal Kombat. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 10: Jade. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2011). Mortal Kombat. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 12: Stryker. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2011). Mortal Kombat. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 14: Cyber Sub-Zero. ^ "Kano Officially Revealed in New Mortal Kombat X Gameplay Video". Shoryuken.com. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 2: Timequake (Kotal Kahn). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 4: Fire & Ice (Sub-Zero & Scorpion). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 6: War on the Homefront (Johnny Cage). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 8: Fight Club (Sonya Blade). ^ "Batman: Arkham City Lockdown - Kano vs Batman - Easter Egg". YouTube. 2012-04-10. Retrieved 2012-09-05. ^ Mortal Kombat Secrets - MKSecrets.Net. "Mortal Kombat 3 - Ed Boon And John Tobias Interviews". YouTube. Retrieved 26 December 2018. ^ ARGpodcast (2018-06-26). "ARGcast Mini #14: Making Mortal Kombat with John Tobias". RetroZap. Retrieved 2018-12-24. ^ Team RipSet, ]{0MBAT interviews John Tobias, retrieved 2018-12-24. ^ Goldman, Michael; Aaron, Richard E. (1995). "Ed Boon & John Tobias Interview". Official MK3 Kollector's Book. Electronic Gaming Monthly. ^ "An Oral History of 'Mortal Kombat'". MEL Magazine. 2018-11-26. Retrieved 2018-12-25. ^ Naytor, Robert. "Hardcore Gaming 101: Mortal Kombat". Retrieved July 16, 2014. ^ Eric Caoili (2009-11-19). "GameSetWatch Former Midway Artist's Revamped Mortal Kombat Fighters". Gamesetwatch.com. Retrieved 2013-07-24. ^ Sega Visions August/September 1993, p.16 ^ Shuman, Sid (2008-11-13). "Ed Boon talks Mortal Kombat secrets, MK vs. DC, and the future of M-rated fighters". GamePro.com. Archived from the original on 2011-06-07. Retrieved 2011-01-25. ^ Kano's Mortal Kombat arcade ending screens - Mortal Kombat Warehouse. Retrieved July 10, 2014. ^ Kano Mortal Kombat Genesis ending screens - VGMuseum.com. Retrieved July 10, 2014. ^ GamePro #59, June 1994, p. 116 ^ Fighters: Kano - Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Wiki Guide IGN, November 22, 2002. Retrieved July 14, 2014. ^ Ueshiba, Kisshōmaru (2004). The Art of Aikido: Principles and Essential Techniques. Kodansha International. p. 70. ISBN 4-7700-2945-4. ^ Mortal Kombat: Prima Official Game Guide, page 115. ^ [1] - primagames.com. Retrieved September 3, 2019. ^ Charles Marshall (w), Patrick Rolo (p), Bobby Rae (i). "Mortal Kombat: Blood & Thunder #1" Mortal Kombat (July 1994), Malibu Comics ^ Charles Marshall (w), Patrick Rolo (p), Steve Biasi, Bobby Rae, Larry Welch (i). "Blood & Thunder #2" Mortal Kombat (August 1994), Malibu Comics ^ Mark Paniccia (w), Patrick Rolo (p), Abraham Madison (i). "Mortal Kombat: U.S. Special Forces #1 & 2" Mortal Kombat (January & February 1995), Malibu Comics ^ a b Delrio, Martin. Mortal Kombat. Tor Books (1995). ISBN 0-812-54452-8. ^ "Mortal Kombat second draft script by Kevin Droney". Retrieved 2013-07-24. ^ Goldman, Michael (1995-08-16). "Mortal Kombat: the Movie". Amazon.com. Prima Lifestyles. ISBN 0-7615-0082-0. Retrieved 2013-08-25. ^ Chris Antista, The Top 7…Most absurd Mortal Kombat offshoots, GamesRadar, April 12, 2011 ^ Familiar Red - Rage Quitter 87's Cartoon Coverage. Retrieved December 15, 2013. ^ Amends - Rage Quitter 87's Cartoon Coverage. Retrieved December 15, 2013. ^ Couch, Aaron (2020-01-17). "Animated 'Mortal Kombat' Movie Sets Cast With Joel McHale, Jennifer Carpenter". hollywoodreporter.com. Retrieved 2020-01-17. ^ Galuppo, Mia (August 26, 2019). "'Mortal Kombat' Movie Finds Its Sonya Blade, Kano (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 26, 2019. ^ Johnny Cage—Mortal Kombat—Hasbro Action Figure - FigureRealm.com. Retrieved July 12, 2014. ^ Kano - Mortal Kombat Series 3 - Shaolin Monks - FigureRealm.com. Retrieved July 12, 2014. ^ Mortal Kombat 9 6-Inch Kano Action Figure - EntertainmentEarth.com. Retrieved July 12, 2014. ^ Kano 2.5" x 3.5" magnet Archived 2014-07-15 at Archive.today - Ata-Boy Wholesale, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2014. ^ "Wreck-It Ralph Footage From D23 Features 8-Bit Action, Plenty Of Cameos". CinemaBlend.com. 2011-08-21. Retrieved 2012-09-05. ^ a b UGO Team (2012-02-28). "Top 50 Mortal Kombat Characters - Mortal Kombat". UGO.com. Archived from the original on 2013-10-31. Retrieved 2012-03-04. ^ K. Thor Jensen, Best Cyborgs Of All Time Archived 2011-12-31 at the Wayback Machine, UGO, September 15, 2011 ^ Jasper, Gavin (January 30, 2015). "Mortal Kombat: Ranking All the Characters". Den of Geek. Retrieved February 4, 2015. ^ "Top 10 Mortal Kombatants - Cheat Code Central". Cheatcc.com. Retrieved 2011-12-27. ^ Severino, Anthony (February 3, 2011). "Top 10 Old School Mortal Kombat Characters". Game Revolution. Retrieved December 19, 2013. ^ a b Saldana, David (July 7, 2011). "The Worst 15 Fatalities in Mortal Kombat History". 1UP.com. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. ^ Buffa, Chris (2012). "Mortal Kombat: A Portable History". Modojo.com. Retrieved February 7, 2014. ^ Frushtick, Russell. "TOP 11 MORTAL KOMBAT FATALITIES (2-1)". UGO.com. Archived from the original on 2008-02-20. Retrieved 2011-01-25. ^ Workman, Robert (April 2014). "The Top 50 Mortal Kombat Fatalities of All Time: 10-1". Prima Games. Retrieved May 30, 2014. ^ a b Rudden, Dave; Shaw, Patrick (November 25, 2008). "The 12 LAMEST Fatalities". GamePro. p. 1. Archived from the original on 2010-05-31. Retrieved February 16, 2014. ^ Skistimas, Craig (2010-08-01). "Top 10 Mortal Kombat Fatalities". ScrewAttack. ScrewAttack's Top 10. GameTrailers. Retrieved 2011-01-25. ^ Ryckert, Dan (May 3, 2010). "Mortal Kombat's Best And Worst Fatalities". Game Informer. Retrieved July 16, 2014. ^ Ryckert, Dan (2010-05-03). "Mortal Kombat's Best And Worst Fatalities". GameInformer. Retrieved 2011-01-25. ^ Smillie, CJ (April 19, 2011). "Top Ten Worst "Mortal Kombat" Fatalities". Game Rant. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2014. ^ Skistimas, Craig (August 15, 2011). "Top 10 Worst Mortal Kombat Fatalities". ScrewAttack.com. ScrewAttack's Top 10. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014. ^ Colautti, Benjo (April 20, 2011). "Mortal Kombat's Best Fatalities". We Got This Covered. Retrieved December 19, 2013. ^ Searle, Tony (May 2014). "18. Kano - Eat Your Heart Out - Mortal Kombat: 20 Horrifically Stomach-Churning Fatalities". Retrieved July 16, 2014. v t e Mortal Kombat Video games Fighting games Mortal Kombat (1992) Mortal Kombat II Mortal Kombat 3 Ultimate Trilogy Mortal Kombat 4 Gold Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Mortal Kombat: Deception Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe Mortal Kombat (2011) Mortal Kombat X Mortal Kombat 11 Adventure games Mortal Kombat Mythologies: Sub-Zero Mortal Kombat: Special Forces Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks Compilations Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection Other media Films Mortal Kombat (1995) Mortal Kombat: Annihilation Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge Mortal Kombat (2021) Television Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm Mortal Kombat: Conquest Mortal Kombat: Legacy episodes Card games Mortal Kombat Kard Game Epic Battles Music Mortal Kombat: The Album Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Score Mortal Kombat: More Kombat Mortal Kombat: Annihilation – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Songs Inspired by the Warriors Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Other Comics Malibu Comics Mortal Kombat: Live Tour Characters Baraka Cassie Cage Cyrax Ermac Goro Jade Jax Johnny Cage Kabal Kano Kenshi Kitana Kung Lao Liu Kang Mileena Nightwolf Noob Saibot Quan Chi Raiden Rain Reptile Scorpion Sektor Shang Tsung Shao Kahn Sheeva Shinnok Sindel Skarlet Smoke Sonya Blade Stryker Sub-Zero Related Controversies surrounding Mortal Kombat Fatality Midway Games NetherRealm Studios Mortal Kombat: Rebirth Injustice: Gods Among Us Injustice 2 Category