This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Kingdoms of Kalamar The Kingdoms of Kalamar logo Designer(s) David Kenzer, Brian Jelke and Steve Johansson Publisher(s) Kenzer and Company Publication date 1994 - 2008 Genre(s) Fantasy System(s) Dungeons & Dragons, d20, HackMaster The Kingdoms of Kalamar is a fantasy role-playing game campaign setting created by Kenzer and Company, originally released in 1994. In 2000, shortly after Wizards of the Coast announced the 3rd edition of Dungeons & Dragons, Wizards and Kenzer jointly announced that Kenzer had acquired a rights to produce the Kalamar setting as a Dungeons & Dragons official licensed product. While not as well known a setting such as Forgotten Realms, the setting has a loyal following and has received praise for its consistency and realism.[1][2] Kenzer and Company has also made the Kingdoms of Kalamar the official setting of its own role-playing fantasy game, HackMaster. Contents 1 History 1.1 1990s 1.2 Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition 1.3 Hackmaster 1.4 Dungeons and Dragons 4th edition 2 Setting 3 External links 4 References History[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) 1990s[edit] The original Kingdoms of Kalamar material was clearly intended for use with Dungeons & Dragons, while carefully avoiding any direct trademark or copyright infringement. The setting appeared in two books, "Kingdoms of Kalamar, Vol 1: Sourcebook of the Sovereign Lands", and "Vol 2: Mythos of the Divine and Worldly", both in 1994. While distribution was not widespread, fans of the setting continued to support it. Vol 1: Sourcebook of the Sovereign Lands detailed the people and places of Tellene, the campaign's continent (and world). It broke the continent down into six regions and examined each one on a large scale. Vol 2: Mythos of the Divine and Worldly detailed the setting's 43 gods. It also described the setting's secret societies, astrology and calendar. These products were available individually or together in a box set with a two-part map. Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition[edit] Kingdoms of Kalamar Campaign Setting; a sourcebook with D&D licensed logo On November 1, 2000, Wizards of the Coast announced via press release that Kingdoms of Kalamar would become an official Dungeons & Dragons world.[3] The Sourcebook of the Sovereign Lands and the Mythos of the Divine and Worldly were combined with nearly 100,000 words of new material for the Kingdoms of Kalamar Campaign Setting, which was nominated for the Origins Award for Best Roleplaying Game in 2001. Over 30 different products have been released to support it. The reviewer from Pyramid found that while the Kingdoms of Kalamar originally had numerous game stats relating to 2nd edition Dungeons & Dragons, once the Kingdoms were made an official Dungeons & Dragons setting in third edition, it had very few D&D specific references.[4] While most of the books have been released with the Dungeons & Dragons logo, newer books (starting with Svimohzia: the Ancient Isle) and pdf re-releases have been without it. On July 11, 2007, Kenzer & Company announced that their license with Wizards of the Coast would expire in August of that year.[5] Hackmaster[edit] On July 6, 2006, Kenzer & Company announced that Kingdoms of Kalamar would be the official setting of the second version of their HackMaster roleplaying game.[6] Dungeons and Dragons 4th edition[edit] On July 8, 2008, Kenzer & Company released a compilation of the Campaign Setting and Atlas as a new PDF updated to Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition. Notable about this release was that it did not use the Game System License and was the first 3rd-party release compatible with 4th edition not under the GSL.[citation needed] Setting[edit] The continent of Tellene is the focus of the Kingdoms of Kalamar setting. Inhabitants of Tellene believe it the entirety of the world, although the source-material hint at lands beyond the edges of the map. Due to this, the world is also generally referred to as Tellene. Tellene is generally divided into several subregions. These include Brandobia, the Young Kingdoms, the Wild Lands, Reanaaria Bay and the isle of Svimohzia. The southernmost tip of Tellene lies at roughly 20° latitude, while the northernmost explored areas rest at about 54° latitude. The climate ranges from temperate to sub-tropical.[7] Tellene has three moons; Diadolai, Pelselond and Veshemo. These orbit Tellene with an 80, 34 and 28 day Orbital period respectively. Most of Tellene uses a lunar calendar, based around the 28-day orbit of Veshemo. The year consists of 13 months, each divided into four 7-day weeks. The year starts on the first day of spring.[7] External links[edit] Kenzer & Company TSR Archive Kingdoms of Kalamar product list Review in Shadis References[edit] ^ Ferguson, D. Andrew (2001). "Kingdoms of Kalamar". Retrieved 2008-02-21. ^ "Kingdoms of Kalamar". 2002-11-05. Retrieved 2008-02-21. ^ "Kingdoms of Kalamar Campaign Setting Becomes Official Dungeons & Dragons World". Wizards of the Coast. November 1, 2000. Archived from the original on February 11, 2003. ^ http://www.sjgames.com/pyramid/sample.html?id=2279 ^ "Wizards of the Coast/Kenzer & Company License Agreements Expiring". Retrieved 2007-07-18. ^ Kenzer, David S. "Re: Future of Kalamar". Retrieved 2007-07-18. ^ a b Kenzer, David S.; Jelke, Brian; Johansson, Steve; Brown III, Lloyd; Blackburn, Jolly (May 2001). Kingdoms of Kalamar Campaign Setting Sourcebook. Kenzer and Company. ISBN 1-889182-50-8. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond