Kobe at twilight The Port of Kobe is a Japanese maritime port in Kobe, Hyōgo in the greater Osaka area, backgrounded by the Hanshin Industrial Region. Located at a foothill of the range of Mount Rokkō, flat lands are limited and constructions of artificial islands have carried out, to make Port Island, Rokkō Island, island of Kobe Airport to name some. Contents 1 History 2 Facilities 2.1 Amusement facility for public 3 Passenger services 4 Cruise port 5 Sister ports 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] Port of Kobe from the sky In the 10th century, Taira no Kiyomori renovated the then Ōwada no Tomari (大輪田泊) and moved to Fukuhara (福原), the short-lived capital neighbouring the port. Throughout medieval era, the port was known as Hyōgo no Tsu (兵庫津). In 1858 the Treaty of Amity and Commerce opened the Hyōgo Port to foreigners. After the World War II pillars were occupied by the Allied Forces, later by United States Forces Japan. (Last one returned in 1973.) In the 1970s the port boasted it handled the most containers in the world. It was the world's busiest container port from 1973 to 1978.[1] The 1995 Great Hanshin earthquake diminished much of the port city's prominence when it destroyed and halted much of the facilities and services there, causing approximately ten trillion yen or $102.5 billion in damage, 2.5% of Japan's GDP at the time. Most of the losses were uninsured, as only 3% of property in the Kobe area was covered by earthquake insurance, compared to 16% in Tokyo. Kobe was one of the world's busiest ports prior to the earthquake, but despite the repair and rebuilding, it has never regained its former status as Japan's principal shipping port. It remains Japan's fourth busiest container port.[2] Facilities[edit] Container Harborland - Meriken Park area with cruise ship Nautica seen in sight. Container berths: 34 Area: 3.89 km² Max draft: 18 m Amusement facility for public[edit] Meriken Park Kobe Port Tower Harborland Passenger services[edit] Busan, South Korea: twice a week Shanghai, China: once a week Tianjin, China: once a week Cruise port[edit] Amsterdam Cruise Ship leaving Kobe. Kobe is also a home port for certain cruise ships. Cruise lines that call at the port are kinds like Holland America Line and Princess Cruise Line. In the summer of 2014 Princess expanded the market in Kobe when their ship Sun Princess sailed eight-day roundtrip Asia cruises from the port. These cruises on the Sun Princess are a part of Princess Cruises $11 billion contributions to the entire country of Japan, where the ship will also sail from Otaru, Hokkaido, as it is currently based in Yokohama, Tokyo. Sister ports[edit] Rotterdam port, Netherlands - 1967 Seattle port, United States - 1967 Tianjin port, China - 1980 Kolkata port, india-1951 See also[edit] List of busiest container ports List of East Asian ports List of world's busiest ports by cargo tonnage References[edit] ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 27, 2007. Retrieved October 26, 2009.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ American Association of Port Authorities Archived 2008-12-21 at the Wayback Machine - "World Port Rankings 2006", retrieved April 15, 2008 External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Port of Kobe Warning: Commons link does not match Wikidata– please check (this message is shown only in preview). (in English) Kobe Ports and Harbors Office v t e Mass Transport in Keihanshin (Greater Keihanshin) JR West lines ("Kinki Area") Hokuriku/Tōkaidō/San'yō Biwako JR Kyoto JR Kobe Akō Wadamisaki Kosei Kusatsu Nara Sanin Sagano Osaka Higashi JR Takarazuka (Fukuchiyama) Gakkentoshi (Katamachi)/JR Tozai Kakogawa Bantan Kishin Maizuru Osaka Loop JR Yumesaki (Sakurajima) Yamatoji Kansai Hanwa (Hagoromo) Kansai Airport Wakayama Man-yo Mahoroba (Sakurai) Kansai Kisei Subway systems Osaka Metro (list of stations) Midōsuji Tanimachi Yotsubashi Chūō Sennichimae Sakaisuji Nagahori Tsurumi-ryokuchi Imazatosuji New Tram Kobe Municipal Subway Seishin-Yamate Kaigan Hokushin Kyoto Municipal Subway Karasuma Tozai Kobe New Transit Port Island Line Rokko Island Line Other major private rail operators Hankyu Hankyu Kobe Main Itami Imazu Koyo Hankyu Takarazuka Main Minoo Hankyu Kyoto Main Senri Arashiyama Hanshin Hanshin Main Namba Mukogawa Keihan Keihan Main Oto Nakanoshima Katano Uji Otsu Lines ■ Keishin ■ Ishiyama Sakamoto Nankai Nankai Main Takashinohama Airport Tanagawa Kada Wakayamako Koya Shiomibashi Kintetsu Namba/Nara Ikoma Kyoto/Kashihara Tenri Tawaramoto Keihanna Osaka Shigi Minami Osaka/Yoshino Domyoji Nagano Gose Semi-major private rail operators Semboku Rapid Semboku Rapid Railway Kitakyu Namboku Line Kōbe Rapid Tōzai Line Namboku Line Sanyo Sanyo Main Line Aboshi Line Other railways Shintetsu Arima Line Sanda Line Kōen-Toshi Line Ao Line Shintetsu Namboku Line Wakayama Railway Kishigawa Line Hankai Tram Osaka Monorail Noseden Myoken Line Nissei Line Randen (Keifuku) Arashiyama Tram Kitano Tram Eizan Electric Railway Eizan Main Line Kurama Line Cable car and aerial tramways Keihan Cable Car Ikoma Cable Car Nishi-Shigi Cable Car Katsuragisan Ropeway Kōyasan Cable Car Eizan Cable Car Eizan Ropeway Terminals Rail Osaka/Umeda/Nishi-Umeda/Higashi-Umeda/Kitashinchi Tennoji/Osaka Abenobashi Namba/Osaka Namba/JR Namba Kyōbashi Shin-Osaka Osaka Uehommachi Tsuruhashi Kyōto Kyoto-kawaramachi/Gion-Shijō Sanjo Sannomiya JR West others Kintetsu Nara Airports Itami Kansai/Wing Shuttle Kobe Tokushima Airport Ports Port of Kobe Port of Osaka Sakai Himeji Miscellaneous Shinkansen Ferry Operators Kanko Kisen Hankyu Ferry Nankai Ferry Akashi-Awaji Ferry Cards ICOCA PiTaPa Rail transport in Japan Osaka City Air Terminal (& Bus) Japan transit: Tokyo Osaka Nagoya Fukuoka Hakone Fuji Izu Hokkaido Aomori Sendai Akita Niigata Toyama Nagano Okayama Hiroshima Shikoku Metro systems Shinkansen trams (list) aerial lifts (list) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 Coordinates: 34°40′39″N 135°13′37″E﻿ / ﻿34.67750°N 135.22694°E﻿ / 34.67750; 135.22694