This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) For the sprite from Germanic folklore, see Kobold. Kobold An illustration of two kobolds First appearance Dungeons & Dragons (1974) Based on Goblin Information Type Humanoid Alignment Usually Lawful Evil Kobolds are a fictional race of humanoid creatures, featured in the Dungeons & Dragons roleplaying game and other fantasy media. They are generally depicted as small reptilian humanoids with long tails, distantly related to dragons. In fantasy roleplaying games, kobolds are often used as weak "cannon fodder" monsters, similar to goblins, but may be cunning and strong in groups.[1][2] Contents 1 Depictions 1.1 In Dungeons & Dragons 2 Reception 3 References 4 Further reading Depictions[edit] In Dungeons & Dragons[edit] Kobolds appeared as monsters alongside goblins, orcs, and trolls in the 1971 wargame Chainmail, as part of Gary Gygax's "fantasy supplement" inspired by The Hobbit and other fantasy novels.[3] This supplement inspired the first editions of Dungeons & Dragons (1974), where kobolds appear again.[4] In these early appearances, they are only described as creatures similar to goblins. Kobolds were first depicted as doglike reptilian humanoids in Gygax's Monster Manual (1977) for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D), which describes them as aggressive, tribal creatures living in dark forests or subterranean settings.[5] In 1987, Roger E. Moore published the editorial "Tucker's kobolds" in the magazine Dragon, describing a game scenario where a horde of well-prepared kobolds uses guerrilla tactics to significantly challenge a far more powerful party of adventurers.[6] This editorial became popular among roleplaying fans, and helped kobolds gain traction.[7] Later editions of the game emphasized their draconic aspects, and suggest that kobolds are biologically related to dragons, and view them as an object of worship and servitude.[8] The AD&D 2nd Edition Monstrous Manual (1993) introduced Urds, a race similar to kobolds with batlike wings.[9] In the 3rd edition, urds were seemingly replaced by dragonwrought kobolds, a subrace of kobolds with more prominent draconic features such as wings. A notable kobold character in media adaptations of Dungeons & Dragons is Deekin Scalesinger, an aspiring bard introduced in Shadows of Undrentide expansion pack for the role-playing video game Neverwinter Nights developed by BioWare. Deekin is originally a follower of the white dragon Tymofarrar, who orders Deekin's kin to travel to a small village called Hilltop located in the Silver Marches and attack a dwarven wizard named Drogan Droganson. Deekin encounters and assists the protagonist of Shadows of Undrentide, an apprentice of Drogan, and later persuades the adventurer to take him along as a traveling companion. Deekin returns as a henchman in the second Neverwinter Nights expansion pack, Hordes of the Underdark, where he is depicted as growing in power and stature, even manifesting dragon-like abilities and features as a Dragon Disciple. Deekin makes a cameo appearance in Neverwinter Nights II developed by Obsidian Entertainment. Reception[edit] "The best characters are really your friends that you play with, but this kobold bard is an exception. Most characters would annoy you if they talked in third person, but Deekin pulls it off. He's working on a book and often narrates what's going on around him, even fessing up to passing gas. Deekin refuses to partake in the typical kobold way of life; after all, who would want to be a generic monster?" Kimberley Wallace, The Best BioWare Characters[10] Screen Rant compiled a list of the game's "10 Most Powerful (And 10 Weakest) Monsters, Ranked" in 2018, calling this one of the weakest, saying "When a dungeon master has run several low-level Dungeons & Dragons adventures, they will inevitably grow weary of using the same creatures from before and will want to shake things up. That's the moment when they prepare to paint over the serial numbers and replace the goblins with kobolds."[11] The kobold was considered one of the "five main "humanoid" races" in AD&D by Paul Karczag and Lawrence Schick.[12] Journalist David M. Ewalt highlighted that kobolds have often been the first combat encounter for new players of Dungeons & Dragons, from its beginnings to the current 5th edition.[13] Kimberley Wallace of Game Informer considered Deekin to be one of best video game characters developed by BioWare.[10] References[edit] ^ Hoffer, Christian (2020-02-06). "Every Dungeons & Dragons Campaign Should Include Kobolds". ComicBook. ^ "13 Most Powerful D&D Monsters (And 12 Weakest)". CBR. 2018-10-10. Retrieved 2021-01-06. ^ Gygax, Gary; Peren, Jeff (1972). Chainmail: Rules for Medieval Miniatures (PDF) (2nd ed.). Guidon Games. pp. 25–32. [W]e are including a brief set of rules which will allow the medieval miniatures wargamer to [...] refight the epic struggles related by J. R. R. Tolkien, Robert E. Howard, and other fantasy writers. ^ Gygax, Gary; Arneson, Dave (1974). Dungeons & Dragons: Single Volume Edition (PDF). Tactical Study Rules. p. 49. Treat these monsters as if they were Goblins except that they will take [fewer attacks]. ^ Gygax, Gary (1979). Monster Manual (PDF). TSR Games. p. 58. ISBN 0-935696-00-8. Kobolds are usually found in dank, dark places such as dismal overgrown forests or subterranean settings. [...] The hide of kabolds runs from very dark rusty brawn to a rusty black. They have no hair. ^ Moore, Roger E (November 1987). "Tucker's Kobolds" (PDF). Dragon. No. #127. TSR. ^ Caroll, Bart. "Excerpt: Kobold". Dungeons & Dragons. Wizards of the Coast. ^ Kestrel, Gwendolyn F.M.; Wilkes, Jennifer Clarke; Liquette, Kolja Raven (2006). Races of the Dragon (PDF). Wizards of the Coast. p. 48. ISBN 0-7869-3913-3. The body and soul of any kobold is dedicated to dragons, whether literally or figuratively. Kobolds search for the dragon in themselves, and they pledge themselves to the dragon in their rites of passage. In the presence of an actual dragon, kobolds are servile, doing anything required of them. Kobolds see dragons as older and wiser kin and cultural heroes. ^ Stewart, Doug (1993). Monstrous Manual. TSR. p. 214. ISBN 1-5607-6619-0. ^ a b Kimberley Wallace (August 15, 2013). "The Best BioWare Characters". Game Informer. Retrieved April 1, 2020. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons: 10 Most Powerful (And 10 Weakest) Monsters, Ranked". ScreenRant. May 20, 2018. ^ Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. p. 92. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ Ewalt, David M. (2013). Of Dice and Men: The Story of Dungeons & Dragons and the People Who Play It. Scribner. p. 109. ISBN 978-1-4516-4052-6. Further reading[edit] Hergenrader, Trent (2019). Collaborative Worldbuilding for Writers and Gamers. Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 95–98. ISBN 978-1-3500-1667-5. Greenwood, Ed (1995). "Elminster's Notebook". Dragon. TSR. #216. Holian, Gary, Erik Mona, Sean K Reynolds, and Frederick Weining. Living Greyhawk Gazetteer. Renton, WA: Wizards of the Coast, 2000. Sargent, Carl. Monster Mythology. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR, 1992. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond