Kongsberg Maritime Type Public Industry Solutions for merchant marine, offshore and subsea Founded 1814 Headquarters Kongsberg, Norway Area served Global Key people Egil Haugsdal (President) Revenue NOK 7,545 million (2018) Number of employees 7,600 (1. April 2019) Parent Kongsberg Gruppen Website http://www.kongsberg.com/maritime/ Kongsberg Maritime (KM) is a Norwegian technology enterprise within the Kongsberg Gruppen (KOG). Kongsberg Maritime deliver systems for positioning, surveying, navigation, and automation to merchant vessels and offshore installations.[1] Their most well known products exist within dynamic positioning systems, marine automation and surveillance systems, process automation, satellite navigation, and hydroacoustics. Contents 1 History 2 Products 3 References 4 External links History[edit] Kongsberg Maritime's history dates back to 1946. Simonsen Radio, later Simrad was founded 31. December that year. The first product was a radio telephone for the fishing fleet. The first echo sounder for the commercial fishing fleet came on the market in 1950. The first alarm system was ready in 1959. Kongsberg Maritime has over the years absorbed a number of well known maritime and offshore related companies, including: Autronica Consultas Contros Embient GeoAcoustics KonMap Kongsberg Mesotech NorControl Rolls-Royce Commercial Marine Seatex Simrad The parent company Kongsberg Gruppen was established on March 20, 1814 as Kongsberg Vaabenfabrik (KV) (lit.: "Kongsberg Weapons Factory") and in 2014 they celebrated 200 years in business. Products[edit] The main product areas for Kongsberg Maritime are: Deck systems Includes complete seismic back-deck systems, seismic cable control, marine and offshore cranes and helideck monitoring. Dynamic positioning systems Control systems that make it possible to keep a vessel/platform in the same position under demanding weather conditions. Navigation systems Radar, digital chart systems (ECDIS), steering systems and integrated navigation equipment for ship's bridges. Hydroacoustics, echo sounder, sonars High technology hydroacoustic products for seabed surveying, subsea communication and positioning. Autonomous underwater vehicles & systems Free-swimming autonomous underwater vehicles characterized by great manoeuvrability and high accuracy for civilian and military use. Includes the HUGIN, MUNIN, REMUS and SEAGLIDER product lines of commercial off the shelf (COTS) AUVs. These AUVs have different capabilities and thus different applications and roles. A partner in the development of the Eelume AUV.[2] Marine automation and surveillance systems Systems for surveillance and for controlling engines, cargo and propulsion on vessels. Motion sensors, GPS, AIS and position reference systems Automatic systems for recording vessel identification, position, movement and cargo (AIS - Automatic Identification Systems). GPS satellite positioning systems. Naval systems Acoustic monitoring and tracking systems, homeland security systems, naval sonars transponders and pingers. Sensors and transmitters Sensors to measure temperature, pressure, tank level, motion and sissolved gases. Tank gauging Systems to measure, monitor and control liquid cargos. Underwater and harsh environment camera systems Underwater cameras, imaging technology and products to the Offshore Oilfield, Scientific, Maritime and Naval sectors. References[edit] ^ Konsberg Maritime Products & Equipment Training ^ Liljebäck, Pål; Mills, Ricard. "Eelume: A Flexible and Subsea Resident IMR vehicle". Kongsberg Maritime. External links[edit] Kongsberg Maritime official homepage Kongsberg Gruppen official homepage - Parent company Simrad official homepage - Subsidiary Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125