This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Korean. (June 2016) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Korean article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Korean Wikipedia article at [[:ko:이무기]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|ko|이무기}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. API Korean name Hangul 용/룡 (미르) Hanja 龍 Revised Romanization yong/ryong (mireu) McCune–Reischauer yong/ryong (mirŭ) Korean dragons are legendary creatures in Korean mythology and folklore. The appearance of the dragon reflects its relation to its East Asian counterparts, including the Chinese dragons. Contents 1 Korean dragons 2 Imugi 3 Korean cockatrice 4 Gallery 5 Dragons related to the Korean dragon 6 References 7 See also 8 Further reading 9 External links Korean dragons[edit] Whereas most dragons in European mythology are linked to the elements of fire and destruction, dragons in Korean mythology are primarily benevolent beings related to water and agriculture, often considered bringers of rain and clouds. Hence, many Korean dragons are said to have resided in rivers, lakes, oceans, or even deep mountain ponds. The symbol of the dragon has been used extensively in Korean culture, both in Korean mythology and ancient Korean art. Ancient texts sometimes mention sentient speaking dragons, capable of understanding complex emotions such as devotion, kindness, and gratitude. One particular Korean legend speaks of the great King Munmu, who on his deathbed wished to become a "Dragon of the East Sea in order to protect Korea". The Korean dragon is in many ways very similar in appearance to other East Asian dragons such as the Chinese and Japanese dragons. It differs from the Chinese dragon in that it developed a longer beard. Very occasionally a dragon may be depicted as carrying a giant orb known as the yeouiju (여의주), the Korean name for the mythical Cintamani, in its claws or its mouth. It was said that whoever could wield the yeouiju was blessed with the abilities of omnipotence and creation at will, and that only four-toed dragons (who had thumbs with which to hold the orbs) were both wise and powerful enough to wield these orbs, as opposed to the lesser, three-toed dragons. As with China, the number nine is significant and auspicious in Korea, and dragons were said to have 81 (9×9) scales on their backs, representing yang essence. Imugi[edit] Korean folk mythology states that most dragons were originally Imugis (Korean: 이무기; RR: Imugi) (Imoogi), or lesser dragons, which were said to resemble gigantic serpents. There are a few different versions of Korean folklore that describe both what imugis are and how they aspire to become full-fledged dragons. Koreans thought that an Imugi could become a true dragon, or yong or mireu, if it caught a Yeouiju which had fallen from heaven. Another explanation states they are hornless creatures resembling dragons who have been cursed and thus were unable to become dragons. By other accounts, an Imugi is a proto-dragon which must survive one thousand years in order to become a fully fledged dragon. In either case they are said to be large, benevolent, python-like creatures that live in water or caves, and their sighting is associated with good luck. It is called Ishimi (Korean: 이시미) (Isimi), Miri (Korean: 미리), Young-no (Korean: 영노) (Youngno, Yeongno, Yeong-no), Gangcheori (Korean: 강철이; Hanja: 強鐵) (Kangcheori) or Kkwangcheori (Korean: 꽝철이) or Kkangcheori (Korean: 깡철이), Bari (Korean: 바리), or Hweryong (Korean: 훼룡; Hanja: 虺龍) or Iryong (Korean: 이룡; Hanja: 螭龍).[1] In the 2007 South Korean film D-War, two Imugi, of which one was benevolent and the other evil, were seen competing for possession of a source of power (the Yeouiju) by which one of them could become a dragon. Ultimately, the evil Imugi is destroyed by his rival moments after the latter had captured the source. Here, the two are shown to be physically different, in that the evil Imugi is darker-colored, more slender and distinguished by an inflexible hood similar to that of a cobra, whereas the good Imugi is paler, stockier, hoodless, and more closely resembles a python. Narration in the film implies that many Imugi exist at a time, whereof few are designated to become a dragon. Korean cockatrice[edit] The Korean cockatrice is known as a gye-lyong (Korean: 계룡; Hanja: 鷄龍), which literally means chicken-dragon; they do not appear as often as dragons. They are sometimes seen as chariot-pulling beasts for important legendary figures or for the parents of legendary heroes. One such legend involves the founding of the Kingdom of Silla, whose princess was said to have been born from a cockatrice egg. It is also the origin of the name for the city of Gyeryong in South Chungcheong province. Gallery[edit] Azure_Dragon of the mural of the Goguryeo Tomb Yong Pagoda in Yongdusan Park Dragons related to the Korean dragon[edit] Chinese dragon Druk, the Thunder Dragon of Bhutanese mythology Japanese dragon Nāga, a Hindu and Buddhist creature in South Asian and Southeast Asian mythology. Bakunawa, a moon-eating sea dragon depicted in Philippine mythology Vietnamese dragon References[edit] ^ 우리 삶에 현존하는 영생의 신화 (in Korean). OhmyNews. 2004-01-05. See also[edit] An Instinct for Dragons, hypothesis about the origin of dragon myths. European dragons Korean folklore Korean mythology List of dragons in mythology and folklore Long Mu, a woman who was deified as a goddess after raising dragons Radical 212, the dragon radical in Chinese characters, also used in traditional Korean writing and in studies of Korean etymology Further reading[edit] Bates, Roy, Chinese Dragons, Oxford University Press, 2002. Bates, Roy, All About Chinese Dragons, China History Press, 2007. 'Korean Water and Mountain Spirits', in: Ingersoll, Ernest, et al., (2013). The Illustrated Book of Dragons and Dragon Lore. Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books. ASIN B00D959PJ0 External links[edit] Podcast: The Meaning of Dragons in Korean Folklore from The Korea Society[permanent dead link] v t e Dragons In mythology European Ajatar Amphiptere Balaur Bisterne Dragon Blue Ben Bolla Chuvash dragon Cockatrice Cuélebre Gargouille Greek Dragon Cychreides Delphyne Lernaean Hydra Ladon Pyrausta Python Guivre Herensuge Knucker Jaculus La Guita Xica Lambton Worm Laidly Worm of Spindleston Heugh Worm of Linton Lindworm Marraco Dragon of Mordiford Norse dragon Fafnir Jörmungandr Níðhöggr Oilliphéist Peluda Slavic dragon Sockburn Worm Stoor worm Sugaar Tugarin Wawel Dragon Welsh Dragon White dragon Wyvern Yelbeghen Zilant Zirnitra Asian Apalala Bakunawa Bašmu Chinese dragon Ao Guang Azure Dragon Chi Dilong Feilian Feilong Fucanglong Hong Jiaolong Panlong Pulao Qiulong Shenlong Teng Tianlong Yellow Dragon Yinglong Zhulong Druk Illuyanka Japanese dragon Kiyohime Kuraokami Kuzuryū Mizuchi Ryūjin Toyotama-hime Wani Watatsumi Yamata no Orochi Zennyo Ryūō Korean dragon Kur Labbu Lahamu Leviathan Lotan Pakhangba Phaya Naga Seraphim Tanin'iver Tannin (monster) Tiamat Vietnamese dragon Vishap Vritra Yam Zahhak Other Amaru Feathered Serpent Gaasyendietha Horned Serpent Nyami Nyami Ouroboros Peuchen Piasa Quetzalcoatl Rahab (Egypt) Sea serpent Snallygaster Teju Jagua Xiuhcoatl In culture Mythology and folklore Draco (constellation) Dragon dance Dragon boat Dragon (zodiac) Dragonslayers Princess and dragon In fiction Popular culture Film and television Games Dragons in Dungeons & Dragons Literature Dragons in J.R.R.Tolkien's legendarium Smaug Dragons in Dragon Prince Dragons in Pern In art Nine Dragons painting Nine-Dragon Wall Dragon jar Cádiz Memorial Dragon and Tiger Pagodas Dragon boundary mark Dragon Bridge (Da Nang) Dragon Bridge (Ljubljana) Merritt Island Dragon Pegasus and Dragon Related Dragon's Eye Here be dragons Dragon curve v t e East Asia Countries and regions PR China Mainland Hong Kong Macau Japan Ryukyu North Korea South Korea Taiwan Mongolia Ethnic groups Ainu Han Hui Koreans in China Manchu Miao Mongols in China Qiang Ryukyuans Indigenous Taiwanese Tibetans Tujia Uyghurs Yamato Yi Zhuang other ethnic groups in China unrecognized historical Culture Age reckoning Architecture‎ Art Chinese Japanese Korean Blepharoplasty Buddhism Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Cultural sphere Dance Decorative knotwork Dragon Fashion Festivals Gardens Gothic typeface Han characters Hip-and-gable roof Languages Literature Mādhyamaka Music Mythology Philosophy Religion Scripts Seal Sino-Xenic pronunciations Surnames Television Yogācāra Zodiac Environment East Asia Climate Partnership Monsoon Rainy season Flora Economy and Politics China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summit Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia Capitalism East Asia Summit East Asian Bureau of Economic Research East Asian Community Four Asian Tigers Human rights in East Asia Ports Stock exchanges History Archaeology Archaeological cultures Bronze Age Iron Age Former countries Sports China–Japan–Korea Friendship Athletic Meeting East Asian Football Federation East Asian Games East Asian Judo Championships East Asian martial arts East Asian Youth Games EAFF E-1 Football Championship Education Association of East Asian Research Universities CrossAsia East Asian Economic Review East Asia Image Collection East Asia Law Review East Asian studies Journal of East Asian Studies Ludwigshafen East Asia Institute Military Horses in East Asian warfare Miyamoto Musashi Sun Tzu The Art of War The Book of Five Rings Yi Sun-sin Science and technology Needham Research Institute Printing Swords Traditional medicine