Mortal Kombat character, Shaolin monk Kung Lao Mortal Kombat character Kung Lao in Mortal Kombat 11 (2019) First appearance Mortal Kombat II (1993) Created by Ed Boon John Tobias Designed by John Tobias (MKII, MK3) Luis Mangubat (MK:D, MK:D, MK:A) Portrayed by Paolo Montalbán (Conquest) Mark Dacascos (Legacy) Max Huang (2021 film) Voiced by Joshua Y. Tsui (MKG) Joe Yau (MK:SM) Jin Hyong (MK9) Will Yun Lee (MKX) Sunil Malhotra (MK11) Motion capture Anthony Marquez (MKII, MK3, UMK3, MKT, MKA) Joshua Y. Tsui (MKG) Joe Yau (MK:SM) Tian Shuai (MK11) In-universe information Species Human/Revenant Gender Male Weapon Razor-Rimmed Hat (All appearances) Battle Axe (MKG) Broadsword (MK:DA, MK:A) Family Kung Jin (nephew) Great Kung Lao (ancestor) Origin China (Earthrealm) Nationality Chinese Fighting styles Mantis (MK:DA, MK:SM[1]) Shaolin Fist (MK:DA, MK:SM,[1] MK:A) Kenpo (MK:SM[1]) White Lotus (MK:SM) Wing Chun (MK11) Warning: Page using Template:Infobox character with unknown parameter "real name" (this message is shown only in preview). Kung Lao (Chinese: 功老; pinyin: gōng lăo)[2] is a fictional character in the media franchise Mortal Kombat. A major hero in the Mortal Kombat series, introduced as a player character in the fighting game Mortal Kombat II in 1993. He is a former member of the White Lotus Society who stands in the shadow of his ancestor, the Great Kung Lao. Kung Lao is the brother-like friend of the series' male protagonist named Liu Kang and together they were the main characters and heroes of the spin-off game Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks. He gained considerable popularity and favorable critical reception, in large part because of his famous hat, which doubles as a weapon that can cut or slice its enemies in half. Contents 1 Appearances 1.1 Mortal Kombat games 1.1.1 Character design and gameplay 1.2 Other media 2 Great Kung Lao 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Appearances[edit] Mortal Kombat games[edit] Introduced in Mortal Kombat II (1993), Kung Lao is one of the last known descendants of the Great Kung Lao, a Champion of Mortal Kombat who lost the title and his life to the Shokan Prince Goro 500 years previously, resulting in the start of corrupt sorcerer Shang Tsung's rule over the tournament. Kung Lao was originally chosen to represent the Shaolin in the Mortal Kombat tournament, but he declined due to the consequences of becoming champion. As a result, his friend Liu Kang was chosen and emerged as the winner. When a portal leading to the otherworldly dimension Outworld was opened and the Shaolin temple was attacked by Baraka and his Tarkatan soldiers, Liu Kang and Kung Lao resolved to travel through the portal themselves and avenge their fallen Shaolin brothers. Kung Lao's ultimate goal however was to rebuild the White Lotus Society at the Wu Shi Academy in order to train a new generation of warriors for the coming ages. Following Liu Kang's victory over the Outworld tyrant Shao Kahn, the monks returned to Earth and began training the next generation of Shaolin warriors. When Shao Kahn invaded Earthrealm in Mortal Kombat 3 (1995), Kung Lao had to temporarily scrap his plans for reforming the White Lotus Society. While Kung Lao faced the Kahn in battle, he was ultimately defeated and believed to have died. Enraged by his friend's apparent death, Liu Kang challenged Shao Kahn and defeated him a second time. With Outworld driven back during Mortal Kombat Gold (1999), Kung Lao decided not to return to the Shaolin; allowing everyone to believe that he was dead so he live a life of peace in respect to the beliefs of his ancestors. This would not last long however, as he was drawn away from his newfound peace to help fight against the fallen Elder God Shinnok's forces when word reached him that Goro was still alive. After Shinnok's defeat, Kung Lao attacked Goro with a ceremonial strike of vengeance for the Great Kung Lao's death. With this act, the two warriors shook hands, ending their conflict. After enjoying peace for a few years (Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance (2002)), when Shang Tsung allied himself with fellow sorcerer Quan Chi to murder Liu Kang, Kung Lao found his corpse. After the thunder god Raiden brought him up to speed on what happened, an enraged Kung Lao vowed revenge; abandoning his pacifist Shaolin beliefs once more. However, he believed his current skills were insufficient to defeat the Deadly Alliance after meeting with several other Earthrealm warriors and traveling to Outworld. Along the way, Kung Lao sought out advice and training from Outworld martial arts teacher Bo' Rai Cho. However, this would not be enough, as Kung Lao and most of his allies fell to the Deadly Alliance before they were resurrected by the dragon king Onaga to become his slaves during the events of Mortal Kombat: Deception (2004). He and the rest of his brainwashed allies were later released from Onaga's spell by Liu Kang and reformed ninja Ermac. In the action-adventure game Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks (2005), an alternate depiction of the events between the first and second Mortal Kombat games, Kung Lao's character was explored to a greater degree than had been shown in previous titles. In this game, he is portrayed as feeling almost resentful of Liu Kang's victory in the Shaolin tournament. Though they are shown to be friends, Kung Lao constantly baits his fellow Shaolin monk, especially regarding Princess Kitana, and the tournament that Shang Tsung disguised as Raiden has sent them to compete in. A rivalry between the two monks was hence established for the first time. As the two fighters defeated Shang Tsung's warriors, they formed a race of sorts to become the Champion of Mortal Kombat. Kung Lao, especially, took time to gloat about how he will win. This rivalry escalated until the two warriors become convinced that the other has been corrupted by Outworld. The wind god Fujin's bio for Mortal Kombat: Armageddon (2006) describes Kung Lao as having joined forces with him to bring their former comrades Raiden and Liu Kang under control, with the God of Thunder becoming "as ruthless as Shao Kahn" and Liu Kang's corpse selectively slaying various people. Fujin then goes on to state in his bio that if no solution was found to revert the two corrupted warriors back to normal, both he and Kung Lao would be forced to finish them.[3] During the course of the game, Kung Lao kills Baraka in battle, but is slain by Shinnok's clone. In the rebooted continuity of Mortal Kombat (2011), Raiden has been given foreboding visions from his future self and attempting to change the timeline of events that lead to Armageddon. He allows Kung Lao to fight in the second tournament, believing that he is the one who must win. Kung Lao defeats Shang Tsung, Quan Chi, and the Shokan Kintaro, but he is killed by Shao Kahn. This enrages Liu Kang, who mortally wounds the tyrant in retaliation. Following Shao Kahn's failed invasion of Earthrealm, Kung Lao was resurrected as one of Quan Chi's undead revenant slaves. Kung Lao's non-canonical ending shows him at his ancestor's burial site with Raiden, where he is given a vision of the past that reveals he is the reincarnation of the Great Kung Lao. Kung Lao returns in Mortal Kombat X (2015),[4] continuing to serve Quan Chi and Shinnok in the Netherrealm. His younger cousin, Kung Jin, appears in the story as a thief turned Shaolin archer and member of the Special Forces after his family fell on hard times following Kung Lao's death. In Mortal Kombat 11 (2019), past iterations of Kung Lao and Liu Kang were brought to the present due to the machinations of the keeper of time Kronika.[5] After learning the Shaolin Temple was attacked by Kronika's forces, they headed out to investigate, only to encounter their revenant selves and fail to stop Kronika's henchman Geras from stealing vials of Earth's lifeforce.[6] They later helped Kitana defeat Shao Kahn and lead the surviving Shaolin monks alongside the combined Earthrealm/Outworld armies in assaulting Kronika's Keep while their revenants attempt to stop them.[7][8][9] In his non-canonical arcade ending, Kung Lao used Kronika's Hourglass to save the Great Kung Lao from his defeat at Goro's hands. Within years, the Great Kung Lao became the undisputed Mortal Kombat champion. Millions of people later join the White Lotus Society and inspired rebels to mutiny against Shao Kahn, bringing peace to the realms. By the time Onaga awakens, he is no match for Kung Lao's power. Character design and gameplay[edit] As stated in Kung Lao's bio card that after the first Mortal Kombat game, the creators wanted a monk character other than Liu Kang. According to Mortal Kombat co-creator John Tobias, Kung Lao's hat was inspired by the 1964 James Bond movie Goldfinger, in which a villain Oddjob threw his special derby hat as a deadly weapon.[10] Kung Lao was portrayed by Anthony Marquez in Mortal Kombat II and Mortal Kombat 3; Ed Boon said Marquez was ”one of the best martial artists we worked with."[11] Kung Lao can be seen in Mortal Kombat II, Mortal Kombat 3, and Shaolin Monks wearing the Chinese character 武 which means military/wu shu/martial arts. However, when asked about this character, John Tobias stated that it is Chinese for "war".[12] Kung Lao's attacks are based on wind-type moves. His most notable attack is the Hat Toss, which could be directed in Mortal Kombat II, but could not be directed since Mortal Kombat Gold,[13] until Mortal Kombat (2011). Many of his Fatalities involve the use of his hat to some extent, such as slicing the body in half and decapitation. According to Prima Games, Kung Lao is one of the cheapest Mortal Kombat characters, where they observe "He can combo almost any jumping attack into his Dive Kick. He even has multiple projectile attacks, one of which he can aim up or down, meaning you can't reliably crouch under or jump over it. In Mortal Kombat 3, he even had one of the longest dial-a-combos, because his damage clearly wasn't high enough already."[14] Other media[edit] Kung Lao made several appearances in Malibu's' Mortal Kombat comic series. His story is slightly altered, stating he is an exile in Outworld due to the failure of his ancestor, and the fall of his lineage. During the comics, he shares a very close relation with Kitana. During the Mortal Kombat: Blood & Thunder miniseries he has a minor participation rescuing a near-death Liu Kang after he was stabbed by Kano. In the Battlewave miniseries, he joins with Kitana, Baraka and Sub-Zero in an attempt to overthrow the Emperor Shao Kahn. He was also featured in his own one-shot issue from Malibu in the summer of 1995. The comic, entitled Rising Son, showed his struggle against Shang Tsung and his shapeshifting mind tricks, using his friends' forms (Kitana, Baraka and Sub-Zero) as well as his ancestor's form to kill him. Kung Lao was also the centerpiece of Jeff Rovin's novelization of the first Mortal Kombat game, but his description therein completely differed from that of the games. In the novel, he is depicted as being tall, bald save for a queue of long black hair (similar to Goro's), barefoot, and wearing a long white robe. Kung Lao appears in Mortal Kombat: Legacy as of season 2, portrayed by Mark Dacascos. Max Huang, a member of the Jackie Chan Stunt Team, will portray Kung Lao in the upcoming Mortal Kombat film reboot.[15] In the reboot, Kung and Liu are Cousins.[16] Great Kung Lao[edit] The Great Kung Lao was raised in the Order of Light, a monastery of Shaolin monks. While he lived happily with his family and friends, he prepared his entire life to fight in the Mortal Kombat tournament. He was trained thoroughly under the monastery’s martial artists, teaching him moves many would think impossible. All of Kung Lao's training made him the monastery’s best fighter. Being the first person from Earthrealm to represent the Order of Light, he would do battle with the evil sorcerer Shang Tsung 500 years before Liu Kang would do the same. Despite Shang Tsung having the advantage of winning nine consecutive Mortal Kombat tournaments, Kung Lao defeated him and became the ageless Grand Champion, saving Earthrealm in the process.[17] While it is common for the victor to take his opponent's life, Kung Lao spared the sorcerer. Fifty years later, he was defeated in by the Shokan prince Goro[18] before Shang Tsung returned to take his soul. In Deception the Great Kung Lao's soul was presumed to have been freed after Shang Tsung was killed by Raiden's failed attempt to destroy the Dragon King Onaga, giving the Shaolin monk peace after more than five centuries of torment. In the good ending of the DLC expansion Mortal Kombat 11: Aftermath, Fire God Liu Kang goes back in time to meet the Great Kung Lao and give him special training for his future battles.[19] The Great Kung Lao briefly appeared in animated film Mortal Kombat: The Journey Begins during a flashback sequence detailing his battle with Goro and ultimate defeat at the hands of the Shokan warrior. The Great Kung Lao is mentioned by name in the first Mortal Kombat film. When Liu Kang challenges Shang Tsung to Mortal Kombat, he calls himself a "descendant of Kung Lao." The Great Kung Lao was featured in the television show Mortal Kombat: Conquest as the main protagonist and was portrayed by Paolo Montalbán.[20] He is the great-great-great-grandfather of Kung Lao and Liu Kang, who follow his teachings. After becoming Grand Champion, the thunder god Raiden tells him that, because he was the last defending warrior of Earthrealm, Lao is now destined to train new warriors to compete against Kahn's forces for the next Mortal Kombat. He initially rejects this responsibility because he desired to marry his girlfriend Jen, despite her father's refusal.[21] While this took place, Shang Tsung, who was now imprisoned in the Cobalt Mines by Shao Kahn after he failed to beat Kung Lao, sought his revenge and sends the undead warrior Scorpion to kill Kung Lao.[21] Scorpion fails to defeat Kung Lao, but manages to kill Jen during the battle. After losing her, Kung Lao commits to training new warriors to defend Earthrealm and fight in Mortal Kombat when the time comes. He is joined by Jen’s bodyguard Siro and by Taja, a thief who (with Raiden's persuasion) saved Kung Lao's life from Jen’s father.[22] Kung Lao is killed by the Shadow Priests along with Taja and Siro in the final episode of Mortal Kombat: Conquest.[23] Reception[edit] Despite being stated as a fan favorite by CNET in 2006,[24] he has been referred to as an "obscure" character by CBS that same year.[25] In 2008, IGN listed him as a character they would like to see as downloadable content for Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe, noting him to be a fan favorite character and praising his appearance and his decapitating moves made with his hat.[26] In 2010, IGN mistakenly noted Kung Lao as Liu Kang's brother and died early in the film (this character was actually Chan Kang) and said that Liu Kang and Kung Lao make the franchise "at its best" when they join forces.[27] In UGO's 2012 list of the top Mortal Kombat characters, Kung Lao placed fifth.[28] The readers of Dorkly voted him the series' eighth greatest character in a 2013 poll.[29] The character was parodied by Iron Galaxy Studios with 2013's Divekick female character Kung Pao.[30] Much of the reception regarded his Fatality moves and his famous hat. In a CNET review of Shaolin Monks, it was stated that Kung Lao's body-dividing Fatality "simply doesn't get old."[31] This Fatality was the only death move from the Mortal Kombat series added to the "Top 10 Death Moves" segment of the GamesMaster Gore Special episode and was voted at number four with a comment that no such list "will be complete without a death move from Mortal Kombat, but with so many to choose from, we ended up with a split decision."[32] In 2009, GamePro listed Kung Lao's hat as the ninth best piece of headwear in gaming.[33] His "Bunny Beatdown" from the same game was ranked as the 43rd craziest finishing move in the gaming by Complex.com in 2010, while the hat slice was ranked fifth.[34] That same year, Kung Lao's hat splice Fatality ranked as the 35th most gruesome finishing move ever by UGO.com.[35] Mortal Kombat co-creator Ed Boon commented that Kung Lao's MK2011 'buzzsaw-on-the-ground' was "probably the most painful-looking Fatality ever made;"[36] it was included by FHM on their list of nine most brutal Fatalities in the game.[37] In 2012, Cheat Code Central's Shelby Reiches included the "Jewel Splitter" Fatality among the four worst cinematic scenes in games, commenting: "Every time he does this to a male fighter, I can hardly watch. I try not to fight against Kung Lao anymore."[38] That same year, IGN ranked his hat as 79th top weapon in video game history.[39] References[edit] ^ a b c Mortal Kombat Shaolin Monks Instruction Booklet, Midway Amusement Game, LLC, 2005, p. 13 ^ Japanese manual of SNES version Mortal Kombat II) ^ Midway (October 11, 2006). Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Premium Edition. Midway. Level/area: Fujin bio card. ^ Dyce, Andrew (January 5, 2015). "Kung Lao Confirmed For 'Mortal Kombat X'". Game Rant. Retrieved January 26, 2015. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 2: Timequake (Kotal Kahn). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 3: Shaolin Monks (Liu Kang & Kung Lao). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 7: Coming of Age (Kitana). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 11: Cutting the Strings (Raiden). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 12: End of an Era (Fire God Liu Kang). ^ Goldman, Michael; Aaron, Richard E. (1995). "Ed Boon & John Tobias Interview". Official MK3 Kollector's Book. Electronic Gaming Monthly. ^ Kung Lao Deception Bio Card. ^ "Shirt Sense". GamePro. No. 76. IDG. January 1995. p. 14. ^ "Mortal Kombat Gold review". Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ "Cheapest Characters in Mortal Kombat History: Part 2". Prima Games. Retrieved May 11, 2015. ^ Golden III, Lee B. (September 16, 2019). "MORTAL KOMBAT: Max Huang To Play Kung Lao As Cameras Roll In South Australia". Film Combat Syndicate. Retrieved September 16, 2019. ^ Lawrence, Gregory (2021-03-03). "27 Things We Learned About 'Mortal Kombat' From Our Set Visit". Collider. Retrieved 2021-03-06. ^ Gruson, Lindsey (1993-09-16). "Video Violence: It's Hot! It's Mortal! It's Kombat!; Teen-Agers Eagerly Await Electronic Carnage While Adults Debate Message Being Sent". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ "Insider Gaming: Brad and James put on their fighting gloves and play Mortal Kombat for Sega Genesis". Archived from the original on 2017-08-07. Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11: Aftermath. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 17: Checkmate (Shang Tsung). ^ "'Cinderella' opens March 20 at Fox Theatre in Atlanta". Archived from the original on 2012-07-14. Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ a b "Eternal Warrior (Part 1)". Mortal Kombat: Conquest. Season 1. Episode 1. 1998-10-03. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Eternal Warrior (Part 2)". Mortal Kombat: Conquest. Season 1. Episode 2. 1998-10-10. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Vengeance". Mortal Kombat: Conquest. Season 1. Episode 22. 1999-05-22. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Mortal Kombat: Armageddon (Xbox)". Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ "Fall Releases For PS2 And PSP". CBS News. 2006-11-03. Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ Schedeen, Jesse (2008-09-12). "DLC Player Wanted MK vs. DC". IGN. Retrieved 2008-12-24. ^ Pirrello, Phil; Schedeen, Jesse (2010-01-29). "Rebooting the Mortal Kombat Franchise". p. 2. Retrieved 2010-01-29. ^ UGO Team (2012-02-28). "Top 50 Mortal Kombat Characters - Mortal Kombat". UGO.com. Archived from the original on 2012-09-29. Retrieved 2012-03-04. ^ "The Greatest Mortal Kombat Character of All-Time (Vote Now!) - Dorkly Toplist". Dorkly.com. Retrieved 2013-12-19. ^ "Divekick Preview for PS Vita - Cheat Code Central". Cheatcc.com. 2013-04-29. Retrieved 2013-07-20. ^ "Mortal Kombat II (PlayStation 3)". Retrieved 2009-11-23. ^ GamesMaster Gore Special episode, "Top 10 Death Moves". ^ Koehn, Aaron (2009-02-19). "Video Game Hats: The 17 Best Pieces of Headwear in Gaming". GamePro. Archived from the original on 2011-06-07. Retrieved 2010-03-10. ^ The 50 Craziest Video Game Fatalities | Complex Archived 2012-08-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ K. Thor Jensen (2011-02-11). "Hat Slice - The Most Gruesome Finishing Moves Ever". UGO.com. Archived from the original on 2011-02-17. Retrieved 2011-10-16. ^ Xbox World 360 (6 Jan 2011). "The secrets of gaming". Xbox World 360. ComputerAndVideoGames. ^ FHM Philippines (2011-04-28). "9 Most Brutal Fatalities in Mortal Kombat 9". Fhm.com.ph. Archived from the original on 2013-10-29. Retrieved 2013-07-20. ^ Shelby Reiches, Best & Worst Cinematic Moments, Cheat Code Central, October 23, 2012 ^ "#79: Kung Lao's Hat (Mortal Kombat) - IGN's Top 100 Video Game Weapons". Uk.ign.com. 2012-03-27. Retrieved 2013-07-20. External links[edit] Media related to Kung Lao Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Mortal Kombat Video games Fighting games Mortal Kombat (1992) Mortal Kombat II Mortal Kombat 3 Ultimate Trilogy Mortal Kombat 4 Gold Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Mortal Kombat: Deception Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe Mortal Kombat (2011) Mortal Kombat X Mortal Kombat 11 Adventure games Mortal Kombat Mythologies: Sub-Zero Mortal Kombat: Special Forces Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks Compilations Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection Other media Films Mortal Kombat (1995) Mortal Kombat: Annihilation Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge Mortal Kombat (2021) Television Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm Mortal Kombat: Conquest Mortal Kombat: Legacy episodes Card games Mortal Kombat Kard Game Epic Battles Music Mortal Kombat: The Album Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Score Mortal Kombat: More Kombat Mortal Kombat: Annihilation – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Songs Inspired by the Warriors Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Other Comics Malibu Comics Mortal Kombat: Live Tour Characters Baraka Cassie Cage Cyrax Ermac Goro Jade Jax Johnny Cage Kabal Kano Kenshi Kitana Kung Lao Liu Kang Mileena Nightwolf Noob Saibot Quan Chi Raiden Rain Reptile Scorpion Sektor Shang Tsung Shao Kahn Sheeva Shinnok Sindel Skarlet Smoke Sonya Blade Stryker Sub-Zero Related Controversies surrounding Mortal Kombat Fatality Midway Games NetherRealm Studios Mortal Kombat: Rebirth Injustice: Gods Among Us Injustice 2 Category