Stable dispersion of polymer microparticles in an aqueous medium For the document preparation system and markup language, see LaTeX. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Extraction of latex from a tree, for use in rubber production Latex is a stable dispersion (emulsion) of polymer microparticles in water.[1] Latexes are found in nature, but synthetic latexes are common as well. Latex as found in nature is a milky fluid found in 10% of all flowering plants (angiosperms).[2] It is a complex emulsion consisting of proteins, alkaloids, starches, sugars, oils, tannins, resins, and gums that coagulate on exposure to air. It is usually exuded after tissue injury. In most plants, latex is white, but some have yellow, orange, or scarlet latex. Since the 17th century, latex has been used as a term for the fluid substance in plants, deriving from the Latin word for "liquid."[3] It serves mainly as defense against herbivorous insects.[2] Latex is not to be confused with plant sap; it is a distinct substance, separately produced, and with separate functions. The word latex is also used to refer to natural latex rubber, particularly non-vulcanized rubber. Such is the case in products like latex gloves, latex condoms and latex clothing. Originally, the name given to latex by indigenous Equator tribes[clarification needed] who cultivated the rubber tree, Hevea brasiliensis, was "caoutchouc", from the words caa ('tear') and ochu ('tree'), because of the way it is collected.[4] IUPAC definition. Latex: Colloidal dispersion of polymer particles in a liquid.[5][a] Synthetic latex: Latex obtained as a product of an emulsion, mini-emulsion, micro-emulsion, or dispersion polymerization.[5] Contents 1 Biology 1.1 Articulated laticifers 1.2 Non-articulated laticifers 2 Productive species 3 Defense function 4 Applications 4.1 Personal and healthcare products 4.2 Opium and opiates 4.3 Clothing 4.4 Industrial and biological applications from synthetic latexes 5 Allergic reactions 6 Environmental impact 6.1 Microbial degradation 7 See also 8 References 8.1 Footnotes 8.2 Notes 9 External links Biology[edit] Articulated laticifers[edit] The cells (laticifers) in which latex is found make up the laticiferous system, which can form in two very different ways. In many plants, the laticiferous system is formed from rows of cells laid down in the meristem of the stem or root. The cell walls between these cells are dissolved so that continuous tubes, called latex vessels, are formed. Since these vessels are made of many cells, they are known as articulated laticifers. This method of formation is found in the poppy family and in the rubber trees (Para rubber tree, members of the family Euphorbiaceae, members of the mulberry and fig family, such as the Panama rubber tree Castilla elastica), and members of the family Asteraceae. For instance, Parthenium argentatum the guayule plant, is in the tribe Heliantheae; other latex-bearing Asteraceae with articulated laticifers include members of the Cichorieae, a clade whose members produce latex, some of them in commercially interesting amounts. This includes Taraxacum kok-saghyz, a species cultivated for latex production.[6] Non-articulated laticifers[edit] In the milkweed and spurge families, on the other hand, the laticiferous system is formed quite differently. Early in the development of the seedling, latex cells differentiate, and as the plant grows these latex cells grow into a branching system extending throughout the plant. In many euphorbs, the entire structure is made from a single cell – this type of system is known as a non-articulated laticifer, to distinguish it from the multi-cellular structures discussed above. In the mature plant, the entire laticiferous system is descended from a single cell or group of cells present in the embryo. The laticiferous system is present in all parts of the mature plant, including roots, stems, leaves, and sometimes the fruits. It is particularly noticeable in the cortical tissues. Latex is usually exuded as a white liquid, but is some cases it can be clear, yellow or red, as in Cannabaceae.[2] Productive species[edit] Latex is produced by 20,000 flowering plant species from over 40 families. These include both dicots and monocots. Latex has been found in 14 percent of tropical plant species, as well as six percent of temperate plant species.[7] Several members of the fungal kingdom also produce latex upon injury, such as Lactarius deliciosus and other milk-caps. This suggests it is the product of convergent evolution and has been selected for on many separate occasions.[2] Defense function[edit] Rubber latex Latex functions to protect the plant from herbivores. The idea was first proposed in 1887 by Joseph F. James, who noted that latex carries with it at the same time such disagreeable properties that it becomes a better protection to the plant from enemies than all the thorns, prickles, or hairs that could be provided. In this plant, so copious and so distasteful has the sap become that it serves a most important purpose in its economy.[8] Evidence showing this defense function include the finding that slugs will eat leaves drained of their latex but not intact ones, that many insects sever the veins carrying latex before they feed, and that the latex of Asclepias humistrata (sandhill milkweed) kills by trapping 30% of newly hatched monarch butterfly caterpillars.[2] Other evidence is that latex contains 50–1000× higher concentrations of defense substances than other plant tissues. These toxins include ones that are also toxic to the plant and consist of a diverse range of chemicals that are either poisonous or "antinutritive". Latex is actively moved to the area of injury; in the case of Cryptostegia grandiflora, this can be more than 70 cm.[2] The clotting property of latex is functional in this defense since it limits wastage and its stickiness traps insects and their mouthparts.[2] While there exist other explanations for the existence of latex including storage and movement of plant nutrients, waste, and maintenance of water balance that "[e]ssentially none of these functions remain credible and none have any empirical support".[2] Applications[edit] Opium poppy exuding fresh latex from a cut The latex of many species can be processed to produce many materials. Balatá and gutta percha latex contain an inelastic polymer related to rubber.[citation needed] Chicle and jelutong tree latex was used in chewing gum.[citation needed] Personal and healthcare products[edit] Natural rubber is the most important product obtained from latex; more than 12,000 plant species yield latex containing rubber, though in the vast majority of those species the rubber is not suitable for commercial use.[9] This latex is used to make many other products including mattresses,[10] gloves, swim caps, condoms, catheters and balloons.[citation needed] Opium and opiates[edit] Dried latex from the opium poppy is called opium, the source of several useful analgesic alkaloids such as codeine, thebaine, and morphine, the latter two of which can then further be used in the synthesis and manufacture of other (typically stronger) opioids for medicinal use, and of heroin for the illegal drug trade. The opium poppy is also the source of medically useful non-analgesic alkaloids, such as papaverine and noscapine.[citation needed] Clothing[edit] Main article: Latex clothing Latex is used in many types of clothing. Worn on the body (or applied directly by painting), it tends to be skin-tight, producing a "second skin" effect.[citation needed] Industrial and biological applications from synthetic latexes[edit] Synthetic latexes are used in coatings (e.g., latex paint) and glues because they solidify by coalescence of the polymer particles as the water evaporates. These synthetic latexes therefore can form films without releasing potentially toxic organic solvents in the environment. Other uses include cement additives and to conceal information on scratchcards. Latex, usually styrene-based, is also used in immunoassays.[citation needed] Allergic reactions[edit] Main article: Latex allergy Some people only experience a mild allergy when exposed to latex, like eczema, contact dermatitis or developing a rash.[11] Others have a serious latex allergy, and exposure to latex products such as latex gloves can cause anaphylactic shock.[12] Guayule latex has only 2% of the levels of protein found in Hevea latexes, and is being researched as a lower-allergen substitute.[13] Additionally, chemical processes may be employed to reduce the amount of antigenic protein in Hevea latex, yielding alternative materials such as Vytex Natural Rubber Latex which provide significantly reduced exposure to latex allergens. About half of people with spina bifida are also allergic to natural latex rubber, as well as people who have had multiple surgeries, and people who have had prolonged exposure to natural latex.[14] Environmental impact[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (August 2014) Microbial degradation[edit] Several species of the microbe genera Actinomycetes, Streptomyces, Nocardia, Micromonospora, and Actinoplanes are capable of consuming rubber latex.[15] However, the rate of biodegradation is slow, and the growth of bacteria utilizing rubber as a sole carbon source is also slow.[16] See also[edit] Latex clothing Latex beads Natural rubber Rubber−related topics References[edit] Footnotes[edit] ^ The polymer in the particles may be organic or inorganic.[5] Notes[edit] ^ Wang, Hui; Yang, Lijuan; Rempel, Garry L. (2013). "Homogeneous Hydrogenation Art of Nitrile Butadiene Rubber: A Review". Polymer Reviews. 53 (2): 192–239. doi:10.1080/15583724.2013.776586. S2CID 96720306. ^ a b c d e f g h Anurag A. Agrawal; d Kotaro Konno (2009). "Latex: a model for understanding mechanisms, ecology, and evolution of plant defense Against herbivory". Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics. 40: 311–331. doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.110308.120307. ^ Paul G. Mahlberg (1993). "Laticifers: an historical perspective". The Botanical Review. 59 (1): 1–23. doi:10.1007/bf02856611. JSTOR 4354199. S2CID 40056337. ^ "Natural Materials - Coco-mat". Coco-mat. Archived from the original on 2017-06-18. Retrieved 2017-07-04. ^ a b c Stanislaw Slomkowski; José V. Alemán; Robert G. Gilbert; Michael Hess; Kazuyuki Horie; Richard G. Jones; Przemyslaw Kubisa; Ingrid Meisel; Werner Mormann; Stanisław Penczek; Robert F. T. Stepto (2011). "Terminology of polymers and polymerization processes in dispersed systems (IUPAC Recommendations 2011)" (PDF). Pure and Applied Chemistry. 83 (12): 2229–2311. doi:10.1351/PAC-REC-10-06-03. S2CID 96812603. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-10-20. ^ "Taraxacum kok-saghyz". Pfaf.org. Archived from the original on 2014-03-20. Retrieved 2013-03-21. ^ Thomas M. Lewinsohn (1991). "The geographical distribution of plant latex". Chemoecology. 2 (1): 64–68. doi:10.1007/BF01240668. S2CID 44594197. ^ Joseph F. James (1887). "The milkweeds". The American Naturalist. 21 (7): 605–615. doi:10.1086/274519. JSTOR 2451222. ^ J. E. Bowers (1990). Natural Rubber-Producing Plants for the United States. Beltsville, MD: National Agricultural Library. pp. 1, 3. OCLC 28534889. ^ Liman, Stacy. "Latex Mattresses: The Best Latex Mattress Guide". Retrieved 17 August 2020. ^ "Latex Allergy | Causes, Symptoms & Treatment". ACAAI Public Website. Retrieved 2019-03-24. ^ "Latex Allergy - Eco Terra". Retrieved 2018-10-10. ^ Anderson, Christopher D.; Daniels, Eric S. (8 May 2018). Emulsion Polymerisation and Latex Applications. iSmithers Rapra Publishing. ISBN 9781859573815. Retrieved 8 May 2018 – via Google Books. ^ "Latex allergy - Symptoms and causes". mayoclinic.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 8 May 2018. ^ Helge B. Bode; Axel Zeeck; Kirsten Plückhahn; Dieter Jendrossek (September 2000). "Physiological and Chemical Investigations into Microbial Degradation of Synthetic Poly(cis-1,4-isoprene)". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 66 (9): 3680–3685. doi:10.1128/aem.66.9.3680-3685.2000. PMC 92206. PMID 10966376. ^ Rose, K.; Steinbuchel, A. (2 June 2005). "Biodegradation of Natural Rubber and Related Compounds: Recent Insights into a Hardly Understood Catabolic Capability of Microorganisms". Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 71 (6): 2803–2812. doi:10.1128/AEM.71.6.2803-2812.2005. PMC 1151847. PMID 15932971. External links[edit] Media related to latex Warning: Commons link does not match Wikidata– please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest informatics IPM inventory governance law old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary transition Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest dieback Forest fragmentation High grading Illegal logging Timber mafia Invasive species wilding REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Category Outline v t e Non-timber forest products Animal products Furs Honey Pine honey Wild game Berries Tree fruit Banana Bilberry Binukaw Blackberry Blueberry Breadfruit Cocoa bean Coconut Durian Gambooge Huckleberry Jackfruit Juniper berry Lingonberry Raspberry Strawberry Tamarind Woodland strawberry Edible plants / roots Betel Fiddlehead ferns Heart of palm Mahuwa flowers Sago palm queen Sassafras filé powder root beer Saw palmetto Wild ginseng Mushrooms Bare-toothed russula Bay bolete Birch bolete Cep Chanterelle Honey mushroom Lingzhi Matsutake Meadow mushroom Morel Oyster mushroom Parasol mushroom Red cap Saffron milk cap Slippery jack Truffle Yellow knight Nuts Spices Allspice Areca nut Bay leaf Black pepper Brazil nut Cinnamon Clove Hazelnut Malva nut Nutmeg Pine nut Vanilla Oil Waxes Allanblackia Babassu Bacuri Candlenut Capuacu Carnauba Chaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus wightiana) Cocoa butter Eucalyptol Eucalyptus Illipe Japan wax Kokum Kombo Kpangnan Kusum Mafura Mahua Mango butter Murumuru Nagkesar Palm (kernel) Phulwara Pilu Pongamia Sal-seed (Shorea robusta) Sandalwood Shea butter Tamanu Tea-seed Tea-tree Tucuma Ucuuba Vateria indica Resins Benzoin Birch tar Camphor Creosote Frankincense Gamboge Kauri Lacquer Mastic Myrrh Pine tar Pitch Rosin Turpentine Varnish Sap / Gum / etc. Birch syrup Chicle chewing gum Coconut sugar Date sugar Fruit syrup Gum arabic Gutta-percha Kino Latex Maple sugar Maple syrup Palm sugar Palm wine akpeteshie ogogoro Rubber Spruce gum Other Amadou Bamboo edible musical instruments textiles Birch bark Birch beer Cork Ferns Forage Gambier Moss Natural dyes henna Peat Quinine Rattan Shellac Tanbark tannin Tendu leaves Thatching Vegetable ivory Willow bark Related Dehesa (Iberian agroforestry) Forest farming / gardening Honey hunting Indian forest produce Mushroom hunting Naval stores Resin extraction Rubber tapping Wildcrafting Category Commons Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125