Mid-sized bilingual university in Greater Sudbury, Ontario, Canada Laurentian University Other name LU, LUL Motto Emitte lucem et veritatem Motto in English Send forth thy light and thy truth Type Public Established 1960 Laurentian University of Sudbury/Université Laurentienne de Sudbury. Former name, University of Sudbury Endowment CA$41.9 million Chancellor Steve Paikin President Robert Haché Administrative staff 922 Undergraduates 9000 Postgraduates 515 Address 935 Ramsey Lake Road Sudbury, Ontario P3E 2C6 46°27′57.75″N 80°58′13.77″W﻿ / ﻿46.4660417°N 80.9704917°W﻿ / 46.4660417; -80.9704917Coordinates: 46°27′57.75″N 80°58′13.77″W﻿ / ﻿46.4660417°N 80.9704917°W﻿ / 46.4660417; -80.9704917 Campus urban green belt, 304 ha (750 acres) Sport Teams Laurentian Voyageurs Colours Gold   & blue   Nickname Voyageurs Affiliations AUCC, IAU, COU, AUFC, CVU, Ontario Network of Women in engineering, U Sports, OUA, CBIE, CUP, OUSA. Mascot Victor the Voyageur Website laurentian.ca Laurentian University (French: Université Laurentienne) is a mid-sized bilingual public university in Greater Sudbury, Ontario, Canada, incorporated on March 28, 1960.[1] While primarily focusing on undergraduate programming, Laurentian also houses the east campus of northern Ontario's only medical school—the Northern Ontario School of Medicine, which opened in 2005. Its school of Graduate Studies offers a number of graduate-level degrees. Laurentian is the largest bilingual provider of distance education in Canada.[2] After experiencing financial difficulties over a period of years, on 1 February 2021, Laurentian University filed for creditor protection.[3][4] As part of its restructuring, on 12 April 2021 Laurentian University announced the closure of 58 undergraduate programs and 11 graduate programs spanning a diversity of subjects.[5][6][7] As part of these closures, some 100 professors' positions were terminated.[8][9] The university is still operational, having 107 undergraduate programs and 33 graduate programs. In regard to the program closures, Laurentian University has stated "We anticipate that approximately 10 per cent of undergraduate students ... will be affected in some way by these program adjustments.”[10] Contents 1 Overview 2 History 3 Partnership 4 Administration 4.1 Presidents 4.2 Chairpersons of the Board of Governors 5 Undergraduate programs 5.1 Faculty of Arts 5.2 Faculty of Education 5.3 Faculty of Graduate Studies 5.3.1 Discontinued / closed programs 5.4 Faculty of Health 5.5 Faculty of Management 5.6 Faculty of Medicine 5.7 Faculty of Science, Engineering and Architecture 6 Program information 6.1 Commerce and administration 6.1.1 Sports Administration (H.B.Comm in SPAD) 6.2 Education (B.Ed.) 6.2.1 École des sciences de l’Éducation (Consecutive Education, French) 6.2.2 School of Education (Concurrent Education, English) 7 Federated schools 8 Research centres 9 Student life 9.1 Students' General Association/Association Générale des Étudiants 9.2 Media 9.3 Sports 9.4 Pipe band 10 Campus 10.1 Fraser Auditorium 10.2 Ben Avery 10.3 Beach 11 Residences 11.1 Single Student Residence 11.2 University College Residence 11.3 Married/Mature Student Residence 11.4 The West Residence 11.5 Thorneloe Residence 11.6 University of Sudbury 11.7 Huntington University 11.8 East Residence 12 Notable alumni 13 Noted faculty 14 See also 15 References 16 External links Overview[edit] The university's campus is located on the south side of Ramsey Lake, just south of Greater Sudbury's downtown core in the Bell Grove neighbourhood. The city's Idylwylde golf course borders on the university campus to the west and the Lake Laurentian Conservation Area borders on the campus to the south.[11] The Lake Laurentian Conservation Area contains a network of trails used for running, mountain biking and nordic skiing.[12][13] The university has a federated school structure, similar to that of the University of Toronto. The school also has two separate student unions (in addition to the part-time and graduate student associations). Students are assigned a student association when they register for their courses; the Francophone Students Association (AEF) is for francophones, while the Students General Association (SGA) is for both anglophones and francophones. History[edit] Laurentian's historical roots lie in the Roman Catholic church.[14] The Collège du Sacré-Coeur was founded by the Society of Jesus in 1913. According to a plaque at the entrance to the R. D. Parker Building, the school began granting degrees in 1957 as the University of Sudbury. A university federation combining representatives from the Roman Catholic, United, and Anglican churches was incorporated as a "non-denominational, bilingual institution of higher learning" in 1960.[14] The new Laurentian University held classes in the University of Sudbury facility, as well as in a variety of locations in the city, including the Sudbury Steelworkers Hall, until its current campus was opened in 1964.[15] The federated colleges included Huntington College (United Church), University of Sudbury College (Roman Catholic, descended from the Collège du Sacré-Coeur), and Thorneloe College (Anglican) which joined in 1963.[16] Collège universitaire de Hearst in Hearst is the only remaining affiliated college while both Nipissing University College in North Bay and Algoma University College in Sault Ste. Marie were previously affiliated with Laurentian.[14] Nipissing and Algoma were established as independent universities in 1992 and in 2008 respectively.[15] Laurentian opened a campus in Barrie, Ontario in 2001 in partnership with Georgian College. In 2016, the university announced that it would shut down operations in Barrie by May 2019.[17] In recent years, the university has expanded its professional programs, launching the Northern Ontario School of Medicine in 2005 and receiving approval to launch the McEwen School of Architecture in 2011.[18] On 1 February 2021, Laurentian University President Robert Haché confirmed that the University has filed for creditor protection.[19][20] Court filings revealed that the university's liabilities amounted to $321 million. As part of its restructuring, in April 2021 the university announced plans to end its relationships with the federated schools effective May 1,[21] although the federated schools have announced an intention to challenge the action in court. On April 12, 2021 Laurentian University announced the closure of 58 undergraduate programs and 11 graduate programs spanning a diversity of subjects.[22][23][24] As part of these closures, some 100 professors' positions were terminated.[25][26] Partnership[edit] Northern Ontario School of Medicine Located in a city where the major industry is mining, Laurentian has strong ties with the mining industry, and is one of the few schools in Canada offering mining engineering. The Willett Green Miller Centre, a provincial building located on campus, houses the Ontario Geological Survey, the Ontario Geoscience Laboratories, the J.B. Gammon Mines Library, and the Mining and Minerals Division of the Ministry of Northern Development and Mines. It also houses the Mining Innovation, Rehabilitation and Applied Research Corporation (MIRARCO), a not-for-profit applied research and technical service company formed through collaboration between Laurentian University and the private and public sectors, and the Mineral Exploration Research Centre (MERC), a semi-autonomous research and teaching centre whose focus is field-based, collaborative research on mineral deposits and their environments.[27] The university is also a partner in the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO), the world's deepest underground laboratory. The observatory studies the composition of the sun and the origins of the universe. In 2004, the university, along with Lakehead University, formed the Northern Ontario Medical School. In addition, Laurentian University has a partnership with St. Lawrence College Tri-campus for its Bachelor of Science in Nursing and Bachelor of Business Administration. The university is a member of L'Association des universités de la francophonie canadienne, a network of academic institutions of the Canadian Francophonie. Administration[edit] The Board of Governors heads the university with the president. Directly to the left and right of the president is the assistant to the president, and the Laurentian University senate. Judith Woodsworth was the president of Laurentian University from 2002 to 2008, at which time Dominic Giroux became president when she left the university to become President and Vice-Chancellor of Concordia University, Montreal. Aline Chrétien, the wife of former Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chrétien, was named the university's first chancellor on September 22, 2010.[28] She was succeeded by Steve Paikin on October 26, 2013.[29] Laurentian University's affiliate universities each have a chancellor. The chancellor is largely a ceremonial role, and has little participation in the day-to-day operations of the university. The chancellor for the affiliated University of Sudbury is Sudbury lawyer André Lacroix ; the chancellor for the affiliated Thorneloe University is Anne Germond; the first chancellor of the affiliated Huntington University is Edward (Ted) Conroy, another Sudbury lawyer. University administration is the responsibility of the Board of Governors, headed by the chairperson of the Board of Governors. As of 2016 this post is held by Jennifer Witty.[30] Presidents[edit] Stanley G. Mullins (1963–1970) R.J.A. Cloutier (1970–1972) Edward J. Monahan (1972–1977) Henry Best (1977–1984) John Daniel (1984–1991) Ross Paul (1991–1998) Jean Watters (1998–2001) Judith Woodsworth (2002–2008) Dominic Giroux (2009–2017)[31] Pierre Zundel (2017–2019) Robert Haché (2019–Present) Chairpersons of the Board of Governors[edit] Ralph D. Parker (1960–1965) Horace J. Fraser (1965–1969) W.J. (Bill) Shea (1969–1971) W.B. (Bill) Plaunt (1971–1973) Jean-Noël Desmarais (1973–1978) André Lacroix (1978–1981) Frank Clumpus (1981–1984) Normand Forest (1984–1987) Alan Querney (1987–1991) Roberto Grosso (1991–1994) Jamie Wallace (1994–1996) Douglas Los (1996–1998) Robert Del Frate (1998–2001) Maureen Lacroix (2001–2004) Jim Smith (2004–2007) Carolyn Sinclair (2007–2010) Floyd Laughren (2010–2013) Michael Atkins (2013–2016) Jennifer Witty (2016–2019) Claude Lacroix (2019–Present) Undergraduate programs[edit] Faculty of Arts[edit] Ancient Studies Arts d'Expression (closed) Classical Studies Communication Studies Computer Science Criminal Justice Criminology Economics English English - Literature English - Rhetoric and Media Studies Études françaises (French) Études journalistiques (French) Ethics Studies Fine Arts - Theatre Fine Arts - Motion Picture Arts Folklore et ethnologie (French) (closed) Français langue seconde General Arts History Indigenous Studies Individualized Thematic Studies Law and Justice Political Science Psychology Religious Studies Sociology Theatre Arts Women's Studies Faculty of Education[edit] Éducation (Consécutif) Éducation (Concomitante) Faculty of Graduate Studies[edit] Laurentian offers a wide-variety of graduate programs, in both English and French. Architecture (M.Arch.) Biology (M.Sc.) Biomolecular Sciences (PhD) Boreal Ecology (PhD) Business Administration (M.B.A.) Chemical Sciences (M.Sc.) Computational Sciences (M.Sc.) Geology (M.Sc.) Histoire (m.a.) History (MA) Humanités - interprétation et valeurs (m.a.) Humanities (MA) Human Kinetics (M.H.K.) Interdisciplinary Humanities (MA) Human Studies (PhD) Indigenous Relations (MIR) Interdisciplinary Health (MA or M.Sc.) Interdisciplinary PhD in Rural and Northern Health (PhD) Kinésie humaine (M.K.H.) Human Kinetics (MHK) Material Sciences (PhD) Mineral Deposits and Precambrian Geology (Ph.D) Natural Resources Engineering (M.Eng and M.A.Sc.), previously Mineral Resources Engineering Natural Resources Engineering (PhD) Nursing (M.Sc.) Nursing - Nurse Practitioner (M.Sc.N) Orthophonie (M.sc.s.) Psychologie (M.A.) Psychology - Applied (MA) Psychology - Experimental (MA) Santé interdisciplinaire (MA et M.Sc.) Science Communication (M.S.Comm. or Graduate Diploma) Science humaines (ph.d.) Sciences Infirmiéres iip-ssp (m.sc.inf.) Sciences Infirmières (m.sc.inf.) Service social (m.s.s.) Social Work (M.S.W.) Sociology (MA) Discontinued / closed programs[edit] Human Development (M.A. and M.Sc.) Diploma in Health Services and Policy Research (Graduate Diploma) Faculty of Health[edit] Gerontology Human Kinetics Human Kinetics - Éducation physique et santé Human Kinetics - Health Promotion Human Kinetics - Outdoor Adventure Leadership Human Kinetics - Sport and Physical Education Human Kinetics - Sport Psychology Indigenous Social Work Midwifery Nursing Orthoponie (French) Sciences infirmières (French) Social Work Faculty of Management[edit] Business Administration Commerce and Administration (closed) Sports Administration Faculty of Medicine[edit] The first medical school in Canada to be opened during the Digital Age, the Northern Ontario School of Medicine’s (NOSM) four-year Undergraduate Medical Education e-curriculum emphasizes the use of broadband technology to bridge the distance between campuses, and to facilitate an extensive distributed learning model that is unique in modern medical education. NOSM aims to train medical learners who are from, and will practice in, Northern Ontario. Faculty of Science, Engineering and Architecture[edit] As of June, 2018, Laurentian offers: Architectural Studies Behavioural neuroscience Biochemistry Biology Biomedical Biology Chemistry Computer Science Computer Science - Game Design Earth Sciences Engineering Engineering - Chemical Engineering - Mechanical Engineering - Mining Forensic Science Liberal Science Zoology Program information[edit] University rankings Global rankings U.S News & World Report Global[32] 1348 Canadian rankings U.S News & World Report National[32] 34 Maclean's Undergrad[33] 12 Commerce and administration[edit] Laurentian's school of commerce and administration was founded in 1960. It is modeled on the University of Western Ontario's Richard Ivey School of Business. The school offers small class sizes, one-on-one teaching, and an outstanding faculty.[citation needed] The School of Management offers a wide variety of programs, from MBAs to honours degrees in Business Administration and Sports Administration (H.B.Comm in SPAD). The school utilizes the case study method, in which it teaches through extensive use of business case studies. The case method enables class discussion of real business problems, which will apply the concepts, decision making methods and tools to those situations to help develop analytical and decision making skills. Students get involved in the community by studying real organizations of their choice, participating in research projects sponsored by businesses in the community and solving real problems.[citation needed] Sports Administration (H.B.Comm in SPAD)[edit] Laurentian University offers a unique program unlike any other in Canada. Laurentian's Sports Administration program is the only undergraduate sport management program that offers a business degree. In recent years, the program has achieved international accreditation which allows for more international opportunities. These opportunities include a two-week course in China, a semester abroad in Austria or France, International destinations for the final consulting trip, as well as many international internship opportunities. Education (B.Ed.)[edit] Laurentian has both English and French language education programs for teacher training. École des sciences de l’Éducation (Consecutive Education, French)[edit] In the Alphonse Raymond building, at the east end of campus, is the school École des sciences de l’éducation de l’Université Laurentienne. Named after Father Alphonse Raymond, and opened in 1974, the building houses classrooms, a cafeteria, an auditorium, a small gymnasium, and offices for more than a dozen professors, offering a variety of programs. The school offers a traditional consecutive post-grad Bachelor of Education, a newer concurrent Bachelor of Arts Education degree that can be taken full or part-time, the possibility of engaging in studies online, and the chance for certified teachers to complete additional qualifications.[citation needed] Bachelor of Education students who attend the institution must complete 50 days of practicum placement focusing on observation and practice teaching. The program provides many of the French-speaking teachers who work in Ontario's publicly funded education system, particularly in schools located in the northeastern section of the province.[citation needed] School of Education (Concurrent Education, English)[edit] In September 2003, Laurentian began offering an English Bachelor of Education. This concurrent B.Ed. is a five-year program taken at the same time — concurrently — with an undergraduate degree commonly in Arts, Sciences or Sport and Physical Education. The primary goal of the English-language Bachelor of Education program is to foster the development of a new generation of reflective educators who employ holistic teaching approaches. The curriculum features an emphasis on equity and diversity as well as the infusion of aboriginal issues and content. At the moment, the program is offered in just two of the three areas of potential concentration: the primary/junior and junior/intermediate divisions. A new School of Education building - based on sustainable environmental principles and located across from L'École des sciences at the east end of the campus – was completed in the summer of 2008. The program requires a 75% average over one's first four years in order to progress to the final (or Pro Year). The 75% minimum average required for entry in the final year means a nearly 80% entering grade in reality, so the annual Pro Year class (ranging from about 65 to 95 students) constitutes a rather elite cohort compared to most other Ontario concurrent programs. Many graduates have gone on to employment with both the local Sudbury boards, with other school boards across Ontario, while many others have acquired employment in Alberta, B.C., and Saskatchewan, with a significant number working overseas (particularly in Britain). Federated schools[edit] Huntington University Huntington University Northern Ontario School of Medicine (in partnership with Lakehead University) Université de Hearst Thorneloe University University of Sudbury Nipissing University in North Bay and Algoma University in Sault Ste. Marie, both now independent universities, were federated schools of Laurentian. Laurentian's Bachelor of Science in Nursing program is also taught in colleges across Ontario as part of one of three agreements between colleges and the university. Graduates of these collaborate programs receive Laurentian degrees upon graduation. The Northeastern Ontario Collaborative Nursing Program (NEOCNP) is a partnership between Laurentian University, Cambrian College, Northern College, and Sault College. St. Lawrence College offers Laurentian's Nursing Program through an agreement called the Laurentian–St. Lawrence Collaborative Nursing Program. Finally, Collège Boréal provides the Nursing program through an agreement with Laurentian University's French-language "sciences infirmières" program. St. Lawrence College also offers Laurentian's Bachelor of Business degree, a four-year program. Research centres[edit] Science buildings Association francophone pour le savoir (ACFAS) Centre for Excellence in Mining Innovation (CEMI) Centre in Mining Materials Research (CIMMR) Centre for Research and Human Development (CRHD) Centre for Research in Occupational Safety and Health (CROSH) Centre for Rural and Northern Health Research (CRaNHR) Cooperative Freshwater Ecology Unit (CFEU) Elliot Lake Research Field Station (ELRFS) Geomechanics Research Centre (GRC) Institut Franco-Ontarien (IFO) Institute of Northern Ontario Research and Development (INORD) Laurentian University Mining Automation Laboratory (LUMAL) Mineral Exploration Research Centre (MERC) Mining Innovation, Rehabilitation and Applied Research Corporation (MIRARCO) Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) [34] Student life[edit] 'Demographics of student body (2015–16) Undergraduate Graduate Male 37.5% 35.1% Female 62.5% 64.9% Canadian student 94.5% 87.3% International student 5.5% 12.7% Students' General Association/Association Générale des Étudiants[edit] The SGA-AGÉ is the largest student union at Laurentian, with around 5100 students. It offers services in both English and French, although in recent years the English services have become predominant. The association is presided over by a board of directors consisting of representatives of each of the academic departments and residences, as well as commissioners representing groups within the school (francophone, aboriginal, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender, international students, women, cultural affairs and special needs), three university senators and the executive. The staff of the association, some of whom are part-time, included the president, two vice presidents, one for policy and advocacy, and one for student life, a Chief Returning Officer during the election campaign, the editor of Lambda, the director of CKLU, the manager of Pub Down Under and the manager of the games room. In 2016, the SGA-AGE became a member of the Ontario Undergraduate Student Alliance. Media[edit] The university's campus radio station, CKLU-FM, broadcasts at FM 96.7 in both English and French. Its campus newspapers are Lambda in English and L'Orignal déchaîné ("The Unchained Moose") in French. Lambda is a member of Canadian University Press, and CKLU is a member of the National Campus and Community Radio Association.[35] Sports[edit] Laurentian Voyageurs logo Voyageurs' women's hockey team 2013–14 Voyageurs' women's hockey team 2013–14 The university's varsity teams, known as the Voyageurs for the men's teams and the Lady Vees for the women's teams, compete in basketball,[36] soccer, rowing, swimming, cross-country running, golf, curling, and Nordic skiing. There are also competitive club teams including lacrosse and a plethora of intramural sports programmes. The Lady Vees basketball team have been one of the most successful franchises in the history of the U Sports Women's Basketball Championship, winning the title seven times. Notable alumnae of the basketball team include broadcaster Sylvia Sweeney. The varsity rowing team within its five-year history has produced a national team athlete and captured medals at both the OUA championships as well as gold medals at the Canadian University Rowing Championships. In 2017, the women's varsity curling team, consisting of Krysta Burns, Megan Smith, Sara Guy, and Laura Masters, captured the OUA Curling Championship (the first for the program and first OUA team banner for the University since 2003) followed by the Curling Canada/USports Championship (the first for the program and first USports team banner for the University since 1991). The Voyageurs' women's team (consisting of Kira Brunton, Megan Smith, Alyssa Denyer, Mikaela Cheslock, and Emma Johnston) followed-up their 2017 USports' victory with a second national USports title during the 2018–19 curling season. The current director of the athletic department is Peter Hellstrom. Pipe band[edit] LUPB bagpipers in Laurentian tartan at Sudbury Celtic Festival, May 2011; blue/green/gold kilts in front row The Laurentian University Pipe Band (LUPB) was launched during spring convocation in May, 2007. Laurentian is one of the first schools (after Queen's University) to design its own tartan (registered in the tartan index) and the third post-secondary institution in Ontario to have its own pipe band (along with Queen's and the Royal Military College). Membership includes Laurentian and Northern Ontario School of Medicine students, alumni, and non-affiliated community members. The band complement includes bagpipes, snare, tenor, and bass drums as well as a highland dancing troupe. The band is managed by an executive council, and musical instruction (including repertoire development) is conducted by the pipe major and drum major. Practices are typically held weekly during the academic year with breaks during holidays and the summer.[37] Campus[edit] The R.D. Parker Building Fraser Auditorium[edit] The Fraser Auditorium in the Fraser Building is a large-volume auditorium and is regularly used for the larger first-year classes, seating up to 669 people.[38] When used as a classroom, the Fraser Auditorium is divided into three smaller sections. The Fraser Auditorium is also used for special events and conferences, and for convocation ceremonies, held within the auditorium each spring. The Fraser Auditorium has hosted the Falconbridge Lecture Series hosting such guests as Chief Justice Beverley McLachlin, and Senator Roméo Dallaire (March 2006). The auditorium also sometimes hosts cultural events, such as theatre and concert performances, and was the original home of the city's Théâtre du Nouvel-Ontario and Sudbury Theatre Centre. Ben Avery[edit] The Ben Avery is the sports building on campus .It has a weight and cardiovascular room, an IAAF eight-lane 400 metres (1,300 ft) Mondo track (2010) that complements the sport fields with seating for 5000, a four-lane indoor track, a rock climbing wall, a bouldering room, an Olympic size swimming pool with high rise diving boards, squash courts, basketball courts, badminton nets, and the home of the pot-banging cheer club. Many students write their final exams in the Ben Avery's Varsity Gym. Beach[edit] The university owns over 765 acres (310 ha) of land, including a private beach. There are five freshwater lakes in the immediate campus area. School and residence activities are held at the beach year round. The beach is a 15-minute or less walk from all of the residences. Residences[edit] The Laurentian Residences offers five unique residences under the supervision of the main campus and three located at the main campus under the supervision of the federated colleges. Single Student Residence[edit] The Single Student Residence (SSR) is an apartment style complex, with apartment units for 4–6 residents, containing a living room, kitchen, and washrooms. The entire complex includes rooms for 387 students in 72 apartments. Student Street, consisting of a convenience store, computer room, mail room, snack bar, and games room, among other rooms and services, is located at the bottom of the SSR complex. A $5.9 million renovation of the residence began in 2013.[39] University College Residence[edit] The University College Residence (UC) is a ten-storey co-ed building with single and double (shared) rooms, providing accommodations for 240 students. University College is also connected to Student Street, giving students access to the same amenities available to SSR students. Married/Mature Student Residence[edit] The Mature Student Residence (MSR) offers furnished apartments for those who have accumulated over 90 university credits. The residence is generally thought of as the quietest at Laurentian. Rooms consist of one bedroom, a living room, bathroom and kitchen. The West Residence[edit] This is a new residence completed in 2007. It is designed for students who have spent at least two years at the university and obtained a minimum of at least 60 credits. The residence consists of same sex apartment style rooms and cost $14.5 million CAD. Thorneloe Residence[edit] The Thorneloe University College Residence provides accommodations for 58 students. This residence offers large kitchens, a sauna, and common rooms. In 2004 the former administrative offices were transformed into a suite for four students. Thorneloe University College, although founded by the Anglican Diocese of Algoma, welcomes all students at Laurentian. University of Sudbury[edit] Main article: University of Sudbury The University of Sudbury Lucien Matte Residence houses 174 students in 92 single and 41 double bedrooms. The University of Sudbury, although associated with the Roman Catholic Church, welcomes those of all religions. Huntington University[edit] Main article: Huntington University, Ontario Huntington Residence houses 184 students in dorm-style rooms. Kitchens and TV lounges are present on both floors. The residence is located with the Academic complex which includes classrooms and a library. Huntington University is affiliated with the United Church of Canada, but does not require religious affiliation East Residence[edit] This is the newest residence on campus, completed for the 2012–2013 school year. This is a 12-story residence building and is for upper-year students (minimum 60 university credits) and has 62 self-contained apartments. Each unit has three or four single bedrooms, living room, kitchen and two bathrooms. The apartments are wired for cable TV, high-speed internet and telephone. In addition, this new residence is connected to Student Street.[40] Notable alumni[edit] Former Laurentian University logo Rick Bartolucci Alex Baumann Michel Bock Minnijean Brown-Trickey Carlo Cattarello Leo Gerard Mike Harris Diane Marleau Elie Martel Tony Martin Sharon Murdock André Paiement Marie-Paule Poulin Tony Ruprecht Dave Salmoni Rosemary Sexton Derwyn Shea John Sola Sylvia Sweeney Shawn Swords Stephen Walkom John Willinsky Akolisa Ufodike Gary Wilson Noted faculty[edit] Frank F. Mallory (biology) – prolific author in the field of mammalian biology, in particular lemmings, wolves, coyotes, and black bears[41] Lorenzo Cadieux (history) – Jesuit priest, historian, and founder of Société historique du Nouvel-Ontario Robert Dickson (études françaises) – recipient of the 2002 Governor General's Award for French language poetry Fernand Dorais (études françaises) – founder of the Théâtre du Nouvel-Ontario Rand Dyck (political science) – author of Canadian Politics: Critical Approaches, now in 6th Edition Harold Gibson (geology) – recipient of 1992 William Harvey Gross Medal and 2012 Duncan Ramsay Derry Medal of the Mineral Deposits Division of the Geological Association of Canada J. F. Hendry (English) – poet Shannon E. Hengen (English) – literary critic Gary Kinsman (sociology) – Canadian academic leader on lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender issues C. Michael Lesher (geology) – recipient of 2007 Duncan Ramsay Derry Medal of the Mineral Deposits Division of the Geological Association of Canada Lucien Matte – Jesuit priest and educator Melchior Mbonimpa - religious studies professor and novelist Graeme S. Mount (history) – prolific author on international relations Roger Nash (philosophy) – award-winning poet and philosopher Alan Nursall (science communication) – host of Daily Planet and The Alan Nursall Experience on Discovery Channel B. P. Paquette (Thornloe) – multiple award-winning filmmaker David Pearson (geology and science communication) – recipient of 2001 Ward Neale Medal from the Geological Association of Canada, 2003 McNeil Medal from the Royal Society of Canada, and appointed to the Order of Ontario in 2016[42] Michael Persinger (psychology) – neuroscientist and recipient of 2007 IFT (Leader in Faculty Teaching) award and 2007 TVO (Ontario) Best Lecturer award Luis Radford (education) – recipient of 2011 Hans Freudenthal Medal Gregory Scofield - poet Adam Sol – Canadian American poet See also[edit] List of Ontario universities Ontario Student Assistance Program Higher education in Ontario U Sports Canadian government scientific research organizations Canadian university scientific research organizations Canadian industrial research and development organizations References[edit] ^ Pound, Richard W. (2005). 'Fitzhenry and Whiteside Book of Canadian Facts and Dates'. Fitzhenry and Whiteside. ^ "Profile of Laurentian University of Sudbury - Ontario, Universities in Canada". canadian-universities.net. Retrieved 2017-05-23. ^ "Laurentian University, key school for northern Ontario, files for creditor protection". CBC News Sudbury. Retrieved 2021-02-01. ^ "Laurentian University files for creditor protection; former Queen's Provost appointed as special advisor". YGK News. ^ https://www.laurentianu.info/program-closures/ ^ https://dailynous.com/2021/04/12/devastating-cuts-laurentian-university-philosophy-other-programs/ ^ https://northernontario.ctvnews.ca/mathematics-physics-music-among-dozens-of-program-cuts-at-laurentian-university-1.5384348 ^ https://dailynous.com/2021/04/12/devastating-cuts-laurentian-university-philosophy-other-programs/ ^ https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-laurentian-professors-in-precarious-spot-as-university-navigates/ ^ https://www.sudbury.com/local-news/black-monday-dozens-of-laurentian-faculty-staff-terminated-today-amid-restructuring-3624770 ^ "Directional map". Conservation Sudbury. Retrieved March 17, 2019. ^ "About". Laurentian Nordic Ski Club. Retrieved 29 March 2018. ^ "BioSki Cross-Country & Snowshoe Club". www.bioski.ca. Retrieved 29 March 2018. ^ a b c "Laurentian University - Université Laurentienne". The Canadian Encyclopedia. Retrieved August 22, 2019. ^ a b "History of Laurentian University". Laurentian University. Retrieved 2016-01-18. ^ "Laurentian University of Sudbury". Ontario Heritage Trust. Retrieved March 17, 2019. ^ "Laurentian University shutting down Barrie campus". CBC News. 12 February 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2019. ^ "Architecture school planned for Sudbury’s Laurentian University". Toronto Star, May 24, 2011. ^ "Laurentian University, key school for northern Ontario, files for creditor protection". CBC News Sudbury. Retrieved 2021-02-01. ^ "Laurentian University files for creditor protection; former Queen's Provost appointed as special advisor". YGK News. ^ Jim Moody, "Anxious times at Laurentian University". Sudbury Star, April 6, 2021. ^ https://www.laurentianu.info/program-closures/ ^ https://dailynous.com/2021/04/12/devastating-cuts-laurentian-university-philosophy-other-programs/ ^ https://northernontario.ctvnews.ca/mathematics-physics-music-among-dozens-of-program-cuts-at-laurentian-university-1.5384348 ^ https://dailynous.com/2021/04/12/devastating-cuts-laurentian-university-philosophy-other-programs/ ^ https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-laurentian-professors-in-precarious-spot-as-university-navigates/ ^ Lindsay Kelly (July 16, 2018). "Mining-polluted water a potential source of antibiotics University Research reveals links between algae and health benefits". Northern Life. ^ "Aline Chrétien named first chancellor of Laurentian University". Toronto Star, September 22, 2010. ^ "'All hands on deck' for leadership, says TVO host". Northern Life, October 25, 2013. ^ $3M boost for LU building Sudbury Star, October 26, 2016. ^ "Dominic Giroux to leave Laurentian University for CEO's job at Health Sciences North". CBC News, Apr 26, 2017 ^ a b "Best Global Universities in Canada". U.S. News & World Report. U.S. News & World Report, L.P. 19 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. ^ "Canada's best Primarily Undergraduate universities: Rankings 2021". Maclean's. Rogers Media. 8 October 2020. Retrieved 9 October 2020. ^ "Laurentian University tops in research funding among undergraduate universities". CBC News · Mar 19, 2018 ^ "CKLU 96.7FM: LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY CAMPUS & COMMUNITY RADIO, SUDBURY". www.cklu.ca. Retrieved 2016-01-19. ^ "Laurentian athletics: Colarossi and Co. in Calgary, men's basketball in Costa Rica". Sudbury Star, Ben Leeson, August 8, 2018 ^ "Fulfilling their pipe dreams". Northern LifeJan 13, 2015 by: Heidi Ulrichsen ^ "Sudbury Ontario Entertainment Venues information & listings". sudbury.foundlocally.com. Retrieved 2016-01-17. ^ "LU res receives $5.9 million makeover" Northern Life (newspaper) July 09, 2013 ^ "New residence caters to students' comfort". Northern Life (newspaper), August 30, 2012 ^ "Sudbury prof's work could save millions". Sudbury Star, by Carol Mulligan August 11, 2013 ^ Science North founding director appointed to Order of Ontario, Northern Life, December 14, 2016. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Official website Alumni@Laurentian Linda McGuire Ambrose (October 2010). Laurentian University: A History. McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP. ISBN 978-0-7735-3772-9. v t e Post-secondary education in Ontario Degree-granting institutions Public universities[1] Algoma Brock Carleton Guelph Lakehead Laurentian/Laurentienne* Laurier McMaster Nipissing OCAD Ontario Tech Ottawa* Queen's RMC/CMR* Ryerson Toronto Trent UOF‡ Waterloo Western Windsor York Private universities[2] Baptist Bible College Canada Canada Christian Emmanuel FaithWay Baptist Great Lakes Heritage Institute for Advanced Judaic Studies Institute for Christian Studies Maimonides Master's Our Lady Seat of Wisdom Redeemer St. Philip's Talpiot Toronto Baptist Tyndale Yeshivas Ner Yisroel Public universities grant degrees under the authority of an Act of the Legislative Assembly or a Royal Charter.[3] Private universities grant degrees under the authority of an Act of the Legislative Assembly or may provide individual degree programs with the consent of the Minister of Training, Colleges and Universities.[4] Degree programs offered under Ministerial Consent Adler Toronto CCNM CMCC Glenn Gould RCC Affiliated/federated schools Assumption Brescia Canterbury Concordia Conrad Grebel Dominican/Dominicain* Glendon* Hearst‡ Huntington Huron Iona King's Martin Luther OAC Renison Saint Paul* St. Jerome's St. Paul's Sudbury* Thorneloe ‡French-language institution; *bilingual institution (English/French).[5] Colleges Colleges of Applied Arts and Technology Algonquin† Boréal‡ Cambrian† Canadore Centennial† Confederation† Durham Fanshawe† Fleming† George Brown† Georgian† La Cité†‡ Lambton† Loyalist† Mohawk† Niagara† Northern St. Clair† St. Lawrence† Sault Seneca† Institutes of Technology and Advanced Learning Conestoga† Humber† Sheridan† Defunct Grands-Lacs‡ †Degree programs offered. ‡French-language institution.[5] Other recognized institutions Specialist institutions Michener Institute Aboriginal institutes Anishinabek FNTI Kenjgewin Teg Iohahi:io Akwesasne Negahneewin Ogwehoweh Oshki-Pimache-O-Win Seven Generations Shingwauk Kinoomaage Gamig Six Nations Polytechnic v t e Distance education in Canada Public post-secondary Athabasca University Carleton University Laurentian University Memorial University of Newfoundland Mount Royal University Royal Military College of Canada Royal Roads University Université TÉLUQ Thompson Rivers University University of Manitoba University of New Brunswick Private post-secondary University of Fredericton Yorkville University Public K–12 Alberta Distance Learning Centre Centre for Distance Learning and Innovation Contact North Fraser Valley Distance Education School Independent Learning Centre North Coast Distance Education School South Central Interior Distance Education School South Island Distance Education School Vancouver Learning Network Virtual School BC VLearn Distributed Learning Private K–12 BC Online School Future School Ottawa Carleton E-School Virtual High School Defunct institutions Canadian Virtual University Lansbridge University Meritus University v t e Sports teams based in Ontario Australian football AFLO Central Blues Etobicoke Kangaroos Grand River Gargoyles Hamilton Wildcats High Park Demons Ottawa Swans Toronto Downtown Dingos Toronto Eagles Toronto Rebels Baseball MLB Toronto Blue Jays Frontier League Ottawa Titans IBL Barrie Baycats Brantford Red Sox Guelph Royals Hamilton Cardinals Kitchener Panthers London Majors Toronto Maple Leafs Welland Jackfish Basketball NBA Toronto Raptors NBA G League Raptors 905 NBL KW Titans London Lightning Sudbury Five Windsor Express CEBL Niagara River Lions Hamilton Honey Badgers Guelph Nighthawks Ottawa Blackjacks Esports CDL Toronto Ultra OWL Toronto Defiant Football CFL Hamilton Tiger-Cats Ottawa Redblacks Toronto Argonauts CJFL GTA Grizzlies Hamilton Hurricanes London Beefeaters Niagara Raiders Ottawa Sooners St. Clair Fratmen QJFL Cumberland Panthers Ottawa Junior Riders Ice hockey NHL Ottawa Senators Toronto Maple Leafs AHL Belleville Senators Toronto Marlies NWHL Toronto Six OHL Barrie Colts Belleville Bulls Guelph Storm Hamilton Bulldogs Kingston Frontenacs Kitchener Rangers London Knights Mississauga Steelheads Niagara IceDogs North Bay Battalion Oshawa Generals Ottawa 67's Owen Sound Attack Peterborough Petes Sarnia Sting Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds Sudbury Wolves Windsor Spitfires Other Junior Leagues CCHL CCHL2 CPJHL GMHL GOJHL LJHL NOJHL OJHL PJHL SIJHL Lacrosse NLL Toronto Rock Roller derby WFTDA Forest City Roller Derby Hammer City Roller Derby Hogtown Roller Derby Ottawa Valley Roller Derby Renegade Derby Dames Royal City Roller Derby Toronto Roller Derby Tri-City Roller Derby Windsor Roller Derby Rugby league RFL Ottawa Aces Rugby union MLR Toronto Arrows NWL Ontario Ontario U23 Ontario U20 Ringette NRL Cambridge Turbos 5 others Soccer MLS Toronto FC CPL Atlético Ottawa Forge FC York United FC USL1 Toronto FC II USL2 Thunder Bay Chill L1O 1812 FC Barrie Alliance United Blue Devils FC Darby FC FC London Guelph United F.C. Hamilton United Master's FA North Mississauga SC North Toronto Nitros Pickering FC ProStars FC Scrosoppi FC Sigma FC St. Catharines Roma Wolves Toronto Skillz FC Unionville Milliken SC Vaughan Azzurri Waterloo United Windsor TFC Woodbridge Strikers L1OW FC Oshawa Guelph Union Tecumseh SC PLSQ Ottawa South United CSL Brantford Galaxy Halton United FC Ukraine United FC Vorkuta Hamilton City SC Milton SC Scarborough SC SC Waterloo Region Serbian White Eagles Swimming ISL Toronto Titans Ultimate AUDL Ottawa Outlaws Toronto Rush U Sports Brock Badgers Carleton Ravens Guelph Gryphons Lakehead Thunderwolves Laurentian Voyageurs (Men's)/Lady Vees (Women's) McMaster Marauders Nipissing Lakers UOIT Ridgebacks Ottawa Gee-Gees Queen's Golden Gaels Royal Military College Paladins Ryerson Rams Trent Excalibur Toronto Varsity Blues Waterloo Warriors Western Mustangs Wilfrid Laurier Golden Hawks Windsor Lancers York Lions v t e U Sports men's ice hockey Atlantic University Sport Acadia Axemen Dalhousie Tigers Moncton Aigles Bleus St. Francis Xavier X-Men Saint Mary's Huskies UNB Reds UPEI Panthers Canada West Alberta Golden Bears Calgary Dinos MacEwan Griffins Manitoba Bisons Mount Royal Cougars Regina Cougars Saskatchewan Huskies Trinity Western Spartans UBC Thunderbirds Ontario University Athletics West Brock Badgers Guelph Gryphons Lakehead Thunderwolves Ryerson Rams Toronto Varsity Blues Waterloo Warriors Western Mustangs Wilfrid Laurier Golden Hawks Windsor Lancers York Lions East Carleton Ravens Concordia Stingers Laurentian Voyageurs McGill Redbirds Nipissing Lakers Ottawa Gee-Gees Queen's Gaels RMC Paladins Ontario Tech Ridgebacks UQTR Patriotes Championships David Johnston University Cup 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Queen's Cup (OUA) Awards Senator Joseph A. Sullivan Trophy U Sports Defenceman of the Year Clare Drake Award Dr. Randy Gregg Award Major W.J. "Danny" McLeod Award Canada West University Hockey Awards Lieutenant Governor Athletic Awards Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125