2015 video game Lego Dimensions PlayStation 4 starter pack box art Developer(s) Traveller's Tales Publisher(s) Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Director(s) Jon Burton James McLoughlin Producer(s) Anna Bailey Toby Jennings Designer(s) Jon Burton Dewi Roberts Programmer(s) Steve Harding Chris Stanforth Alistair Crowe Ben Klages Artist(s) Jeremy Pardon Leon Warren Paul Munro Writer(s) Jon Burton Graham Goring James McLoughlin Composer(s) Ian Livingstone Platform(s) PlayStation 3 PlayStation 4 Wii U Xbox 360 Xbox One Release NA: September 27, 2015 EU: September 29, 2015 JP: March 12, 2017 Genre(s) Action-adventure Mode(s) Single-player, multiplayer Lego Dimensions is a Lego-themed action-adventure crossover video game developed by Traveller's Tales and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment, for the PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Wii U, Xbox One and Xbox 360. It follows the toys-to-life format, in that the player has Lego figures and a toy pad that can be played within the game itself where it features characters and environments from over 30 different franchises.[1][2] The Starter Pack, containing the game, the USB toy pad, and three minifigures, was released in September 2015, while additional level packs and characters were released over the following two years. A third year of content was planned, but was cancelled in October 2017.[3][4] Contents 1 Gameplay 2 Plot 2.1 Franchises 3 Packs 3.1 Starter Pack 3.2 Story packs 3.3 Level packs 3.4 Team packs 3.5 Fun packs 3.6 Polybags 4 Reception 4.1 Sales 4.2 Awards 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Gameplay[edit] Lego Dimensions features the same style of gameplay as the previous Lego video games developed by Traveller's Tales, in which up to two players control Lego minifigures based on various represented franchises. Players progress through linear levels, using their characters' abilities to solve puzzles, defeat enemies, and attempt to reach the level's end. Characters are entered into the game by placing their respective minifigures onto a USB toy pad, with each character possessing unique abilities that can be used to solve puzzles or reach hidden areas. Using a character from a certain franchise will also unlock that franchise's Adventure World, an open-world area for players to explore and complete in-game objectives. The Starter Pack includes the toy pad and the game's 14-level main story campaign, which revolves around Batman, Gandalf, and Wyldstyle, while additional levels are made available by purchasing Level Packs and Story Packs. In addition to the minifigures, players can also build models of vehicles, such as the Batmobile, TARDIS, Mystery Machine, or DeLorean, and put them into the game for characters to drive. Completing objectives in the levels and adventure worlds will reward players with gold bricks, which can be used to upgrade vehicles and give them new abilities. Each adventure world also contains a red brick for players to retrieve; these will unlock special bonuses, such as visual modifiers for characters or extra assistance at finding collectible items. Unlike series such as Skylanders, Disney Infinity, and Amiibo, the minifigures, vehicles, and the USB toy pad are all made from real Lego pieces and can be freely built and customized. All minifigures and vehicles can be used in any available level, though specific figures must be present to initially enter those levels or worlds. An additional feature called "Hire a Hero" was added shortly after the game's launch; this feature allows players to pay in-game currency to temporarily summon characters they do not own in order to complete an otherwise-inaccessible puzzle. The game's second year of content also introduced competitive multiplayer in the form of the Battle Arenas, allowing up to four players to compete in modes such as Capture the Flag. Gold bricks can be used to purchase new power-ups for the Battle Arenas. Certain packs also include exclusive features; for example, the Midway Arcade level pack unlocks playable emulations of over 20 Midway arcade titles, while the Teen Titans Go! packs unlock an exclusive Lego-themed episode of the series that can be viewed in-game.[5][6] Plot[edit] Arriving on Foundation Prime, a planet located in the center of the Lego multiverse, Lord Vortech (Gary Oldman), a being who has the power to shapeshift and travel through dimensions, and his robotic minion X-PO (Joel McHale) seek the twelve Foundation Elements, the cornerstones of time and space itself, in a bid to merge all the dimensions into one under Vortech's control. These Elements, such as the Ruby Slippers, the One Ring, the Flux capacitor, the Palantir, and Kryptonite, were scattered across the dimensions long ago, but gathered together at Foundation Prime can unlock the power to control all of the dimensions. When X-PO voices his doubts of Vortech's evil plan (as it is too dangerous to harness the Elements safely), Vortech decides that he no longer needs him and banishes him to the dimensional void Vorton. Unfortunately for Vortech, his own body cannot handle too many more dimensional jumps, forcing him to open vortexes to the different dimensions and recruits their villains to help him search for the Elements while imprisoning the heroes pulled through them. These actions damage the boundaries between the dimensions, causing them to merge and characters to be displaced. When Robin (Scott Menville), Frodo (Elijah Wood), and MetalBeard (Nick Offerman) are pulled into the vortexes, each unknowingly in possession of one of the Elements, Batman (Troy Baker), Gandalf the Grey (Tom Kane), and Wyldstyle (Elizabeth Banks) all jump in after them. The three get pulled into the same vortex and appear on Vorton, where the vortex generator they came out of explodes, prompting them to rebuild it. Aided by X-PO, the three use the generator to travel through the dimensions and search for the Foundation Elements and the five missing Keystones that power the generator (Shift, Chroma, Elemental Phase, Scale, and Locate) hoping to find their missing friends and stop Vortech's plan from succeeding in the process. Along their journey, they meet and assist the various heroes of the dimensions they visit, such as Dorothy Gale (Laura Bailey), Homer Simpson (Dan Castellaneta), Dr. Emmett Brown (Christopher Lloyd), Wheatley (Stephen Merchant), and Scooby-Doo (Frank Welker) while fighting numerous villains, including the Wicked Witch of the West (Courtenay Taylor), Lord Business (Nolan North), the Joker (Christopher Corey Smith), Master Chen (William Salyers), Saruman the White (Roger L. Jackson), Daleks (Nicholas Briggs), Lex Luthor (Travis Willingham), the Riddler (Roger Craig Smith), Two-Face (Troy Baker), Sauron (Steve Blum), General Zod (Nolan North), as well as Vortech himself in 1885 Hill Valley and a haunted circus. However, Vortech eventually realizes that X-PO is helping them. The heroes travel to Foundation Prime to find their friends and fight Vortech, but it turns out to be a diversion, allowing the villains to ambush X-PO and retrieve the trio's Foundation Elements in their absence. With all of the Elements collected, Vortech unlocks the foundation of all the dimensions, a green Lego building plate, and is imbued with near-unlimited power. He merges Robin, Frodo, MetalBeard, and a piece of himself into a giant robot mutant known as the Tri, (Menville, Wood, and Offerman) and sends it to wreak havoc on the trio's worlds. Fearing that a failure could lead to a transformation into a similar mutant, the villains bail out on Vortech. The heroes free their friends from inside the Tri and destroy the Vortech piece, causing it to implode. After the Tri's defeat, Batman realizes that they will need all the help they can get to defeat Vortech, leading them to recruit the Twelfth Doctor (Peter Capaldi), Mystery Inc., the Ghostbusters, the space ship Defender, and GLaDOS (Ellen McLain) to their cause. While the Doctor, GLaDOS, and X-PO work on a plan to seal Vortech in a rift loop, the heroes head to Foundation Prime, fighting him along the way. With their allies' help, they are able to destroy the Lego plate, which causes Foundation Prime's palace to collapse, infuriating Vortech. He grows to an enormous size and attacks the trio, but the Doctor is able to manipulate the portal technology and sucks all of them into a rift loop. Using a special device he, GLaDOS, and X-PO designed, the heroes are able to seal Vortech in an endless rift prison for all eternity, saving the multiverse. In a post-credits scene, an unknown figure finds a piece of Vortech's body in the remains of Foundation Prime's palace. He picks it up and instantly becomes corrupted, yelling in pain as he converts into a Vorton being. Vortech's laughter is heard as the scene fades out, suggesting that the figure has been transformed into another version of Vortech. Franchises[edit] The game features characters and worlds from thirty different franchises, consisting of:[7] The A-Team Adventure Time Back to the Future Beetlejuice DC Comics Doctor Who E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Ghostbusters Ghostbusters (2016) The Goonies Gremlins Harry Potter Jurassic World Knight Rider Legends of Chima Lego City (based on the Lego City Undercover video game) The Lego Batman Movie The Lego Movie The Lord of the Rings Midway Arcade Mission: Impossible Ninjago Portal The Powerpuff Girls Scooby-Doo The Simpsons Sonic the Hedgehog Teen Titans Go! The Wizard of Oz The game also features character and setting cameos from other franchises, including HAL 9000 from the Space Odyssey series, S.T.A.R. Labs from CW's The Flash, Bedrock from The Flintstones, the family room from The Jetsons, and the DNA ship from Red Dwarf.[8] Unlike other toys-to-life series such as Skylanders and Disney Infinity, Lego Dimensions allows all figures to be compatible with the existing title, rather than releasing a sequel.[9][10] Packs[edit] In addition to the game's starter pack, Lego Dimensions has a wide range of packs available, split into four categories: story packs, level packs, team packs, and fun packs. Packs from the game's second year (September 2016–17) also unlock Adventure World Battle Arenas, competitive four-person multiplayer areas themed after each figure's respective franchise.[11] Starter Pack[edit] Pack name Contents Release date Lego Dimensions Starter Pack Lego Dimensions video game 27 September 2015 (North America) 28 September 2015 (Australia) 29 September 2015 (Europe) Lego Toy Pad Lego Gateway Batman (from DC Comics)[a] Gandalf (from The Lord Of The Rings) Wyldstyle (from The Lego Movie) Batmobile Story packs[edit] Story packs add six new levels to the game based on the represented franchise; these levels retell the story of their respective film, with characters from other franchises making occasional appearances. The packs also include one or two characters, a vehicle or gadget, and a new gateway design for the toy pad. Story packs each also unlock a new keystone for the portal, providing additional abilities. Franchise Pack name Contents Release date Ghostbusters Ghostbusters Story Pack Abby Yates[b] 27 September 2016 Ecto-1 Zhu's Chinese Restaurant Six additional Ghostbusters levels Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Story Pack Newt Scamander[c] 18 November 2016 Niffler MACUSA Six additional Fantastic Beasts levels The Lego Batman Movie The Lego Batman Movie Story Pack Robin[d] 10 February 2017[12] Batgirl Batwing Bat Computer Six additional The Lego Batman Movie levels Level packs[edit] Level packs contain a character with two items, which are either vehicles or gadgets, along with a new level to play in, based on the represented character's franchise. Franchise Pack name Contents Release date Back to the Future Back to the Future Level Pack Marty McFly 27 September 2015 DeLorean Time Machine Hoverboard Back to the Future Portal 2[13] Portal 2 Level Pack Chell Companion Cube Sentry Turret Aperture Science The Simpsons[13] The Simpsons Level Pack Homer Simpson Homer's Car Taunt-o-Vision The Mysterious Voyage of Homer Doctor Who[13] Doctor Who Level Pack Twelfth Doctor[e] 3 November 2015[15] TARDIS K-9 The Dalek Extermination of Earth Ghostbusters Ghostbusters Level Pack Peter Venkman[f] 19 January 2016 Ecto-1 Ghost Trap Ghostbusters Midway Arcade[17] Midway Arcade Level Pack Gamer Kid[18] 15 March 2016 Arcade Machine G-6155 Spy Hunter Retro Wreckage[18] Adventure Time Adventure Time Level Pack Finn the Human[g] 27 September 2016 Jakemobile Ancient War Elephant A Book and a Bad Guy Mission: Impossible Mission: Impossible Level Pack Ethan Hunt IMF Scrambler IMF Sport Car Mission: Impossible Sonic the Hedgehog Sonic the Hedgehog Level Pack Sonic the Hedgehog 18 November 2016 Sonic Speedster The Tornado Sonic Dimensions The Goonies The Goonies Level Pack Sloth[h] 9 May 2017 One-Eyed Willy's Pirate Ship Skeleton Organ The Goonies Team packs[edit] Team packs are similar to Fun packs except they contain two characters and a combination of two vehicles or gadgets, one for each character. Franchise Pack name Contents Release date Jurassic World[13] Jurassic World Team Pack Owen Grady 27 September 2015 ACU Trooper Velociraptor Gyrosphere Scooby-Doo[13] Scooby-Doo Team Pack Scooby-Doo Shaggy Mystery Machine Scooby Snack Lego Ninjago Lego Ninjago Team Pack Kai 3 November 2015 Cole Blade Bike Boulder Bomber DC Comics[19] DC Comics Team Pack The Joker 19 January 2016 Harley Quinn The Joker's Chopper Quinn-mobile Adventure Time Adventure Time Team Pack Jake the Dog 27 September 2016 Lumpy Space Princess BMO Lumpy Car Harry Potter Harry Potter Team Pack Harry Potter Lord Voldemort Enchanted Car Hogwarts Express Gremlins Gremlins Team Pack Gizmo 18 November 2016 Stripe R.C. Racer Flash 'n' Finish The Powerpuff Girls The Powerpuff Girls Team Pack Blossom 12 September 2017 Bubbles Octi PPG Smartphone Teen Titans Go! Teen Titans Go! Team Pack Beast Boy Raven Spellbook of Azarath T-Car Fun packs[edit] Fun packs each contain a character from a certain franchise and a gadget or vehicle to play with. Franchise Pack name Contents Release date The Lord of the Rings Gollum Fun Pack Gollum 27 September 2015[20][21] Shelob the Great Legolas Fun Pack Legolas Arrow Launcher Gimli Fun Pack Gimli Axe Chariot The Wizard of Oz Wicked Witch Fun Pack Wicked Witch Winged Monkey Lego Legends of Chima[13] Laval Fun Pack Laval 27 September 2015§ 3 November 2015 Mighty Lion Rider Cragger Fun Pack Cragger 27 September 2015 Swamp Skimmer Eris Fun Pack Eris Eagle Interceptor The Lego Movie Emmet Fun Pack Emmet Brickowski Emmet's Excavator Bad Cop Fun Pack Bad Cop Police Car Benny Fun Pack Benny Benny's Spaceship Unikitty Fun Pack Unikitty 3 November 2015 Cloud Cuckoo Car Lego Ninjago Jay Fun Pack Jay 27 September 2015§ 3 November 2015 Storm Fighter Nya Fun Pack Nya 27 September 2015 Samurai Mech Zane Fun Pack Zane NinjaCopter Sensei Wu Fun Pack Sensei Wu 19 January 2016[22] Flying White Dragon Lloyd Fun Pack Lloyd Garmadon 10 May 2016[23] Lloyd's Golden Dragon DC Comics Wonder Woman Fun Pack Wonder Woman 27 September 2015 Invisible Jet Cyborg Fun Pack Cyborg[i] Cyber-Guard Superman Fun Pack Superman 15 March 2016[24] Hover Pod Aquaman Fun Pack Aquaman Aqua Watercraft Bane Fun Pack Bane 10 May 2016 Drill Driver The Simpsons[13] Bart Simpson Fun Pack Bart Simpson 3 November 2015 Gravity Sprinter Krusty the Clown Fun Pack Krusty the Clown Clown Bike Back to the Future[19] Doc Brown Fun Pack Doc Brown 19 January 2016[15][25] Traveling Time Train Doctor Who[13] Cyberman Fun Pack Cyberman Dalek Ghostbusters Stay Puft Fun Pack Stay Puft Marshmallow Man 15 March 2016 Terror Dog Slimer Fun Pack Slimer 10 May 2016 Slime Shooter The A-Team A-Team Fun Pack B. A. Baracus[j] 27 September 2016 B.A.'s Van Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them Tina Fun Pack Tina Goldstein 18 November 2016 Swooping Evil E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial E.T. Fun Pack E.T. Phone Home Adventure Time Marceline Fun Pack Marceline the Vampire Queen 18 November 2016§ 10 February 2017 Lunatic Amp Knight Rider Knight Rider Fun Pack Michael Knight 10 February 2017† 21 March 2017 KITT The Lego Batman Movie Excalibur Batman Fun Pack Excalibur Batman 10 February 2017‡ 21 March 2017[26] Bionic Steed Lego City Lego City Fun Pack Chase McCain 9 May 2017 Police Helicopter Harry Potter Hermione Granger Fun Pack Hermione Granger Buckbeak Beetlejuice Beetlejuice Fun Pack Betelgeuse 12 September 2017 Saturn's Sandworm The Powerpuff Girls Buttercup Fun Pack Buttercup Mega Blast Bot Teen Titans Go! Starfire Fun Pack Starfire Titan Robot ^§ : Everywhere in all other countries and Toys "R" Us stores in U.S. only. ^† : Everywhere in all other countries and GameStop stores in U.S. only. ^‡ : Everywhere in all other countries and Target stores in U.S. only. Polybags[edit] Polybags are limited-edition releases of a single character figure, distributed only at events and via special offers. Franchise Pack name Release DC Comics Green Arrow Distributed via 2016 promotional events, Black Friday retail offers[27][28] Supergirl PlayStation 4 Starter Pack bundle (timed exclusive)[29] Reception[edit] Reception Aggregate score Aggregator Score Metacritic (PS4) 80/100[30] (XONE) 80/100[31] (Wii U) 80/100[32] Review scores Publication Score Destructoid 7.5/10 [33] Game Informer 8.75/10 [34] GameSpot 8/10 [35] Lego Dimensions received "generally favorable reviews", according to review aggregator Metacritic.[30][31][32] IGN awarded it a score of 7.7 out of 10, saying "Lego Dimensions' great characters and fun references consistently left me with a big dumb grin on my face."[36] GameSpot awarded it a score of 8.0, saying "In any game within the toys-to-life genre, there's sometimes an unspoken question: is this also a great toy or just a great game? In Lego Dimensions' case, the answer is easy: it's both." They also praised the open world sections of the game, stating that "While they don't feature the same level of intricacy the main game provides, they do add several more hours each to the overall experience."[35] Polygon awarded it 8 out of 10, saying "Where the game's innovative designs push forward what it means to blend toys and games into a single experience, the writing and both companies' willingness to dig deep into their vaults, pull the whole game together."[37] Good Game: Spawn Point Hosts Bajo and Hex both awarded the game 3 out of 5. Praise was given to the puzzles and mechanics, commenting that it may be their favourite LEGO game. However, they gave harsh criticism to the pricing model. Their summation was that it was "poor value", stating that the last few Lego games were "pretty much as good as this one", but players can play as their extensive character rosters without having to buy expensive expansions."[38] Sales[edit] In the UK and Ireland, Lego Dimensions landed at number 2 on the sales charts in its first week. Sales had surpassed in comparison to first week sales of other 2015 toys-to-life game competitors Skylanders: Superchargers and Disney Infinity 3.0.[39] Awards[edit] List of awards and nominations Award Category Result The Game Awards 2015 Best Family Game Nominated[40] British Academy of Film and Television Arts Game Won[41] Notes[edit] ^ He can transform into his DC Comics counterpart when he enters DC Comics World, and is playable permanently upon purchase of the "Always Batman" Red Brick, located in the Adventure World. ^ Upon completing the included levels, players can use the Abby Yates figure to also control the other three Ghostbusters (Erin Gilbert, Jillian Holtzmann and Patty Tolan) in the game. ^ Upon completing the included levels, players can use the Newt Scamander figure to also control Jacob Kowalski in the game. ^ He can transform into his Teen Titans Go! counterpart when he enters the Teen Titans Go! Adventure World. ^ All previous incarnations of the Doctor (including the War Doctor) are also playable. When players die they will regenerate, cycling from the First Doctor through to the Twelfth. Peter Capaldi reprised his role of the Twelfth Doctor, while the other twelve Doctors feature the voices of their respective actors via archive audio taken from the TV series. The interior of the TARDIS also change accordingly (e.g., the First and Second Doctor's console room is displayed in monochrome to match the black & white 1960s era).[14] ^ Upon completing the included level, players can use the Peter Venkman figure to also control the other three Ghostbusters (Ray Stantz, Egon Spengler, and Winston Zeddemore) in the game.[16] ^ Upon completing a specific objective in the Adventure Time world, players can use the Finn figure to also control Fern the Human in the game. ^ Upon completing the included level, players can use the Sloth figure to also control the other seven Goonies (Andy, Brand, Chunk, Data, Mikey, Mouth, and Stef) in the game. ^ He can transform into his Teen Titans Go! counterpart when he enters the Teen Titans Go! Adventure World. ^ Upon completing certain in-game tasks, players can use the B. A. Baracus figure to also control the other three A-Team members (John "Hannibal" Smith, Templeton Peck, Howling Mad Murdock) in the game. References[edit] ^ Narcisse, Evan (9 April 2015). "Lego Dimensions Announced, Uses Actual Lego Toys". Kotaku. Retrieved 13 April 2015. ^ Lego Group (9 April 2015). "Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment, TT Games and the LEGO Group announce LEGO® Dimensions". Lego.com. Lego. Retrieved 9 April 2015. ^ LEGO Dimensions [@LEGODimensions] (23 October 2017). "From building and rebuilding to the most bricktacular mash-ups, the Multiverse would be nothing without our amazing community. Thank you" (Tweet) – via Twitter. ^ Phillips, Tom (23 October 2017). "The sad, slow death of Lego Dimensions". Eurogamer. Retrieved 25 February 2020. ^ Crecente, Brian (24 March 2016). "Lego Dimensions delivers a playable video game museum with Midway Arcade". Polygon. ^ Osborn, Alex (31 May 2017). "Teen Titans Go!, The Powerpuff Girls and Beetlejuice Packs Coming to LEGO Dimensions". ^ Karmali, Luke (2 June 2015). "LEGO Dimensions: Simpsons, Ghostbusters and More Confirmed". IGN. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ Phillips, Tom (16 November 2016). "Smegging hell, Lego Dimensions has added a Red Dwarf area". ^ "Lego Dimensions PAX Prime Live Demo Walkthrough". Gamerevolution.com. 31 August 2015. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ "Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment, TT Games and The LEGO Group Announce the Expansion of LEGO® DIMENSIONS™". BusinessWire. 9 June 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2016. ^ Copeland, Wesley (9 April 2015). "Warner Bros. Announces Lego Dimensions". IGN. Retrieved 13 April 2015. ^ Osborn, Alex (19 September 2016). "LEGO Dimensions Knight Rider and Batman Expansion Packs Get Release Date". ^ a b c d e f g h "Portal, Doctor Who, The Simpsons and more confirmed for Lego Dimensions". Polygon. 10 May 2015. Retrieved 11 May 2015. ^ Haywald, Justin (8 July 2015). "Every Doctor Who is Playable in Lego Dimensions, But Only One Will Have a Voice Actor". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ a b "LEGO Dimensions Level Pack: Dr. Who". GameStop. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ Fitzsimmons, Jason (19 January 2016). "Ghostbusters Pack For Lego Dimensions Now Available!". Ghostbusters News. Retrieved 19 January 2016. ^ LEGO Dimensions [@LEGODimensions] (27 August 2015). "Grow your collection with Expansion Packs. Download this official guide:" (Tweet). Retrieved 27 August 2015 – via Twitter. ^ a b "Midway Arcade Level Pack". imgur.com. Retrieved 28 August 2015. ^ a b "LEGO Dimensions Adds More Iconic Characters". Brick Fanatics. Archived from the original on 15 June 2015. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ "GameStop shares listing for LEGO Dimensions' Laval fun pack (Chima)". GoNintendo. 8 June 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ "LEGO Dimensions, Simpsons Bart Fun Pack: Video Games". Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ "Amazon.com: Ninjago Sensei Wu Fun Pack - LEGO Dimensions: Video Games". amazon.com. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ "Amazon.com: Ninjago Lloyd Fun Pack - LEGO Dimensions: Video Games". amazon.com. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ "Amazon.com: DC Bane Fun Pack - LEGO Dimensions: Video Games". amazon.com. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ "Amazon.com: Back to the Future Doc Brown Fun Pack - LEGO Dimensions: Video Games". amazon.com. Retrieved 9 July 2015. ^ "Preorder Card of Excalibur Batman". ^ LEGO Dimensions [@LEGODimensions] (15 June 2016). "You'll have lots of chances to get your hands on the LEGO Green Arrow minifigure this year. Watch our pages! #E32016" (Tweet) – via Twitter. ^ "GameStop Black Friday 2016 Ad Revealed". PlayStation LifeStyle. 12 November 2016. ^ LEGO Dimensions (16 August 2016). "LEGO Dimensions: Supergirl Joins the Multiverse!" – via YouTube. ^ a b "LEGO Dimensions for PlayStation 4 Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ a b "LEGO Dimensions for Xbox One Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ a b "LEGO Dimensions for Wii U Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ Carter, Chris (1 October 2015). "Review: LEGO Dimensions". Destructoid. Retrieved 3 May 2015. ^ Reiner, Andrew (27 September 2015). "Lego Dimensions - When Brick Worlds Collide". Game Informer. Retrieved 3 May 2016. ^ a b Ramsay, Randolph (25 September 2015). "LEGO Dimensions Review". GameSpot. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ "LEGO Dimensions Review - IGN". Uk.ign.com. 29 September 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ Crecente, Brian (28 September 2015). "Lego Dimensions review". Polygon. Retrieved 14 October 2015. ^ "LEGO: Dimensions review". Good Game Spawn Point. 25 October 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2019. ^ Robertson, Andy (5 October 2015). "'LEGO Dimensions' Outsells 'Skylanders Superchargers' and 'Disney Infinity 3.0' In Launch Week". Forbes. Retrieved 4 November 2015. ^ "Nominees | The Game Awards 2015". The Game Awards. Ola Balola. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015. ^ "Horrible Histories, TrueTube lead BAFTA Children's noms". External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Official website API at IMDb v t e The Lego Movie Films The Lego Movie (2014) The Lego Batman Movie (2017) The Lego Ninjago Movie (2017) The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part (2019) Video games The Lego Movie Videogame Lego Dimensions The Lego Ninjago Movie Video Game The Lego Movie 2 Videogame Miscellaneous Characters Emmet Brickowski Songs "Everything Is Awesome" "Catchy Song" The Lego Movie: 4D – A New Adventure Unikitty! List of Lego films and TV series The Lego Movie (Lego theme) The Lego Batman Movie (Lego theme) The Lego Ninjago Movie (Lego theme) Lego Unikitty! Category v t e Lego video games Island Lego Island Lego Island 2: The Brickster's Revenge Island Xtreme Stunts Creator Lego Creator Lego Creator: Knights' Kingdom Racers Lego Racers Lego Racers 2 Drome Racers Bionicle Lego Bionicle: The Legend of Mata Nui Lego Bionicle: Quest for the Toa Bionicle: Matoran Adventures Bionicle Bionicle: Maze of Shadows Bionicle Heroes Battles Lego Battles Lego Battles: Ninjago City Lego City Undercover Lego City Undercover: The Chase Begins Legends of Chima Lego Legends of Chima: Laval's Journey Lego Legends of Chima Online Ninjago Lego Battles: Ninjago Lego Ninjago: Nindroids Lego Ninjago: Shadow of Ronin Other games Lego Loco Lego Chess Lego Rock Raiders Legoland Lego Alpha Team Lego Stunt Rally Football Mania Lego Knights' Kingdom Lego Universe Lego Minifigures Online Lego Worlds Lego Builder's Journey Lego Brawls Lego Friends Lego Brawls Lego Legacy: Heroes Unboxed Licensed games Star Wars Lego Star Wars: The Video Game Lego Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga Indiana Jones Lego Indiana Jones: The Original Adventures Lego Indiana Jones 2: The Adventure Continues DC Lego Batman: The Videogame Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham Lego DC Super-Villains Harry Potter Lego Harry Potter: Years 1–4 Lego Harry Potter: Years 5–7 Middle-earth Lego The Lord of the Rings Lego The Hobbit The Lego Movie The Lego Movie Videogame The Lego Ninjago Movie Video Game The Lego Movie 2 Videogame Marvel Lego Marvel Super Heroes Lego Marvel's Avengers Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2 Disney/Pixar Lego Pirates of the Caribbean: The Video Game Lego The Incredibles Other games Lego Rock Band Songs Lego Jurassic World Lego Dimensions v t e Back to the Future Robert Zemeckis Bob Gale Films Back to the Future Back to the Future Part II Back to the Future Part III Characters Marty McFly Emmett "Doc" Brown Biff Tannen Music Back to the Future "The Power of Love" "Back in Time" Back to the Future Part III "Doubleback" The Back to the Future Trilogy Back to the Future the Musical Other media Back to the Future the Ride Back to the Future: The Animated Series Back to the Future (pinball) Transformers/Back to the Future (comic) Back in Time Video games Back to the Future (1985) Back to the Future (1989) Back to the Future Part II Back to the Future Part III Back to the Future Part II & III Universal Studios Theme Parks Adventure Back to the Future: The Game Lego Dimensions Universe DeLorean time machine Hill Valley "Great Scott!" Hoverboard Nike Mag Self-Tying shoes Legacy The Earth Day Special Ready Player One "Holiday" Category v t e Doctor Who Programme Development History Canada and the U.S. Australia Music theme music composers soundtrack releases featured music Episodes 1963–1989 episodes 1996 film 2005–present episodes Christmas and New Year's specials Supplementary episodes Missing episodes Unmade serials Production Producers Script editors Writers Concepts TARDIS Regeneration Sonic screwdriver Time War Torchwood Institute UNIT personnel Blinovitch Limitation Effect Releases Radio stories Home video releases VHS releases Miscellaneous Fandom Whoniverse Popular culture Merchandise Awards and nominations Plot devices Primary The Doctor Doctors Companions Time Lord The Master Secondary Cast Supporting characters Creatures Dalek Cyberman Sontaran Weeping Angel Davros Silurian Creatures and aliens Narrative devices Villains Henchmen Robots Items Related media Spin-offs Spin-offs Spin-off companions K-9 and Company Tardisode Torchwood The Sarah Jane Adventures K-9 Class Specials Dimensions in Time The Curse of Fatal Death Scream of the Shalka An Adventure in Space and Time The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot Films Dr. Who and the Daleks Daleks' Invasion Earth 2150 A.D. Documentaries Whose Doctor Who Thirty Years in the TARDIS Dalekmania Confidential Totally Doctor Who Torchwood Declassified The Commentaries The Science of Doctor Who Extra The Fan Show Stage The Curse of the Daleks Seven Keys to Doomsday The Ultimate Adventure A Celebration 2008 Prom Live Novels Novelisations New Adventures Missing Adventures Virgin Decalog Eighth Doctor Adventures Past Doctor Adventures BBC Short Trips New Series Adventures Telos novellas Big Finish Short Trips Audio Big Finish audio plays Big Finish spin-off audio plays Audiobooks Audio releases Video Wartime P.R.O.B.E. Shakedown: Return of the Sontarans Mindgame Downtime Cyberon Auton Dæmos Rising Zygon: When Being You Just Isn't Enough Dead and Buried Video games The First Adventure The Warlord The Mines of Terror Dalek Attack Destiny of the Doctors Top Trumps The Adventure Games Return to Earth Evacuation Earth The Mazes of Time Worlds in Time The Eternity Clock Legacy Lego Dimensions Miscellaneous Comics Faction Paradox Death's Head Dalek illustrations Pinball Spoofs Star Trek crossover Exhibitions Publications Magazines etc. Magazine Adventures Battles in Time The Black Archive Publishers Big Finish Productions Reeltime Pictures BBV Mad Norwegian Press Magic Bullet Productions Obverse Books Portal Category Doctor Who portal Speculative fiction portal The Simpsons portal