This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Leopards in the arms of the Hohenlohe princes The leopard in heraldry is traditionally depicted the same as a lion, but in a walking position with its head turned to full face, thus it is also known as a lion passant guardant in some texts, though leopards more naturally depicted make some appearances in modern heraldry. The Oxford Guide to Heraldry makes little mention of leopards but glosses leopard as a "term used in medieval heraldry for lion passant guardant. Now used for the natural beast."[1] Another name for this beast is the ounce.[2] Contents 1 Early heraldic leopards 2 Countries with leopards in their coats of arms 2.1 One leopard 2.2 Two leopards 2.3 Three leopards 2.4 Leopard's heads 2.5 Natural leopards 3 See also 4 References Early heraldic leopards[edit] The typical heraldic leopard differs from the natural leopard (Panthera pardus) in that it has no spots and often has a mane, but is generally similar in appearance to a heraldic lion, other than its attitude. In the Middle Ages, leopards were thought to be a crossbreed between a lion and a pard.[3] Arthur Charles Fox-Davies wrote in 1909 that the distinction between lions (which were constantly rampant) and leopards (which were necessarily walking) originated in French heraldry and was brought into English heraldry along with so much else of English language and custom deriving from French traditions. But "the use of the term leopard in heraldry to signify a certain position for the lion never received any extensive sanction, and has long since become obsolete in British armory," though the distinction is still observed in French blazon.[4] Fox-Davies further notes that the lions depicted in the royal arms of England, though passant guardant, have never represented anything other than lions,[5] also pointing out that another ancient (if controversial) rule distinguishing leopards from lions dictated that while several leopards could appear on one shield, there could not be more than one lion on the shield (with the apparent exception of two lions combatant); multiple rampant lions on one shield were called lioncels.[6] Countries with leopards in their coats of arms[edit] One leopard[edit] Coat of arms of Fiji Coat of arms of Ghana Two leopards[edit] Coat of arms of the principality of Hohenlohe Coat of arms of Normandy Three leopards[edit] Coat of arms of Canada Coat of arms of Denmark (12th century - 1819. After that changed to lions.) Coat of arms of Estonia Coat of arms of England Coat of arms of Jersey Coat of arms of Guernsey Leopard's heads[edit] A leopard's face jessant-de-lys Coat of arms of Dalmatia, until 1526 the official arms of Croatia and was later used by Kingdom of Dalmatia in Habsburg Monarchy; it is now part of Coat of arms of Croatia. A leopard's face is frequently shown Jessant-de-lys, as in the 13th century arms of Cantilupe. Natural leopards[edit] Coat of arms of Benin Arms of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) Coat of arms of Gabon (black panther) Coat of arms of Malawi Coat of arms of Somalia See also[edit] Lion (heraldry) References[edit] ^ Woodcock, Thomas; Robinson, John Martin (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 203. ISBN 0-19-211658-4. ^ Woodcock, Thomas; Robinson, John Martin (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 204. ISBN 0-19-211658-4. ^ Woodcock, Thomas; Robinson, John Martin (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 64. ISBN 0-19-211658-4. ^ Fox-Davies, Arthur Charles (1909). A Complete Guide to Heraldry. London: T. C. and E. C. Jack. p. 173. OL 7101030M. ^ Fox-Davies (1909), p. 173. ^ Fox-Davies (1909), p. 174. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Leopards in heraldry. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources