Wikipedia list article Castle of Good Hope Erasmus Castle Grey High School The following is a list of reportedly haunted locations in South Africa. Haunted locations[edit] Castle of Good Hope Dutch East India Company fort in Cape Town is believed to be the most haunted site in South Africa. The resident ghosts reportedly include the ghost of Lady Anne Barnard who lived there, the ghost of a soldier who hanged himself in the bell tower and the ghosts of soldiers pacing the battlements.[1]:18–28[2][3] Erasmus Castle/Kasteel: "Die Spookhuis" or Erasmus Castle in Erasmuskloof, Pretoria, local residents often report strange noises and ghost sightings in and around the Victorian mansion. Paranormal activity includes lit windows in the uninhabited mansion, and hearing people moaning at night.[4] Hostel in Philippolis, Free-State On the right as you enter the oldest town of the Free-State you will see this huge building. Today it is used as a hostel but in the 1800 is was known as the Castle of Philippolis. Rumor has it that there was a suicide in room 56 on the top floor and the ghost can still be seen. Children have reported someone touching them and seeing a cloud floating in the halls Fort Frederick: In Eastern Cape, is a fort built by the British during 1799 in Algoa Bay that is reportedly haunted by theatrical ghosts of a Shakespearian play.[5] Foxwood House in Johannesburg. Paranormal activity includes mysterious footsteps and visitors seeing an anonymous spectral woman with an anonymous child on the balcony of this building.[6] Kempton Park Hospital: This abandoned hospital in Kempton Park, Gauteng is frequented by thrill-seekers and ghost hunters.[3][7][8] Nottingham Road Hotel: A hotel in KwaZulu-Natal, where the ghost of a former barmaid is said to still wander the hotel moving pots, light fixtures, and sheets, as well as ringing the service bell.[1]:174–175[9] Old Presidency: In Bloemfontein, was the official residence of the former Orange Free State. The stables at the back of the building are thought to be haunted with several reports of people hearing carriages moving into the stables. The premises reportedly house the ghost of a dog with many people hearing ephemeral barking at night. There are also many stories of children being spotted within the building due to the buildings tenure as a school and hostel.[10] The Old Gaol (Grahamstown): Built in Grahamstown in 1824, the Old Gaol was a prison when martial law ruled in the old town. “Dead men walking” - those sentenced to death - were led from the Old Goal to the military parade ground for public hanging. The last victim of such a death was Henry Nicholls, executed in 1862 after being convicted of rape. That this was not an offence punishable by death is, some say, the reason for his restlessness. Now his spirit is supposedly doomed to repeat the sombre walk - back and forth from gaol to gallows - perhaps for eternity. Somerset Hospital: South Africa's oldest hospital in Green Point, Cape Town, where resident ghosts reportedly include Sister Henrietta Stockdale, a blonde girl combing her hair and others that roam the corridors at night.[1]:157[11] Grey High School in Port Elizabeth is well known for its paranormal occurrences. Tales of the school's past rectors that wander the corridors at night and past matrons that haunt the boarding house are frequent and numerous. Old Jail in Philippolis Found in the heart of the oldest town in the Free-State, the old jail of Philippolis is said to be one of the most haunted places in South-Africa. Once used as a barracks for military to a jail. Story goes that after a Giekwa got in a car accident they took his body to the jail and he died in one of the cells. Up until this day you can hear him play the violin. See also[edit] List of reportedly haunted locations References[edit] ^ a b c Hopkins, Pat (2006). Ghosts of South Africa. Cape Town: Zebra Press. ISBN 9781770073036. Retrieved 17 June 2014. ^ Peters, Melanie (30 March 2001). "Ghosts haunt guards at Cape Town Castle". IOL. Archived from the original on 16 June 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. ^ a b Jackman, Rebecca (23 July 2013). "Inside SA's most haunted site". Weekend Argus. Archived from the original on 16 June 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04. Retrieved 2015-09-26.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Hopkins, Pat (2006). Ghosts of South Africa. ISBN 9781770073036. ^ "7 of South Africa's best haunted hotels - Getaway Magazine". Getaway Magazine. ^ Theresa, Taylor (17 June 2011). "Ghosts that haunt the old hospital". The Star. Archived from the original on 16 June 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. ^ Bester, Zianko (24 August 2012). "Something strange in your neighbourhood? Call Gauteng Paranormal Society". The New Age. Archived from the original on 18 June 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2014. ^ Nottingham Road Hotel from Articlesphere.com ^ "The Haunting of the Old Presidency (Ou Presidensie)". Archived from the original on 2016-06-26. Retrieved 2017-03-14. ^ Lovell, Jeremy (10 December 2000). "Cape Town markets its ghostly history". Archived from the original on 17 June 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category