Wikipedia list article This list needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This list has no precise inclusion criteria as described in the Manual of Style for standalone lists. Please improve this article by adding inclusion criteria. (Discuss) (March 2017) This is a list of magical weapons from fiction and folklore. A magical weapon is one that is directly described as such in the work, or one that has obvious fantastic or supernatural qualities. Contents 1 In folklore 1.1 Indian mythology 1.2 Islamic mythology 1.3 Norse mythology 1.4 Irish mythology 1.5 Arthurian legend 1.6 The Song of Roland 1.7 Japanese folklore 1.8 Spanish folklore 2 In novels 2.1 The works of J. R. R. Tolkien 2.2 The works of Michael Moorcock 3 In comics and graphic novels 4 In role-playing games 4.1 Dungeons & Dragons 5 In video and computer games 6 In cartoons 7 Magical weapons by type 8 Other magical weapons 9 References In folklore[edit] Further information: List of mythological objects § Weapons Trident - Weapon usually attributed to water deities in Western Culture, such as Poseidon. In Hinduism, it is the weapon of Shiva, known as trishula (Sanskrit for "triple-spear"). Tyrfing — a cursed sword that appears in Norse Mythology that would kill a man when drawn and would eventually kill its wielder. Sword Kladenets – a fabulous magic sword in some Old Russian fairy tales.[citation needed] Dyrnwyn – Sword of Rhydderch Hael in Welsh legend; When drawn, it blazed with fire; if drawn by a worthy man, the fire would help him in his cause, but its fire would burn the man who drew it for an unworthy purpose. Hrunting and Nægling – Beowulf's magical swords. Shamshir-e Zomorrodnegar – Legendary Persian sword. Skofnung – sword of legendary Danish king Hrólf Kraki. Thunderbolt – as wielded by various mythological deities such as Zeus. Vajra – A composite weapon made from the bones of a willing sage used by Indra. Gan Jiang and Mo Ye - Legendary Chinese twin swords named after their creators. Sharur - the enchanted talking mace of Ninurta, Sumerian god Ru Yi Jing Gu Bang - Magical staff wielded by the Monkey King Sun Wukong in the Chinese classic novel, Journey to the West. The Jem of Kukulkan - the Mayan Serpents Jem has the ability to control all elements. Like fire, wind, and ice, though the Serpent only has the wind jem. Indian mythology[edit] Arrow of Brahma - The arrow given by the sage Agastya to Rama (seventh avatar of Vishnu) and was used to kill Ravana. Asi - A legendary divine lotus sword created in ancient times as the first weapon to destroy the enemies of the gods and restore dharma. Astra - Divine celestial weapons with devastating impacts which could be invoked by reciting mantras and forming hand signs. Chandrahansa - In the Hindu epic Ramayana, the Chandrahansa sword is an indestructible sword that Lord Shiva gifts Ravana. Chentu - A horse whip which looks like a crooked stick, and is a typical attribute of Aiyanar, Krishna in his aspect as Rajagopala, and Shiva with Nandi. Gada - A mace used by the Monkey God Hanuman. Gandiva - An indestructible bow with 100 strings created by Brahma and later used by Arjuna. Halayudha - A plough used as a weapon by Balarama. Kaladanda - the staff of Death is a special and lethal club used by the God Yama or God of Naraka or Hell in Hindu mythology. It was the ultimate weapon; once fired it would kill anybody before it no matter what boons he had to protect himself. Kaumodaki - The Gada (mace) of the Hindu god Vishnu. Kaundinya's bow - A magic bow wielded by the merchant Brahmin Kaundinya I, who used it to make the Nāga princess Queen Soma fall in love with him. Khaṭvāṅga - In Hinduism, the god Shiva-Rudra carried the khatvāṅga as a staff weapon and are thus referred to as khatvāṅgīs. Kodandam - Rama's bow. Mace of Bhima - A club that was presented by Mayasura. It was a weapon of Danavas King Vrishaparva. Nandaka - Nandaka or Nandaki is the sword of the Hindu god Vishnu. Parashu - The parashu is the weapon of the god Shiva who gave it to Parashurama, sixth avatar of Vishnu, whose name means "Rama with the axe". Pasha - A supernatural weapon depicted in Hindu iconography. Hindu deities such as Ganesha, Yama and Varuna are depicted with the pasha in their hands. The pasha is used to bind a foe's arms and legs or for hunting animals. Pattayudha - The divine sword of Lord Virabhadra, commander of Lord Shiva's armies. Pinaka - The great bow of Shiva, arrows fired from the bow could not be intercepted. Sharanga - The bow of the Hindu God Vishnu. Sharkha - The bow of Krishna, eight avatar of Vishnu. Shiva Dhanush (Shiva's bow) - A bow given by Shiva to Janaka and broken by Rama during Sita's swayamvara. Sudarshana Chakra - The legendary discus of Vishnu, which cannot be stopped by anyone, except by Lord Vishnu and Lord Shiva. It has tremendous occult and spiritual powers, by which it is able to destroy anything. Teen Baan - Shiva gave Barbarika three infallible arrows (Teen Baan). A single arrow was enough to destroy all opponents in any war, and it would then return to Barbarika's quiver. Trident of Madhu - It was given as a boon by Shiva to Madhu, a Rakshasa. Then he gave it to his son Lavanasura. It was a very powerful weapon. It destroys anyone who directly fights with its master. Trishula - The trident of Shiva, stylized by some as used as a missile weapon and often included a crossed stabilizer to facilitate flight when thrown. Considered to be the most powerful weapon. Vajra - A lightning thunderbolt wielded by Indra, the god of rain and thunderstorms. Vasavi Shakti - The magical dart of Indra. Used by Karna against Ghatotkacha in the Mahabharata war. Vel - Vel is a divine javelin (spear) associated with the Hindu war god Karthikeya. Vijaya - The bow of Karna, one of the greatest hero of the Hindu epic Mahabharata. The bow of Indra is also called Vijaya. Islamic mythology[edit] Zulfiqar - A sword belonging to Ali ibn Abi Talib. Norse mythology[edit] Angurvadal (Stream of Anguish) - A magical sword of Viking, and later Frithiof. The sword was inscribed with Runic letters, which blazed in time of war, but gleamed with a dim light in time of peace. Dáinsleif - King Högni's sword that gave wounds that never healed and could not be unsheathed without killing a man. Dragvandil - The sword of Egill Skallagrímsson. Forseti's axe (also Fosite's axe) - A golden battle axe that Forseti (or Fosite in the Frisian mythology) used to save the old sages of the wreck and then threw the axe to an island to bring forth a source of water. Freyr's sword - A magic sword which fought on its own. It might be Lævateinn. Gambanteinn - A sword which appears in two poems in the Poetic Edda Gram – Sword of the hero Sigurd from Norse mythology, also known as Nothung in the Ring cycle Gríðarvölr - A magical staff given to Thor by Gríðr so he could kill the giant Geirröd. Gungnir – Odin's spear created by the dwarf Dvalinn. The spear is described as being so well balanced that it could strike any target, no matter the skill or strength of the wielder. Hǫfuð - The sword of Heimdallr, the guardian of Bifröst. Hrotti – Hrotti is a sword in the Völsung cycle (Fáfnismál, Völsunga saga, 20). It was a part of Fáfnir's treasure, which Sigurðr took after he slew the dragon. Lævateinn – A weapon mentioned in Fjölsvinnsmál by Sophus Bugge. Ostensibly forged by Loki. Legbiter - The sword of Magnus III of Norway. Mistilteinn - The magical sword of Prainn, the draugr, later owned by Hromundr Gripsson and it could never go blunt. Mjölnir – The hammer of Thor. It was invulnerable and when thrown it would return to the user's hand. Quern-biter - Sword of Haakon I of Norway and his follower, Thoralf Skolinson the Strong, said to be sharp enough to cut through quernstones. Ridill (also Refil) - Sword of the dwarf Regin. Skofnung - The legendary sword of Danish king Hrólf Kraki. It was renowned for supernatural sharpness and hardness, as well as for being imbued with the spirits of the king's twelve faithful berserker bodyguards. The Sword of Surtr - The weapon the fire giant Surtr wields in the battle of Ragnarok. The Prose Edda calls it a flaming sword, although in the Poetic Edda merely it is described only as a "bright blade." Tyrfing – A sword made by dwarves in the Elder Edda. Irish mythology[edit] Fragarach – Sword of the god of the seas Manannan mac Lir and later Lugh in Irish legend; it was said to be a weapon that no armour could stop. Caladbolg – Two-handed sword of Fergus mac Róich in Irish legend; said to make a circle like an arc of rainbow when swung, and to have the power to cleave the tops from the hills. Moralltach (Great Fury) – a highly lethal sword belonging to Aengus, which left no stroke or blow unfinished at the first trial. Aoegus eventually gave to his foster-son Diarmuid Ua Duibhne along with a second sword of less power, the Beagalltach (Little Fury). Gáe Buide and Gáe Derg – Spears of Diarmuid Ua Duibhne, given to him by Aengus. The yellow spear Gáe Buide was said to inflict wounds from which none could recover; the red spear Gáe Derg can destroy any magic that touches its head. Claíomh Solais – Sword of Nuada, the king of the gods in Irish mythology; in legend, the sword glowed with the light of the sun and was irresistible in battle, having the power to cut his enemies in half. Gáe Bulg – Spear of Cúchulainn; made from the bones of a sea monster. Spear of Lugh – Spear of Lugh, the champion of the gods in Irish mythology. Arthurian legend[edit] Excalibur - The sword King Arthur got from the lady of the lake. Caliburn – Another name for Excalibur, but in some versions of the legends is the sword King Arthur pulled from the stone. Clarent – King Arthur's sword of peace. Also known as the Coward's Blade, as it is the sword Mordred, his son, stole and later used to kill King Arthur. Carnwennan - King Arthur's dagger, sometimes described to shroud the user in shadow. Galatine - Sir Gawain's sword granted by the lady of the lake said to make the wielder invincible under the sunlight Pridwen (also Wynebgwrthucher) - The shield of King Arthur it is said that this could also be used as a boat. Rhongomiant - King Arthur's Spear. The Song of Roland[edit] Almace – The sword of Archbishop Turpin. Durendal – Indestructible sword of Roland. Hauteclere – The sword of Oliver. Joyeuse – Charlemagne's personal sword. Cortana or Curtana – The sword of Ogier the Dane Japanese folklore[edit] Ame-no-nuhoko – Japanese halberd which formed the first island. Kusanagi – Legendary Japanese sword. Can also be considered as Kusanagi-No-Tsurugi (Sword Of Orochimaru). Muramasa - The katana forged by famous swordsmith Muramasa, it was rumored that it was a demonic sword that can curse the wielder to murder people. It also said that the demonic sword rumor was made by Ieyasu Tokugawa, the 1st Shogun of the Tokugawa Shogunate because he hated those swords made by Muramasa. Tonbogiri – One of three legendary spears created by the famed swordsmith Muramasa. It is said to be so sharp that a dragonfly landing on the edge would be instantly cut in half. This is the origin of the name. Honjo Masamune - A legendary and very real Japanese sword (with alleged mythical abilities), created by Japan's greatest swordsmith, Goro Nyudo Masamune. The Masamune sword is by far the most referenced Japanese sword in popular fiction, ranging through books, movies and computer games. Murasame - A magical katana that mentioned in fiction Nansō Satomi Hakkenden, it said the blade can moist itself to wash off the blood stain for keeping it sharp. Spanish folklore[edit] Tizona - the sword of El Cid, it frightens unworthy opponents, as shown in the heroic poem Cantar de Mio Cid.[1] Colada - the other sword of El Cid, as Tizona its power depends on the warrior that wields it.[1] The lance of Olyndicus, wielded by the Celtiberians' war chief Olyndicus, who fought against Rome. According to Florus, he wielded a silver lance that was sent to him by the gods from the sky.[2] In novels[edit] Anaklusmos (Riptide) - The female sword used by Perseus (Percy) Jackson in the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series by Rick Riordan. Axe of Hereward in Charles Kingsley's 1866 novel Hereward the Wake.[3] Brisingr - The Rider sword that Eragon uses in the Inheritance Cycle by Christopher Paolini Blackfyre. A sword made of Valyrian steel, and owned by house Targaryen. [4] Caesura - The Adem sword that Kvothe uses in the Kingkiller Chronicles by Patrick Rothfuss Callandor – The sword that is not a sword, a powerful sa'angreal in Robert Jordan's Wheel of Time series. Chance - Sword carried by Ganoes Paran and instrument of the Twins of Chance in the Malazan Series by Steven Erikson Charon's Claw – Powerful sword from the Forgotten Realms series. Curoch - The Blade of Power from The Night Angel Trilogy. The Darksword – Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman's Darksword trilogy. Dark Sister. A sword forged from Vlaryian steel in the Book Fire & Blood by George R.R. Martin. The sword is wielded by Visenya and Maegor Targaryian. [5] Dragnipur - Sword forged by Draconas and wielded by Anomandar Rake in the Malazan Series by Steven Erikson Heosphoros - One of the 2 Morgenstern family swords, owned by Clarissa 'Clary' Fray in The Mortal Instruments by Cassandra Clare Ice. A Valyrian steel greatsword owned by house Stark in A Song of Ice and Fire a Book series by George R.R. Martin. A sword notable for its large size and large history.[6] Jack (Summabrander) - the talking sword used by Magnus Chase in Magnus Chase and the gods of Asgard series by Rick Riordan Kuro Kumo - sword of Dokugan Ryu in The Young Samurai series by Chris Bradford Phaesphoros - One of the 2 Morgenstern family swords, owned by Valentine Morgenstern and later by his son Sebastian in The Mortal Instruments by Cassandra Clare The Mortal Sword - One of the Mortal Instruments. When held by a shadowhunter, it compels him/her to tell the truth (Cassandra Clare) Grayswandir – The magic sword wielded by Corwin in The Chronicles of Amber by Roger Zelazny. Sister blade of Werewindle. Frakir - Merlin's magically sentient garotte from the second Chronicles of Amber, also by Roger Zelazny. Need - A sword with a human soul, attuned to women in need, in Oathbound and subsequent novels Nehima – Lirael and Abhorsen by Garth Nix. Ruyi Jingu Bang – A magical staff wielded by Sun Wukong in Journey to the West. Snaga, the Sender - The great axe of Druss, the Legend, from the Drenai Series by David Gemmel. Shardblades. A type of sword wielded in the The Stormlight Archive book series by Brandon Sanderson.[7] The subtle knife - A knife wielded by Will Parry in the His Dark Materials trilogy by Philip Pullman. Has the power to cut through any material and to cut into other worlds. The Swords of Night and Day - The twin blades of Skilgannon, The Damned, from the Drenai Series by David Gemmell. Sword of Gryffindor – In the Harry Potter series, a sword that was previously owned by Godric Gryffindor. Has the power to reveal itself to any worthy Gryffindor student in a time of need. In the novels, reveals itself to Harry and Neville Longbottom. Sword of Martin the Warrior – Weapon from the Redwall series of novels by Brian Jacques. Forged from a fallen star by a badger ruler. It appears to be unbreakable. The Sword of Shannara – The sword enchanted by the druids to reveal truth in Terry Brooks novels. The Sword of Truth – The sword wielded by the Seeker of Truth in the Terry Goodkind novels. The Vorpal Sword in the poem Jabberwocky in Through the Looking Glass by Lewis Carroll. Vasilis, the sword of light and darkness in the Fablehaven series, by Brandon Mull Werewindle – Also called Rawg; the magic golden-colored sword inscribed with portions of the Pattern and wielded by Brand in The Chronicles of Amber by Roger Zelazny. Sister blade of Grayswandir. Malachai Sword - The sword Nick uses to fight in the Chronicles of Nick series by Sherrilyn Kenyon. Zar'roc - The sword used in the Inheritance Cycle by Christopher Paolini; used by Morzan - first and last of the Forsworn (formerly), later acquired by Brom, used by Eragon (formerly), Murtagh Morzansson (current) - means misery in the ancient language of Alagaësia. The works of J. R. R. Tolkien[edit] See also: List of Middle-earth weapons and armour Anglachel – One of the two swords forged by Eöl the Dark Elf out of a black iron meteorite. It is said to be able to cleave any iron from within the earth. Anglachel appears to be a sentient sword that speaks on occasion and has some will of its own.[8] Glamdring, Orcrist and Sting – High-Elven swords; glow with a blue or white flame when Orcs are near. These are obtained during the events of The Hobbit and are carried respectively by Gandalf, Thorin Oakenshield and Bilbo Baggins. Sting is later passed onto the latter's nephew Frodo Baggins.[9] Morgul-blade – Magical poisoned dagger wielded by Nazgûl.[9] Caudimordax – This sword cannot be sheathed when a dragon comes within five miles of its bearer's presence.[10] Andúril/Narsil – The sword of Elendil that was used by Isildur to cut the One Ring from Sauron (Narsil) reforged several ages later by Elrond (Andúril); the reforging of the shards was foretold as a sign of the coming of the true King of Gondor. Aiglos – The spear with which the Elven king Gil-galad went to war. The works of Michael Moorcock[edit] Mournblade – An enchanted blade from Michael Moorcock's Elric stories, twin to Stormbringer. Kanajana - The sword of Erekose. The Runestaff - A magical staff in Moorcock's Dorian Hawkmoon novels which preserves the Cosmic Balance. Stormbringer - One of the two vampiric black runeswords inherited by the Melnibonean kings. Wielded by Elric of Melnibone. The Sword of the Dawn - A magical blade in Moorcock's Dorian Hawkmoon novels. In comics and graphic novels[edit] Ebony Blade – Marvel Comics Godkiller – DC Comics's Wonder Woman and Deathstroke divine sword Soulsword – Marvel Comics Soultaker – DC Comics Kevin Matchstick's magical baseball bat, Excalibur - Comico/Image Comics Dragonslayer- A huge sword wielded by Guts, the protagonist of Berserk Zangetsu- Ichigo's shikai from Bleach The Enchanted Sword- Black Star's weapon, Tsubaki, transforms into her enchanted sword in Soul Eater Soul Eater- The same enchanted sword from Arthurian legend but can transform into a small humanoid. Tsumehirameki- Shizuku Yaegashi's legendary Katana in Arifureta: From Commonplace to World's Strongest, which is enchanted with various powerful magic by Hajime Nagumo. Holy Swords- Sacred Swords created using magic and alchemy in Highschool DxD, legendary in ancient times as the signature weapons of historical heroes, pass down to the Christianity Religious order as weapons for Exorcists to fight malevolent supernatural beings. Excalibur- One of the dual legendary Holy Swords wielded by British King Arthur of Camelot, currently wielded by Xenovia Quarta. Durandal- The legendary Holy Sword of Roland the Paladin of the Holy Roman Emperor, also wielded by Xenovia alongside Excalibur. Caliburn- The other legendary Holy Sword of King Arthur, hailed as the most powerful Holy Sword ever created. Currently wielded by King Arthur's direct descendant, Arthur Pendragon. Ea: The single most powerful weapon in existence, Ea can – at full power – destroy the entire world. It is something that was born before the appearance of the concept that the world calls a "sword", so it is not something that can truly be called a sword or have the shape of any known blade and it is the only sword that does not exist in the current world. It is something that does not appear in any modern legends, crystallized during the Age of Gods at the beginning of the world. It is possessed by Gilgamesh, and is the only sword that Archer and Emiya cannot Trace. In role-playing games[edit] Dungeons & Dragons[edit] Dungeons & Dragons is a fantasy role-playing game with many unique magical weapons. Axe of the Dwarvish Lords (Greyhawk campaign setting) Wave (trident), Whelm, and Blackrazor (sentient trident, hammer, and greatsword from the 1st Edition AD&D module S2: White Plume Mountain) Hammer of Kharas (Dragonlance campaign setting) Dragonlance (Dragonlance campaign setting) Dragonslayer (Dragonlance campaign setting) Druniazth (thermophagic sword; name is an anagram of its associated deity Tharizdun) The Brightblade (Dragonlance campaign setting) Staff of Magius (Dragonlance campaign setting) Mace of Cuthbert (Greyhawk campaign setting) Sword of Kas (Greyhawk campaign setting) In video and computer games[edit] See also: Final Fantasy weapons and armor Magic weapons are a staple of fantasy video games. The Silver Sword of Gith - Neverwinter Nights 2. A legendary shattered blade whose shards are collected and eventually reforged to defeat the King of Shadows. Dagger of Time – Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time. Master Sword – Legend of Zelda series. Used by Link after being drawn from a stone altar. Said to be untouchable by evil. Phantom Sword - Legend of Zelda series. A sword created by the ocean king. Used to kill phantoms and to finish off Bellum. Lokomo Sword - Legend of Zelda series. Able to stun phantoms without tears of light. Goddess Sword - Legend of Zelda series. It was a gift by the goddess Hylia to the chosen hero. A spirit named Fi resides within it. This blade later transformed into the Master Sword. Four Sword - Legend of Zelda series. Has the power to split the wielder in four. Falchion - Fire Emblem series. Used by many heroes such as Marth, Alm, and Chrom. It was created from the dragon Naga's fang. Has the power to slay gods, something impossible to normal weapons Gradivus - Fire Emblem series. A lance that can pierce rock, regalia of House Archanea. Originally wielded by the Grustian general Camus as his weapon of choice. Mercurius - Fire Emblem series. The mercury sword, regalia of House Archanea. Parthia - Fire Emblem series. A bow of fire, regalia of House Archanea. Tyrfing - Fire Emblem series. One of twelve holy weapons, it is a sword once wielded by the Crusader of Light, Baldur, bestowed upon him during the Miracle of Darna. Book Of Naga - Fire Emblem series. One of twelve holy weapons, it is a tome that was originally wielded by the Crusader Heim, bestowed upon him by the Divine Dragon Naga during the Miracle of Darna. Binding Blade - Fire Emblem: The Binding Blade. A legendary blade of incredible power used to seal away the Mage Dragon Idun. Also known as the Sword Of Seals. Used By Prince Roy of Pherae. Mani Katti - Fire Emblem: The Blazing Blade. A highly versatile katana-like sword used by Lyn. Sol Katti - Fire Emblem: The Blazing Blade. Stronger sister sword of the Mani Katti, and forged to defeat dragons. Used by Lyn. Durandal - Fire Emblem series. The Sword of Raging Fire. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Armads - Fire Emblem series. The Axe of Heavenly Thunder. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Forblaze - Fire Emblem series. An ancient tome dubbed the Reason of Hellfire. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Aureola - Fire Emblem series. An ancient tome dubbed the Glorious Ascension or Light of Supremacy. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Mulagir - Fire Emblem series. The Tempest Bow. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Maltet - Fire Emblem series. The Blizzard Spear of Ice and Snow. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Apocalypse - Fire Emblem series. A tome dubbed the Elder Revelation. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Eckesachs - Fire Emblem series. The sword of the kings of Bern, wielded by Zephiel. One of the eight legendary weapons of the Scouring. Siegmund - Fire Emblem: The Sacred Stones. One of the Sacred Twins of Renais, and is usable only by Ephraim. The flame lance. Sieglinde - Fire Emblem: The Sacred Stones. One of the Sacred Twins of Renais, and is usable only by Eirika. The lightning sword. Ragnell - Fire Emblem Tellius series. Used by Ike. A sword blessed by the goddess Ashera. Alondite - Fire Emblem Tellius series. Used by the Black Knight. This is the other half of a pair to Ragnell. Blessed by the goddess Ashera. Siegfried - Fire Emblem Fates. A glowing purple blade, personal weapon of Prince Xander of Nohr. One of the five legendary weapons forged by the Rainbow Sage. Brynhildr - Fire Emblem Fates. An ancient tome, personal weapon of Prince Leo of Nohr. One of the five legendary weapons forged by the Rainbow Sage. Fujin Yumi - Fire Emblem Fates. A holy bow with a bow string made of light and shoots out light arrows, personal weapon of Prince Takumi of Hoshido. One of the five legendary weapons forged by the Rainbow Sage. Rajinto - Fire Emblem Fates. A lightning covered katana, personal weapon of Prince Ryoma of Hoshido. One of the five legendary weapons forged by the Rainbow Sage. Yato - Fire Emblem Fates. A holy blade that can change shapes in the presence of the other four legendary weapons to create the Seal of Flame. Personal weapon to Prince/ss Corrin of Nohr and Hoshido, crowned King/Queen of Valla. Ganglari - Fire Emblem Fates. An evil, twisted blade bestowed upon Prince/ss Corrin of Nohr and Hoshido by King Garon. Soul Reaver – Legacy of Kain series. Soul Calibur and Soul Edge - Soul series. Monado - Xenoblade Chronicles The sword of the Bionis used by Zanza in his battle against the Mechonis. The sword has the ability to cut through mechon with ease. After the battle between Bionis and Mechonis, the blade's powers were sealed and was rendered useless against creatures of Bionis. However, in its unsealed state, nothing but a God can stand in its way. Keyblade - Kingdom Hearts series. Star Rod - Kirby's Adventure. Magic rod that serves as the power source for the Fountain of Dreams. When swung it fires a shooting star from the tip. Crystalis – Crystalis. The titular sword is formed from four elemental blades.[11] Ashbringer,[12] Frostmourne,[13] and Thunderfury, Blessed Blade of the Windseeker – Warcraft series. Blades of Chaos - God of War. These broad-bladed swords are seared into the flesh of the protagonist, Kratos, with a pair of chains wrapped his arms. This allows him to perform whip-like maneuvers.[14] Sword of Aeons - Fable. Avo's Tear - Fable. An ancient sword said to be as powerful as the legendary Sword of Aeons. This Sword was imbued with extraordinary power when the Guild Mage Solcius used it in a spell to close a large vortex. Arondight - Fate/Zero Lancelot's sword, counterpart to Excalibur, crafted by the fairies (妖精, Yousei). Umbra - The Elder Scrolls. An immensely powerful, black-bladed sword that is occasionally given to mortals by the immortal Daedric prankster, Clavicus Vile. It can only pass from one mortal to another if the inheritor kills the former owner in single combat. Sword of Hisou (Sword of Scarlet Perceptions) - Touhou Project Tenshi Hinanai's sword, one that only Celestials can use. When paired with a keystone, she can manipulate the sky, people, and the earth. Moonlight Greatsword - Dark Souls A reoccurring weapon in the popular Dark Souls series, it creates a wave of force that can hit enemies from a distance. Leviathan axe (God of War) an elemental frost axe that can be summoned/returned to the user as they wish. MediEvil - The main objective in the series is to kill the undead, this fills the chalice that is collectible in every level. Once Sir Daniel Fortesque collects a full chalice, he will be rewarded many magical weapons available in the game Valmanway - Castlevania In cartoons[edit] Sword of Omens - ThunderCats. Wielded by the hero Lion-O, the magical Eye of Thundera is embedded in its hilt.[15] The Power Sword and the Sword of Protection - He-Man. Twin swords wielded by Prince Adam and his sister Adora in the Masters of the Universe cartoons and toy line. The Star Sword and The Power Sword - Two halves of one sword, The PowerStar. The former wielded by the protagonist Blackstar and the latter wielded by the antagonist Overlord. Only Friend and New Friend - Erin McGathy's character Beor O'Shift is known for utilizing these Barbarian War Axes in the live improv RPG-show Harmonquest. Juana Stabadude - Jeff Bryan Davis's character Boneweevil carries this rapier into battle in the live improv RPG-show Harmonquest. Magical weapons by type[edit] Magic ring Magic sword Flaming sword Wand Other magical weapons[edit] Some weapons in fiction do not, strictly speaking, have magical properties, but are forged with materials or methods that are unique in the context of the story. Green Destiny – Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon a powerful jian.[citation needed] Chrysaor – Edmund Spenser's The Faerie Queene Green Dragon Crescent Blade – Exceptionally heavy guandao wielded by Guan Yu in the Romance of the Three Kingdoms; forged with the blood of a green dragon.[16] References[edit] ^ a b Cantar de mio Cid. Edition of Alberto Montaner. Ed. Galaxia Gutenberg, 2007. ^ Florus. Epitomae, II. ^ Charles Kingsley (2007). "How Hereward was Outlawed". Hereward the Wake (Vol I). Wildside Press. p. 67. ISBN 978-1-4344-9091-9. ...one of those magic weapons, brought, men know not how, out of the magic East, which was hereditary in many a Norse family, and sung of in many a Norse saga. ^ "Magic Swords post Fire and Blood". A Forum of Ice and Fire - A Song of Ice and Fire & Game of Thrones. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ "Magic Swords post Fire and Blood". A Forum of Ice and Fire - A Song of Ice and Fire & Game of Thrones. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ Nicolaou, Elena. "The Essential Guide To The Swords On "Game Of Thrones"". www.refinery29.com. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ Pye, Michael (2013-12-05). "The Way of Kings Reread: Chapter 47". Tor.com. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ The Silmarillion, J. R. R. Tolkien ^ a b The Lord of the Rings, J. R. R. Tolkien ^ Farmer Giles of Ham, J. R. R. Tolkien ^ Lopez, Miguel (Jun 17, 2000). "Crystalis Review for Game Boy Color". Gamespot. Archived from the original on September 20, 2011. Retrieved November 16, 2010. ^ Ziebart, Alex (Aug 14, 2008). "Know Your Lore: The Ashbringer". joystiq. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved November 16, 2010. ^ Rossi, Matthew (Mar 14, 2008). "Behold Frostmourne!". Joystiq. Archived from the original on November 13, 2010. Retrieved November 16, 2010. ^ Navarro, Alex (Mar 21, 2005). "God of War Review for PlayStation 2". Gamespot. Archived from the original on October 5, 2009. Retrieved November 16, 2010. ^ Hendershot, Heather (1998). "Toys, TV and Toaster Pictures". Saturday morning censors: television regulation before the V-chip. Duke University Press. p. 97. ^ "Did Guan Yu Actually Use the Green Dragon Crescent Blade?". Cultural China. Archived from the original on 2009-12-28. Retrieved 2010-02-22. v t e Witchcraft and magic Types African witchcraft Witch smeller Asian witchcraft Kulam Australasian witchcraft Makutu European witchcraft Akelarre Benandanti Chaos magic Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva White witch Witch-cult hypothesis Latin American witchcraft Warlock Wicca Witch doctor Practices Animism Black magic Coven Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Flying ointment Goetia Gray magic Jinn Love magic Magic circle Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Poppet Potions Shamanism Black shamanism Yellow shamanism Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Witch ball Witch's ladder Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Broom besom Cloak of invisibility Love charm Magic carpet Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Talisman Fulu Yansheng Coin Wand Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Dayan Drude Elbow witch Huld Kalku Hecate Circe Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Sea witch Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witch of Endor Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Related Witch (word) Witch-hunt accusations against children Witchcraft in Anglo-Saxon England Witchcraft in early modern Britain Witchcraft in Ghana Witchcraft in Italy Witches in fiction