Wikipedia list article This article is about dragons in tabletop and video games. For broader coverage of fictional dragons across all types of media, see List of dragons in popular culture. This article contains incomplete lists that may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by expanding them with entries that are reliably sourced. Representation of a dragon as it appears in the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons This is a list of dragons in tabletop and video games. If there are many dragons then only the most notable are mentioned. Contents 1 Dragons in video games 1.1 Guide to Roles 1.2 Dragons in role-playing video games 1.3 Dragons in multiplayer online games 1.4 Dragons in other video game genres 1.5 Dragons in games for mobile devices 2 Dragons in tabletop games 2.1 Dragons in tabletop role-playing games 2.2 Dragons in board games 2.3 Dragons in card games 2.3.1 Magic: The Gathering 2.3.2 World of Warcraft Trading Card Game 2.3.3 Yu-Gi-Oh! 2.3.4 Cardfight!! Vanguard 2.3.5 Duel Masters Trading Card Game 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Dragons in video games[edit] Guide to Roles[edit] Player Character – The dragon is the main character controlled by the player through all or most of the game. Playable Character – The dragon is a character that if selected can be controlled. Companion - The dragon is a character that usually follows the player and can often be controlled as a riding mount. Boss – The dragon is a boss to be defeated by the player. Final Boss – The dragon is the final boss in the game. Optional Boss – The dragon is an optional boss. Playable Character Transformation – The dragon is an alternate form the player's character can take. Enemy – The dragon is a general enemy in the game. Trainable Monster – The dragon is a monster used in a battle in an arena against another monster. Supporting Character – The dragon helps the player at points throughout the game. Unit – The dragon is a controllable battle unit in the game. Collectible Card – The dragon is a digital card in the digital collectible card game which can be obtained to customize and improve player's decks. Various – Dragons play multiple roles in the game. Dragons in role-playing video games[edit] Dragons appear in numerous role-playing games with fictional setting as bosses, final bosses, and enemies, as well as player characters, companions, and supporting characters. Video game Name of Dragon Type Transforms, if so from what? Voice Actor Role Notes Darksiders Abaddon European Angel Troy Baker Final Boss AdventureQuest Various Various No Various Adventures of Mana Unnamed European No Boss Xenoblade Chronicles Alcar, Dragonia, Abaasy European No Boss Dragon King Alcar, Demon King Dragonia, Avalanche Abaasy The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim Alduin, Paarthurnax, Odahviing Wyvern No Daniel Riordan / Charles Martinet / Charles Dennis Various Many other named dragons appear Dragon's Crown Ancient, Red Dragons European No Bosses Borderlands 2 Ancient Dragons of Destruction European No Bosses Drakengard series Angelus, Legna Wyvern No Mona Marshall / Yoshio Harada Companion I of the Dragon Annoth, Barroth, Morrogh European No Player Character 3 dragons to play as Emerald Dragon Atrushan European Human Player Character A young blue dragon that transforms freely between his true form and an acquired human form to rescue a childhood human friend and sibling named Tamryn Avernum/Exile Various European No Various Dragon Valor Azi Dahaka Various No Bosses Other dragons appear Final Fantasy series Bahamut European No Various Most recurrent of many dragons in series Valkyrie Profile 2 Bahamut European No Boss Zelda II: The Adventure of Link Barba Serpentine No Boss Battledragons Unnamed Various No Units Shining Force Bleu European No Playable Character Other dragons appear Blue Dragon Blue Dragon Other No Companion Super Paper Mario Bonechill, Fracktail, Wracktail European No Bosses Fracktail and Bonechill are required bosses while Wracktail is an optional boss. Kingdom of Loathing Bonerdagon Wyvern No Boss Paper Mario: The Thousand-Year Door Bonetail, Gloomtail, Hooktail European No Bosses Hooktail and Gloomtail are required bosses while Bonetail is an optional boss. Bravely Default Various European No Bosses Two Worlds II Cassara European Human Sandra Pascuzzi Final Boss Star Ocean: Till the End of Time Crosell European No Ryûzaburô Ôtomo Boss Super Mario RPG Czar Dragon, Zombone, Bahamutt European No Bosses Divinity: Original Sin Various European No Various Divinity II The Dragon Knight Wyvern Human Playable Character Transformation Other dragons appear. Dark Souls Various Various Various Bosses Dawn of the Dragons Various European No Various Disgaea Various Various No Units The World Ends with You Draco Cantus Asian Human Shane Johnson Final Boss Dragon Age Various European Various Various Dragon Buster Unnamed European No Boss Dragon Fable Various European No Companion Chrono Cross Dragon Gods Various No Bosses Six of them Titan Quest Dragon Liche European No Optional Boss Dragon Quest Dragonlord European Human Final Boss White Knight Chronicles Dragon Matriarch European Human Boss Shining Tears Dragonutes Various No Various Drakkhen Various European No Bosses Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup Various European No Enemies Faria: A World of Mystery and Danger! Unnamed European Human Final Boss Fate Unnamed European No Bosses Marvel: Ultimate Alliance Fin Fang Foom Asian No Boss The Battle for Wesnoth Fire Dragon European No Units Fire Emblem Various European Human Various Secret of Mana, Dawn of Mana Flammie European No Companion A white four-winged fluffy dragon which the characters ride, Some eventually turn into the Mana Beast Golden Sun Fusion Dragon European (2H)[a] Human Final Boss Enclave Fyrlakith European No Boss Level "The Guardian" Popolocrois Gaba, Sania European Human Companion Gothic II Various European No Bosses Atelier Iris 2: The Azoth of Destiny Gray Asian Human Kenta Miyake Playable Character Turned into a dragonman by the Dragon King Ardgevald Lunar: Silver Star Story Complete Green Dragon Serpentine No Boss Dragon's Dogma Grigori European No David Lodge Final Boss Devour the Hero's heart and made himself an arisen King's Field Guyra, Seath European No Bosses Riviera: The Promised Land Hades European No Optional boss Odin Sphere Hindel, Belial, Wagner, Leventhan Wyvern No Bosses Icewind Dale: Heart of Winter Icasaracht European No Final Boss Ni no Kuni II: Revenant Kingdom Incineraptor European No Boss Fable: The Lost Chapters Jack of Blades European Demon Keith Wickham Final Boss Initially a masked hooded figure, Jack is reincarnated in the Lost Chapters as a dragon. Legacy of the Wizard Keela European No Final Boss Kingdom Hearts Various European Human Various King's Bounty: The Legend Various European No Units Megami Tensei Kuzuryu, Seiryu, Samael Various No Bosses The Last Remnant Various European No Bosses The Legend of Dragoon Various Other No Bosses Dragon Quest VIII Lord of the Dragovians European Human Boss Dragon form changes color Lost Kingdoms Various European No Bosses Lufia Egg Dragon European No Boss Might and Magic Various European No Various Monster Rancher Unnamed European No Trained Monster Neverwinter Nights Various European No Various Pokémon series Various Various Various Trainable Monsters Some Pokémon who aren't dragons in their base forms can transform into one in various ways while others are not dragons originally but can evolve into a Dragon type Pokémon Ogre Battle Various European No Various Lunar series Quark European No Hal Delahousse Supporting Character Tower of Druaga Quox European No Boss Radiata Stories Various Various No Bosses I Am Setsuna The Reaper European Human Final Boss Legend of the Red Dragon Red Dragon European No Final Boss Breath of Fire Ryu European Human Player Character Sacred Various European No Bosses The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings Saesenthessis Various No Eiry Hughes Various Grandia 3 Shiba Wyvern No Supporting Character Owned by Ulf Shin Megami Tensei Various Various No Bosses A race of demons Suikoden Various Various No Bosses Controlled by Dragon Knights Dungeons & Dragons: Shadow over Mystara Synn European Human Final Boss Female red dragon Tears to Tiara Various European No Bosses Thousand Arms Various Various No Bosses Diablo series Tathamet, Trag'Oul European 7th Dragon Tiamat Western No Boss Tales of Zestiria Tiamat European No Boss Alundra 2: A New Legend Begins Tirion European No Neil Ross Companion The Lord of the Rings: War in the North Urgost European No Keith Szarabajka Optional Boss Vagrant Story Various Various No Bosses Hydlide Varalys European No Final Boss Paper Mario: The Origami King Water Vellumental European No Boss A blue, origami dragon. It is the second Vellumental fought. Olivia gains its powers when Mario defeats it. The Witcher III: Wild Hunt Various Various No Beasts Wizardry Various Various No Bosses Wild Arms series Zephyr European No Boss Other dragons appear Golden Treasure: The Great Green Unnamed Wyvern No Player Character/Various Follows the life experiences of one of the so-named "Draak-Kin", an intelligent species of wyverns existing during humanity's prehistoric times. Dragons in multiplayer online games[edit] Video game Name of Dragon Type Transforms, if so from what? Voice Actor Role Genre Notes World of Warcraft Alexstrasza, Deathwing (formerly known as Neltharion), Kalecgos, Korialstrasz, Malygos, Nozdormu, Onyxia, Sapphiron, Soridormi, Sindragosa, Sintharia, Tyranastrasz, Ysera European Human Leader of flights / Bosses MMORPG [1] Heroes of the Storm Alexstrasza, Chromie (Chronormu), Deathwing, Dragon Knight European Human / Gnome / No / Hero Wendee Lee[2] / Karen Strassman[3] Player Characters MOBA Dragon Knight is a Playable Character Transformation on the Dragon Shire battleground. Heroes can liberate the Dragon Knight by activating the shrines and interacting with the Knight's statue in the middle lane of the battleground, taking control of him temporarily. Phantasy Star Alterazgohg, Sil Dragon Various No Bosses MMORPG Counter-Strike Online Angra European Dione Boss / Playable class First-person shooter Boss, in Zombie Scenario Season 2; Playable class, in Zombie Giant Dota 2 Auroth (the Winter Wyvern), Davion (the Dragon Knight), Jakiro (the Twin Head Dragon), Puck (the Faerie Dragon), Viper (the Netherdrake) Wyvern / European / European (2H)[a] / Fae / Amphithere No / Human / No / No / No Merle Dandridge / Tony Todd / Dave Fennoy / Jen Taylor / Tony Todd Player characters MOBA Davion, the Dragon Knight, gained the ability to transform into a Dragon after slaying the Dragon Slyrak. Jakiro, the Twin Head Dragon, has two heads. One breathing fire, the other one breathing ice. Final Fantasy XIV Bahamut, Midgardsormr, Nidhogg, Hraesvelgr, Tiamat, Twintania, Shinryu European No Bosses MMORPG Includes dragons in the Heavensward expansion pack Dungeon Fighter Online Bakal European No Boss MMORPG Dragon's Prophet Various European No Companion MMORPG Drakensang Online Various European No Bosses MMORPG Vindictus Elchulus, Siglint, Beokros European No Greg Chun / Edward Bosco Bosses MMORPG RuneScape Various European No Boss / Enemies / Companion MMORPG Wyverns are also present, but are a separate race to dragons Free Realms Various Wyvern No Player Companion MMORPG Hearthstone Various Various Various Collectible Cards Digital collectible card game Maplestory Horntail European (3H)[b] No Boss MMORPG And many others EverQuest Lord Nagafen, Trakanon, Lady Vox European No Boss MMORPG Mabinogi Various Various No Bosses MMORPG Istaria: Chronicles of the Gifted Named by player European No Player Character / Bosses MMORPG Can be created and customized by paid membership players and they grow up from hatchling to adult to ancient dragons. Awesomenauts Nibbs European No Playable Character MOBA Guild Wars 2 Primordus, Jormag, Zhaitan, Mordemoth, Kralkatorrik, Deep Sea Dragon Various No Bosses MMORPG Elder Dragons sleeping for centuries and have now awoken to unleash a cycle of destruction upon Tyria, the world in which the game is set. They each have control over an element. ArcheAge Red Dragon European No Boss MMORPG League of Legends Shyvana European Humanoid Player Character MOBA A playable champion whose ultimate lets her transform into a dragon temporarily[4] TERA Various Various No Player Companion MMORPG Aion: Upheaval Tiamat, Stormwing, Beritra, Ereshkigal European Human Final Boss MMORPG Tibia Various European No Enemies MMORPG Ultima Online Various Various No Units MMORPG Lineage 2 Valakas, Antharas, Lindvior European No Bosses MMORPG Antharas is the Earth Dragon, Valakas is red, Lindvior is a wind dragon Realm of the Mad God Pyyr, Nikao, Limoz, Feargus, Ivory Wyvern Various No Bosses MMORPG Dragons in other video game genres[edit] Video game Name of Dragon Type Transforms, if so from what? Voice Actor Role Notes The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess Argorok Wyvern No Boss Twilit Dragon Dragon Spirit Amul Wyvern Human Player Character ActRaiser Arctic Wyvern Wyvern No Boss Drakan Arokh European No Jeff McNeal, David Scully Companion Many other dragons appear Kameo: Elements of Power Ash European Fairy Playable Character Transformation Ash is an element of fire Dragon Breed Bahamoot Serpentine No Companion Bakugan Various Various Ball Trainable Monsters The Simpsons: Bart vs. the World Unnamed Asian No Enemies Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess Unnamed Asian Horse Player units The Incredible Toon Machine Bik European No Non-playable Super Princess Peach Blizzaurus European No Boss Bomberman Wars Bomber Dragon European No Unit Starbound Bone Dragon Wyvern No Boss Yoshi's Story Bone Dragon European (3H)[b] No Boss Undead, skeletal dragon Bubble Bobble Series Various European No Main Character The Sims Burnie, Pyritie, Torch European No Player Companion Dragon Rage Cael Cyndar European No Player Character Call of Duty: Black Ops III Unnamed Wyvern No Various The Cave Unnamed European No Boss Banjo-Tooie Chili Billi, Chilly Willy European No Bosses Twin brothers, one breathes fire, the other breathes ice The Cave (video game) Unnamed European No Boss Cobra Triangle Unnamed Serpentine No Boss Dragon City Various European No Playable Character/companion The paler rides dragons throughout the game.[5] Crash Bandicoot: The Wrath of Cortex Various European No Boss / Enemy Digimon Various Various No Trainable Monsters Disciples II: Dark Prophecy Various European No Various Discworld Unnamed European No Boss Donkey Kong 64 Dogadon Hybrid No Boss Dragonfly-Dragon hybrid Master of Magic Draconians European No Playable Character Castlevania: Lords of Shadow Dracula European Vampire Robert Carlyle Player Character A powerful attack DuckTales: Remastered Dracula Duck Serpentine Duck Frank Welker Boss Wario's Woods Drago European No Boss Sacrifice Dragon European No Unit Shrek Dragon European No Final Boss Viva Pinata Dragonache Other No Breedable animal Color depends on the main landscape of the garden Donkey Kong: Jungle Climber Dragon Kremling Asian No Boss Altered Beast Dragon Man European Human Playable Character Transformation Dragonseeds Various Asian No Trainable Monster Battle Realms Dragon Spirit Asian No Unit Called down by Dragon Clan The Longest Journey, Dreamfall Draic Kin European No Supporting Characters Extraterrestrial sentient beings Endless Legend Drakken Wyvern No Unit Star Fox Adventures Drakor European No Boss Fourth boss The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II Drogoth European No Unit Forgotten Worlds Dust Dragon European No Boss Earth Defense Force 2025 Unnamed European No Enemies Minecraft Ender Dragon European No Final Boss Purple-eyed black scaled dragon living in The End Kirby's Epic Yarn Fangora European No Boss Ghostbusters Genesis Fire Dragon Serpentine No Boss The Great Circus Mystery Starring Mickey & Minnie Dragon Pete European Cat Final Boss After being defeated in the first form as wizard, Pete transforms into a red dragon The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild Dinraal, Farosh, Naydra[6] Asian No Bosses Dungeons & Dragons: Tower of Doom Flamewing European No Superboss Blazing Dragons Flicker European No Player character The King of Dragons Gildiss European No Final Boss The Legend of Zelda Aquamentus, Gleeok European / (2H)[a] No Boss Super Mario Galaxy 2 Gobblegut Serpentine No Boss Also fought in a harder fire form Zork: Grand Inquisitor Griff European No Marty Ingels Supporting Character Golden Axe: Beast Rider Great Dragon European No Boss ActRaiser 2 Greed European No Boss Cuphead Grim Matchstick European No Boss Atari Adventure Grundle, Rhindle and Yorgle Asian No Bosses Haruka: Beyond the Stream of Time Unnamed Asian No Supporting Character Kid Icarus: Uprising Hewdraw Serpentine (3H)[b] No Danny Mann Boss Heroes of Might and Magic series Various Various No Units Green dragon (Gold dragon, Emerald dragon), Bone dragon (Ghost dragon, Spectral dragon), Shadow dragon (Red dragon, Black dragon), Faerie dragon, Rust dragon, Crystal dragon, Azure dragon Hoard Unnamed European No Player Character Dragon Saber Huey, Siria Wyvern Human Player Character Kirby's Dream Land 2 Ice Dragon Wingless, Bipedal No Boss Breathes ice instead of fire. American Dragon: Jake Long – Attack of the Dark Dragon Jake Long European Human Player Character Star Wars: Bounty Hunter Krayt Dragon Wingless, Quadrupedal No Boss King's Quest Unnamed European No Boss Kingdom II: Shadoan Unnamed European No Boss Will eat the main character if he doesn't solve a puzzle Lair Various European No Companion Kirby's Return to Dream Land Landia Wyvern (4H)[c] No Boss Each of Landia's four heads is able to split from the main body to form a smaller dragon. Mortal Kombat Liu Kang Asian Human Playable Character Fatality Wonder Boy III: The Dragon's Trap Lizard Man European Human Playable Character Transformation Loom Unnamed European No Boss Mega Man Mecha Dragon European No Boss Sonic Heroes Metal Overlord Other Robot Final Boss Sonic and the Black Knight Mist, Earth Dragon Various No Boss Sorcer Striker Miyamoto European No Playable Character Monster Hunter Various Various No Bosses Monster Maulers Unnamed Serpentine No Boss The Elder Scrolls Adventures: Redguard Nafaalilargus Wyvern No Jonathan Bryce Boss Calls himself "The Crown Jewel of the Empire" Alcahest Nevis European Human Playable character Neopets Various European No Playable Character Age of Mythology Nidhogg European No Unit The Legend of Zelda: Oracle of Seasons Aquamentus, Onox European / Wyvern No / Human Boss / Final Boss Dark Dragon as true form Ōkami Orochi, Yomigami Asian (8H)[d] / Asian No Boss / Supporting Character Panzer Dragoon (series) Various Various No Companion War of the Monsters Raptros European No Playable Character Kirby Super Star Red Dragon/Great Dragon European No Boss Holographic dragon summoned by the Computer Virus boss Metroid series Ridley Other No Final Boss Reappears as Meta Ridley Rock of Ages Unnamed European No Boss Super Mario Odyssey Ruined Dragon European No Boss Scooby-Doo! Unmasked Unnamed Asian Mubber Boss Zen Tuo's dragon The Lost Vikings 2 Scorch European No Player character Simon the Sorcerer Unnamed European No Supporting Character Has a cold when first encountered Dragon's Lair Singe European No Final Boss Cave Story Sky Dragons European No Bosses The Hobbit Smaug European No James Horan Boss Bilbo has to take a golden cup from him Lego The Hobbit Smaug Wyvern No Boss Ninja Gaiden Smaugan European No Boss Other dragons appear Diddy Kong Racing Smokey European No Rival Demon's Crest Somulo European No Boss Donkey Kong Jungle Beat Space Dragon Serpentine No Obstacle Spyro series Spyro, Cynder European No / Shadowy form, Explosive skull Carlos Alazraqui, Tom Kenny, Jess Harnell, Elijah Wood, Josh Keaton, Matthew Mercer, Justin Long / Cree Summer, Mae Whitman, Christina Ricci, Tobie LaSalandra, Erica Lindbeck, Felicia Day Playable Character Spyro's objectives vary depending on the series. However, as of The Legend of Spyro and Skylanders, he is a purple dragon capable of controlling all elements, but is classified as Magic element in Skylanders. Cynder is a former servant of Malefor in both versions, but the result of her corruption results in different effects on her. In Legend of Spyro, she gains control over shadows, poison, fear, and wind, but in Skylanders, she becomes an Undead elemental, capable of using spectral lightning, summoning ghosts, and turning into a shadow form. Keio Flying Squadron Spot European No Companion Summoners War: Sky Arena Various European No Companion Super Ghouls 'n Ghosts Unnamed Asian (3H)[b] No Boss Syvalion Unnamed Asian No Player character Space Harrier Uriah Asian No Companion Devil World Tamagon Other No Player character Thanatos Thanatos Wyvern No Player Character Tomb Raider 2 Unnamed Asian Human Boss Total War: Warhammer Various European No Units Homestar Runner Trogdor Other No Player character The Burninator True Crime: Streets of LA Unnamed Asian No Boss Fur Fighters Tweek, Gwyneth European No Playable character The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker Valoo European No Supporting Character Hyrule Warriors Volga European Human Boss, Playable Character The Adventure of Link Volvagia Asian No Boss Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time Volvagia Asian No Boss Subterranean Lava Dragon Wildlife Park: Ultimate Edition Unnamed European No Player Character Others Threads of Fate Wylaf European No Supporting Character Terraria Wyvern Asian No Enemy Despite being called "wyverns" they resemble an Asian dragon Hype: The Time Quest Zatila, Voydh European No Companion / Boss Zoids Series Various Various No Various Animal Crossing Drago Dragons in games for mobile devices[edit] There are a number of casual, idle, life simulation and other types of games for mobile devices involving dragons. Video game Genre Platform(s) Notes Clash of Clans Strategy Android, iOS Dragons are Units Clash Royale Strategy Android, iOS Dragons are Collectible Cards Dragon City Social network game Android, iOS, Facebook Dragon Mania Legends Casual Android, iOS, Windows Dragon Story Life simulation Android, iOS Dragon Story is a game where the player breeds and discovers many dragon species on an island known as the Dragon Islands. The dragons must be fed with food from the farms. Dragon types include Red, Green, Yellow, Blue, Purple, White, Pink, and Black. Puzzle & Dragons Puzzle Android, iOS, Amazon Fire The player collects dragons as a reward for completing the game's dungeons or spending in-game currency. Raid: Shadow Legends Strategy Android, iOS PC Wyvern bosses Tap Zoo Idle Android, iOS Tiny Zoo Simulation iOS Zoo Craft: Animal Family Simulation Android, iOS Zoo Story 2 Casual Android, iOS Dragons in tabletop games[edit] Dragons in tabletop role-playing games[edit] Dragons are common (especially as non-player characters) in Dungeons & Dragons and in some fantasy role-playing video games. They, like many other dragons in modern culture, run the full range of good, evil, and everything in between. In Dungeons and Dragons, the color of the dragon shows if it is evil or good. Metallic dragons are forces of good and they are led by the mighty dragon-god Bahamut. Chromatic dragons are evil creatures ranging from white (the weakest) to the mighty red (the strongest). The chromatic dragons revere Tiamat, a five-headed dragon-god with heads of each color of the evil dragon (red, blue, green, white, black). Various Great Feathered Serpent dragons, Great Eastern dragons, Great Western dragons, Great Sirrush dragons, and others in Shadowrun Various types of dragons found in the Rifts role-playing game. Various Great Western dragons and others in Earthdawn Dragons in board games[edit] Red, green and white dragon tiles in Mahjong. Darkfyre in DragonStrike (board game) Dragon chess, a three-board chess variant designed by Gary Gygax, has a dragon piece. Big Snore, the sleepy purple title dragon from Don't Wake the Dragon!, a mid-1980s children's board game Carcassonne - The Princess & the Dragon, an expansion for Carcassonne (board game), centers around a dragon represented by a large wooden piece Mimring (the evil red dragon), Charos (the green dragon), Braxas (the black dragon queen), and Niflhelm (the white dragon king) are some of the most powerful characters in Heroscape. Dragons in card games[edit] Fantasy card games often feature dragons, often many of them, and thus this sub-section only mentions the more popular or important ones. Magic: The Gathering[edit] Dragon is a creature subtype in Magic: The Gathering. The Primeval Dragons in the Invasion block, namely Crosis, the Purger; Darigaaz, the Igniter; Dromar, the Banisher; Rith, the Awakener and Treva, the Renewer The Elder Dragon Legends from the Legends block, namely Arcades Sabboth, Chromium, Nicol Bolas, Palladia-Mors and Vaevictis Asmadi Draco, an extremely powerful artifact dragon, that has the highest mana cost in the game (16 colorless mana). Rorix Bladewing, a Shivan dragon who fights in the Otarian Grand Coliseum to reclaim his nation's honor: upon his death, Rorix is reincarnated as a "dracolich", under the name Bladewing the Risen. The Guardian Ryuu of Kamigawa, including Jugan, the Rising Star; Keiga, the Tide Star; Kokusho, the Evening Star; Ryusei, the Falling Star; and Yosei, the Morning Star. Niv-Mizzet, the insightful but short-tempered dragon wizard and leader of the Izzet guild in Ravnica. The Planar Chaos set introduces a new cycle of legendary Dragons bearing many similarities to the Invasion cycle - Oros, the Avenger; Intet, the Dreamer; Teneb, the Harvester; Numot, the Devastator; and Vorosh, the Hunter. The Future Sight set contains a legendary dragon called Tarox Bladewing in its "futureshifted" sheet. Tarox is apparently the son of the above-mentioned Rorix Bladewing, and according to his flavour text, "despises his siblings as insults to his line, finding and devouring each in turn". According to the magicthegathering.com article that previewed Tarox, he wants to be just like his father Rorix - although smaller than his father, Tarox's controller can discard another Tarox from their hand to double his size, making him a far heavier hitter than Rorix. There are also numerous other dragons, which have appeared in almost every set and every block. The most notable such dragon is Shivan Dragon, which has appeared in all but one of the Magic Core Sets. World of Warcraft Trading Card Game[edit] World of Warcraft Trading Card Game features many dragons from Warcraft universe, including Onyxia, Deathwing, Alexstrasza and all the other Aspects. Yu-Gi-Oh![edit] Dragon is also a monster type in the Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card Game. Dragons in Yu-Gi-Oh! include: The Blue-Eyes White Dragon and its incarnations, including Paladin of White Dragon (A ritual monster and younger version of Blue Eyes), Blue-Eyes Ultimate Dragon (the fusion of three Blue-Eyes White Dragon), Dragon Master Knight (A fusion monster composed of Black Luster Soldier and Blue-Eyes Ultimate Dragon) and Blue-Eyes Shining Dragon, and Blue-Eyes Toon Dragon (A Toon version of the Blue-Eyes White Dragon). The Red-Eyes B. Dragon, and its incarnations, including Red-Eyes B. Chick, Paladin of Dark Dragon (A ritual monster and younger version of Red Eyes, but called Knight of Dark Dragons in the anime), Lord of the Red (A ritual monster and almost a human form of Red Eyes), Red-Eyes Wyvern, Red-Eyes Black Metal Dragon, Red-Eyes Darkness Dragon, Red-Eyes Darkness Metal Dragon, and its many Fusion monsters. Baby Dragon which morphs into Thousand Dragon using Time Wizard. In the TCG/OCG, Thousand Dragon is a Fusion monster with Time Wizard and Baby Dragon and its materials. Curse of Dragon and its Fusion form Gaia the Dragon Champion (A fusion monster composed of Gaia the Fierce Knight and Curse of Dragon) Slifer the Sky Dragon (Sky Dragon of Osiris), the Egyptian god Osiris card avatar. The Winged Dragon of Ra The Eye of Timaeus, The Fang of Critius, and The Claw of Hermos, and their human knight counterparts; the Legendary Dragon Cards|Three Legendary Dragons Cyber Dragon variants, though actually classed as Machine type monsters, can easily be compared to the Blue-Eyes White Dragon. Rainbow Dragon, the Crystal Lord, and Rainbow Dark Dragon Chaos Emperor Dragon - Envoy of the End White Night Dragon Five-Headed Dragon (originally known as F.G.D.) The Five Dragons linked to the Signers: Stardust Dragon, Red Dragon Archfiend, Black Rose Dragon, Ancient Fairy Dragon, Black-Winged Dragon, and Life Stream Dragon. This also includes their "Buster/Assault Mode"(Stardust Dragon /Assault Mode and Red Dragon Archfiend / Assault Mode) "Majestic/Savior"(Majestic Star Dragon and Majestic Red Dragon) Cosmic Sychro Monster Forms(Shooting Star Dragon, Red Nova Dragon, and Cosmic Blazar Dragon, technically both Shooting Star Dragon and Cosmic Blazar Dragon are both Accel Synchro while Red Nova Dragon is Double Tuning) and Limit Over Accel Synchro(Shooting Quasar Dragon). Dragon Knight Draco-Equiste (A fusion monster composed of 1 Dragon-Type Synchro monster + 1 Warrior-Type monster) Hundred Eyes Dragon ( A dragon who serves the Earthbound Immortals) The Inca archetypes, Sun Dragon Inti and Moon Dragon Quilla Jormungardr The Nordic Serpent Several evolutionary dragons, such as Armed Dragons, Horus the Black Flame Dragon and some others. The Malefic Dragons the evil or the corrupted versions of the signature dragons throughout the Yu-Gi-Oh! series e.g. Malefic Stardust Dragon, Malefic Cyber End Dragon, Malefic Rainbow Dragon, Malefic Red-Eyes Black Dragon, Malefic Blue-Eyes White Dragon and most notably the Malefic Paradox Dragon and Malefic Truth Dragon. Cardfight!! Vanguard[edit] Several races and clans within the Cardfight!! Vanguard trading card game are heavily based around dragons. A few of the races that are based on dragons include: Flame Dragon, found only in the Kagero and Narukami clan this race is the typical fire breathing dragon archetype. Notable units include Dragonic Overlord, Dragonic Overlord the End, Dauntless Drive Dragon, Gattling Claw Dragon, and Vortex Dragon. Cosmo Dragon, a powerful race considered holy and usually associated with bringing judgment upon evil forces. Notable units include Soul Saver Dragon and Satellitefall Dragon. Abyss Dragon, the abyss dragons are known for their strength and willingness to sacrifice allied units to gain extra power. Notable units include: Phantom Blaster Dragon, Phantom Blaster Overlord, Spectral Duke Dragon, Revenger, Raging Form Dragon and Revenger, Dragruler Phantom Dino Dragon, unique to the Tachikaze clan. As their name would suggest, they appear more dinosaur-like than dragon-like. Notable units include Tyrant, Deathrex, Dragon Egg, and Sonic Noa. Winged Dragon, the typical flying dragon. Many of these units are mechanized. Notable units include Wyvern Strike, Tejas, Wyvern Strike, Jarran and Hex Cannon Wyvern. Dragonman, are units that share the features of both man and dragon. Notable units include Lizard Runner, Undeux, Wyvern Guard, Barri, and Demonic Dragon Berserker, Yaksha. Thunder Dragon, found only in the Narukami clan this race are dragons that are attacking with lightning or thunder base. Notable units include Dragonic Kaiser Vermillion, Dragonic Kaiser Vermillion "THE BLOOD", Eradicator, Vowing Sword Dragon and Eradicator, Dragonic Descendant. Cyber Dragon, found only in the Link Joker clan this race are mechanical looking dragons and capable of locking your opponents rear-guards. Notable units include: Star-vader, Mobius Breath Dragon, Gravity Ball Dragon, Gravity Collapse Dragon, Schwarzschild Dragon, Star-vader, Infinite Zero Dragon, Star-vader, Nebula Lord Dragon and Star-vader, Chaos Breaker Dragon. Tear Dragon, found in the clans of Kagero and but mostly Aqua Force these dragons are water-based attackers and can attack up to 3-5 times in 1 turn. Notable units include Blue Storm Dragon, Maelstrom, Blue Storm Supreme Dragon, Glory Maelstrom, Blue Flight Dragon, Trans-core Dragon, Last Card, Revonn, Blue Wave Dragon, Tetra-drive Dragon. Zeroth Dragons is a race featured on one card of each nation, The Zeroth Dragons are weapons of mass destruction born from the Dragon Deity of Destruction, Gyze. The apostles of Gyze plan to use these dragons to revive him. These dragons can be played to any clan that represents their nation and also if this Grade 4 units failed to attack your opponent's Vanguard you cannot use your G-Zone cards anymore during the Cardfight This units are United Sanctuary's Zeroth Dragon of Zenith Peak, Ultima, Dragon Empire's Zeroth Dragon of Inferno, Drachma, Star Gate's Zeroth Dragon of Destroy Star, Stark, Dark Zone's Zeroth Dragon of End of the World, Dust, Magallanica's Zeroth Dragon of Distant Sea, Megiddo and Zoo's Zeroth Dragon of Death Garden, Zoa. Duel Masters Trading Card Game[edit] There are many cards focusing on dragons in Duel Masters such as the ones included in the Epic Dragons of Hyper Chaos set. See also[edit] List of dragons in film and television List of dragons in literature List of dragons in popular culture List of dragons in mythology and folklore Notes[edit] ^ a b c Two-headed dragon ^ a b c d Three-headed dragon ^ Four-headed dragon ^ Many-headed dragon References[edit] ^ Game Informer provides information on who the character is, why the character is important, and what is next for the character in "Faces of Warcraft: The Essential Introduction to Characters," Game Informer 183 (July 2008): 101. ^ Toyias, Andrea (2017-11-27). "So glad you love her! It is the amazing, beautiful and talented Wendee Lee! She almost killed herself with that voice and so many lines....but she made it through. And it is glorious! xx". @AndreaToyias. Retrieved 2019-10-23. ^ "Bio". Karen Strassman. Retrieved 2019-12-25. ^ "League of Legends". euw.leagueoflegends.com. Retrieved 2019-10-24. ^ Peeples, Jeremy (26 November 2013). "Review: Dragon City". HDragon City. Social Point. Retrieved 10 December 2013. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Orry, Tom (May 7, 2020). "Breath of the Wild: How to Find Naydra, Dinraal and Farosh Dragons". US Gamer. Retrieved October 18, 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) v t e Dragons In mythology European Ajatar Amphiptere Balaur Bisterne Dragon Blue Ben Bolla Chuvash dragon Cockatrice Cuélebre Gargouille Greek Dragon Cychreides Delphyne Lernaean Hydra Ladon Pyrausta Python Guivre Herensuge Knucker Jaculus La Guita Xica Lambton Worm Laidly Worm of Spindleston Heugh Worm of Linton Lindworm Marraco Dragon of Mordiford Norse dragon Fafnir Jörmungandr Níðhöggr Oilliphéist Peluda Slavic dragon Sockburn Worm Stoor worm Sugaar Tugarin Wawel Dragon Welsh Dragon White dragon Wyvern Yelbeghen Zilant Zirnitra Asian Apalala Bakunawa Bašmu Chinese dragon Ao Guang Azure Dragon Chi Dilong Feilian Feilong Fucanglong Hong Jiaolong Panlong Pulao Qiulong Shenlong Teng Tianlong Yellow Dragon Yinglong Zhulong Druk Illuyanka Japanese dragon Kiyohime Kuraokami Kuzuryū Mizuchi Ryūjin Toyotama-hime Wani Watatsumi Yamata no Orochi Zennyo Ryūō Korean dragon Kur Labbu Lahamu Leviathan Lotan Pakhangba Phaya Naga Seraphim Tanin'iver Tannin (monster) Tiamat Vietnamese dragon Vishap Vritra Yam Zahhak Other Amaru Feathered Serpent Gaasyendietha Horned Serpent Nyami Nyami Ouroboros Peuchen Piasa Quetzalcoatl Rahab (Egypt) Sea serpent Snallygaster Teju Jagua Xiuhcoatl In culture Mythology and folklore Draco (constellation) Dragon dance Dragon boat Dragon (zodiac) Dragonslayers Princess and dragon In fiction Popular culture Film and television Games Dragons in Dungeons & Dragons Literature Dragons in J.R.R.Tolkien's legendarium Smaug Dragons in Dragon Prince Dragons in Pern In art Nine Dragons painting Nine-Dragon Wall Dragon jar Cádiz Memorial Dragon and Tiger Pagodas Dragon boundary mark Dragon Bridge (Da Nang) Dragon Bridge (Ljubljana) Merritt Island Dragon Pegasus and Dragon Related Dragon's Eye Here be dragons Dragon curve v t e Lists of fictional life forms Plants Plants Animals Arthropods Fish Parasites Worms Amphibians Frogs and toads animation Reptiles Crocodilians Dinosaurs Snakes Turtles Birds Birds of prey Ducks animation Penguins Mammals Canines Animation Comics Literature Dogs prose and poetry comics live-action film live-action television animation animated film animated television video games Foxes Wolves Felines Animation Comics Film Literature Television Big cats animation Rodents Animation Comics Literature Video Games Primates Animation Comics Film Literature Television Video games Ungulates Animation Horses Literature Pachyderms Pigs Miscellaneous Bears Marsupials Musteloids animation Badgers Raccoons Pinnipeds Rabbits and hares Rhinogradentia Humanoids General Animation Comics Film Literature Television Video games Specific Avian Piscine and Amphibian Reptilian Other Alien species Humanoids Parasites Symbionts Legendary By type Dragons popular culture film and television games literature mythology and folklore Equines Unicorns Winged horses Winged unicorns Ghosts Giants Hybrids Mermaids Vampires by region Dhampirs Werewolves popular Theological Fictional angels Fictional demons Fictional deities