Wikimedia list article This list is incomplete; you can help by adding missing items with reliable sources. St Trinnean's Academy for Young Ladies was one of the real-life inspirations for the fictional girls' school of St Trinian's The squalid Dotheboys Hall in Dickens' Nicholas Nickleby was inspired by a real school in Bowes.[1] This is a list of fictional schools as portrayed in various media. Contents 1 Literature 2 Comics 3 Film 4 Television 5 Others 6 Magic schools 6.1 In a series 6.2 Others 7 See also 8 References 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources Literature[edit] Main articles: School and university in literature, School story, and Campus novel Camden College Chalet School, in books by Elinor Brent-Dyer Greyfriars School, in books by Charles Hamilton writing as Frank Richards The Little Female Academy, in Sarah Fielding's 1754 book.[2] Lowood Institution, in Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë Malory Towers, in books by Enid Blyton Miskatonic University St Trinian's School, in comic books by Ronald Searle and later films Sweet Valley High Sweet Valley University Comics[edit] Empire State University Hudson University Film[edit] Monsters University Television[edit] Main article: List of television series about school Ackley Bridge College in Channel 4's television drama series, Ackley Bridge, set in the fictional Yorkshire mill town of Ackley Bridge[3] For-Profit Online University Grange Hill School in BBC's television drama series, Grange Hill, set in the fictional North London borough of Northam[4] Hudson University Mars University Others[edit] Starfleet Academy, located in San Francisco, California in the fictional Star Trek universe. Magic schools[edit] A magic school is an institution for learning magic, appearing in works of fantasy depicting worlds in which magic exists and in which there is an organized society of magicians or wizards who pass on their knowledge in a systematic way. It may also be a school which is magically protected, or a Faculty of Magic in a university which also teaches other subjects. In a more loose way, also a place where a single wizard teaches an apprentice can count as a magic school. In a series[edit] Dungeons and Dragons See also: Magic of Dungeons & Dragons § Arcane magic Harry Potter series See also: Fictional universe of Harry Potter Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry in Scotland Beauxbatons Academy of Magic in France Durmstrang Institute for Magical Learning between the border of Norway and Sweden Ilvermorny School of Witchcraft and Wizardry in North America[5] Uagadou in Africa[5] Mahoutokoro in Japan[5] Castelobruxo (pronounced cah-stelo-bru-sho) Amazon rainforest in Brazil[5] Koldovstoretz in Russia[6] Legendary The Black School, where the Icelandic priest and scholar Sæmundr fróði supposedly learned magic from the Devil Domdaniel The Cave at Salamanca where the Devil supposedly taught, among others, Pope Sylvester II The Scholomance, a legendary school of black magic in Transylvania Others[edit] Aethergarde Academy: Ark of the Youth & Mystic Arts in Aetherholmes, New Philippines, a magic school featured in Aethergarde Academy by Guillen Victori. This is the only mystical university that exists in the fictional version of the Philippines called the Nuevas Filipinas II/New Philippines. Youth of only the age of 18 in a certain year are allowed to enter once annunciated as a surgent (mystical-blooded human) after the results of genetic & psychological examinations on the Hallmarking Day. Toadblatt's Summer School of Sorcery in The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy Burg Magic School, featured in Lunar: Walking School and its remake Magic School Lunar! Balamb Garden, a magic school featured in Final Fantasy VIII. Other "gardens" in this game include Galbadia Garden and Trabia Garden. Brakebills College for Magical Pedagogy, a fictional college in The Magicians by Lev Grossman. Located on the Hudson in upstate New York, near West Point. It is the only school of magic in North America. Of other schools, there is at least one in South America, located in the Argentinian pampas. In Europe there are three schools - in the UK, in Zurich, and at a Medieval keep in the Carpathians. There are four schools in Asia, one of them on Rishiri Island off the coast of Hokkaido, and one in New Zealand. Carthak University, in Tamora Pierce's Tortall books. Her books in the Circle universe also have a school of magic in the Winding Circle community. Magic School, a location in the Charmed television series Miss Cackle's Academy for Witches from The Worst Witch series by Jill Murphy Miss Robichaux's Academy for Exceptional Young Ladies in American Horror Story Roanoke Academy for the Sorcerous Arts in The Unexpected Enlightenment of Rachel Griffin by L. Jagi Lamplighter The School of Magic on Roke Island from Ursula K. LeGuin's Earthsea cycle Veritas, the hidden magical university inside Harvard in The Siren and the Sword and other books of the Magic University series by Cecilia Tan Unseen University in the Discworld books of Terry Pratchett Will O' Wisp Academy in Magical Starsign Wizard's Hall, in the eponymous novel by Jane Yolen Magicians' Guild / University from The Black Magician series by Trudi Canavan The Colleges of Magic, from Warhammer Fantasy The University, from The Kingkiller Chronicle by Patrick Rothfuss teaches magic among various other subjects University of Rhiannon, granting its graduates the degree of "Magister in the field of Magic", in Three Hearts and Three Lions by Poul Anderson University of Salamanca Faculty of Magic in The Charwoman's Shadow by Lord Dunsany Mr. Wickens' School, in "The Wall Around the World" by Theodore Cogswell Starfall in Marie Brennan's Doppelganger and Warrior and Witch - where the daughters of witches are placed when ten years and undergo fifteen years of intensive training, in preparation for the extremely difficult Test at the age of 25. This would result either in becoming a fully empowered witch, wielding magic - or in becoming dead. Luna Nova Magical Academy in Yoh Yoshinari's Little Witch Academia, a prestigious school for young girls training to become witches. Daane University, in Holly Lisle's Fire in the Mists. The Institute in Shadowhunters Wiz Tech, in Wizards of Waverly Place The 2020 video game Ikenfell features a magic school of the same name. See also[edit] List of fictional magic schools List of fictional British and Irish universities References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ Photographic reproduction of Dotheboys Hall, Bowes, 1841, British Library, 1841 ^ Clark, Beverley Lyon; Shankar, Lavina Dhingra (October 1994), "When Women Tell Tales About School", Studies in Popular Culture: 17–20, JSTOR 23413787 ^ Bley Griffiths, Eleanor (25 June 2019). "When is Ackley Bridge on TV? Who's in the cast and what's going to happen?". Radio Times. Retrieved 8 September 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Grange Hill makes Mersey debut". BBC. 28 January 2003. Retrieved 8 September 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ a b c d Hughes, WilliM (January 30, 2016). "J.K. Rowling announces four new wizarding schools you'll never get to attend". AV Club. Retrieved 31 January 2016. ^ Wonderbook: Book of Potions Sources[edit] Alexander H. Pitofsky (2014), American Boarding School Fiction, 1928-1981, McFarland, ISBN 9780786478651 Nancy G. Rosoff; Stephanie Spencer (2019), British and American School Stories, 1910–1960, Springer, ISBN 9783030059866 Jeffrey Richards (1988), Happiest Days: The Public Schools in English Fiction, Manchester University Press, ISBN 9780719027758 Silke Braselmann (2019), The Fictional Dimension of the School Shooting Discourse, Walter de Gruyter GmbH, ISBN 9783110649017 Jo Keroes (1999), Tales Out of School, SIU Press, ISBN 9780809322381 L. Spolton (1963), "The Secondary School in Post‐war Fiction", British Journal of Educational Studies, 11 (2): 125–141, doi:10.1080/00071005.1963.9973093 v t e Fictional education Schools Fictional British and Irish universities Fictional Oxford colleges Fictional Cambridge colleges Fictional Oxbridge colleges Fictional schools Fictional magic schools School and university in literature Campus novel Varsity novel School television series People Fictional professors Fictional librarians representation in popular culture Fictional Oxford people