Wikipedia list article This page lists notable fantasy novels (and novel series).[1][2] The books appear in alphabetical order by title (beginning with A to H) (ignoring "A", "An", and "The"); series are alphabetical by author-designated name or, if there is no such, some reasonable designation. Science-fiction novels and short-story collections are not included here. This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources. Contents:  A B C D E F G H  I–R (separate page)  S–Z (separate page) References See also A[edit] Abhorsen Trilogy by Garth Nix Acacia: The War With The Mein by David Anthony Durham Aegypt series by John Crowley Aladore by Henry Newbolt Alice in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll Alphabet of Thorn by Patricia McKillip The Tales of Alvin Maker series by Orson Scott Card The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay by Michael Chabon The Amber series by Roger Zelazny American Gods by Neil Gaiman Among Others by Jo Walton The Anubis Gates by Tim Powers Apprentice Adept series by Piers Anthony Arafel duo by C. J. Cherryh The Artefacts of Power by Maggie Furey Artemis Fowl series by Eoin Colfer. At Swim-Two-Birds by Flann O'Brien At the Back of the North Wind by George MacDonald B[edit] The Bards of Bone Plain by Patricia A. McKillip Barsoom series by Edgar Rice Burroughs The Bartimaeus Trilogy by Jonathan Stroud Bas-Lag by China Miéville The Battle of Apocalypse by Eduardo Spohr Beauty by Robin McKinley Beauty by Sheri S. Tepper Beautiful Darkness (novel) by Kami Garcia and Margaret Stohl Beautiful Creatures (book) by Kami Garcia and Margaret Stohl The Belgariad series by David Eddings The Bell at Sealey Head by Patricia A. McKillip Beyond the Golden Stair by Hannes Bok Beyonders: A World Without Heroes by Brandon Mull Beyond the Spiderwick Chronicles by Holly Black The BFG by Roald Dahl The Bitterbynde trilogy by Cecilia Dart-Thornton Black Blossom by Boban Knežević The Black Company saga by Glen Cook, a nested set of sub-series The Black Jewels trilogy by Anne Bishop The Black Magician (novel series) by Trudi Canavan The Black Swan by Mercedes Lackey The Black Tides of Heaven by JY Yang Bloodring by Faith Hunter Blood Song by Anthony Ryan[3] The Blue Star by Fletcher Pratt The Blue Sword by Robin McKinley Boggart series by Susan Cooper Bone Dance by Emma Bull The Book of Atrix Wolfe by Patricia McKillip Book of Enchantments by Patricia C. Wrede The Book of the New Sun series by Gene Wolfe The Books of Abarat by Clive Barker Brak the Barbarian by John Jakes Brown Girl in the Ring by Nalo Hopkinson Bloodlines by Richelle Mead C[edit] Captain Slaughterboard Drops Anchor by Mervyn Peake Cats Have No Lord by Will Shetterly The Changeling Sea by Patricia A. McKillip Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl Charlie Bone Series by Jenny Nimmo The Chathrand Voyage Quartet by Robert V.S. Redick Chernevog by C. J. Cherryh Children of the Lamp series by P.B. Kerr Chimera by John Barth Chrestomanci series by Diana Wynne Jones Chronicles of an Age of Darkness by Hugh Cook Chronicles of Ancient Darkness by Michelle Paver Chronicles of Brothers series by Wendy Alec The Chronicles of Narnia by C.S. Lewis - see at N, below The Chronicles of Prydain by Lloyd Alexander Chronicles of The Raven by James Barclay The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant series by Stephen R. Donaldson - see at T, The Circus of Dr. Lao by Charles G. Finney City of Bones by Martha Wells The City of Brass (novel) by S. A. Chakraborty The Claidi Journals by Tanith Lee Coldfire Trilogy by Celia S. Friedman Cold Tom by Sally Prue Conan series by Robert E. Howard and others Coraline by Neil Gaiman The Cottingley Secret by Hazel Gaynor The Court of the Air by Stephen Hunt The Crock of Gold by James Stephens The Cygnet and the Firebird by Patricia A. McKillip D[edit] The Dagger and the Coin series by Daniel Abraham Dalemark Quartet by Diana Wynne Jones The Dalkey Archive by Flann O'Brien Damiano series by R. A. MacAvoy The Dark Artifices trilogy by Cassandra Clare The Dark Is Rising sequence by Susan Cooper The Dark Tower series by Stephen King Daughter of the Lioness series by Tamora Pierce The Death of the Necromancer by Martha Wells Deltora series by Emily Rodda The Deptford Mice by Robin Jarvis Deryni novels by Katherine Kurtz Descent into Hell by Charles Williams Dirk Gently series by Douglas Adams Discworld series by Terry Pratchett The Divine Cities series by Robert Jackson Bennett The Door in the Hedge by Robin McKinley The Door Within Trilogy by Wayne Thomas Batson Dorothea Dreams by Suzy McKee Charnas The Dragon House by Darrell Schweitzer Dragoncharm trilogy by Graham Edwards The Dragon's Familiar by Lawrence Jeffrey Cohen Dragonlance Chronicles trilogy by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman Dragon Raja by Lee Yeongdo Dragon Rider by Cornelia Funke The Dragonbone Chair by Tad Williams The Dragonology Chronicles: The Dragon's Eye by Dugald Steer Dragonriders of Pern series by Anne McCaffrey Dragonsbane by Barbara Hambly Dragonvarld trilogy by Margaret Weis The Dreamwalker's Child by Steve Voake The Drawing of the Dark by Tim Powers The Dreamstone by C. J. Cherryh The Dresden Files series by Jim Butcher Drizzt Do'Urden novels by R. A. Salvatore Durand Col series by David Keck. Series has no official name, however Durand Col is generally used because he is the central focus of all the novels. The Dying Earth series by Jack Vance E[edit] Ealdwood by C. J. Cherryh Earthsea series by Ursula K. Le Guin The Edge Chronicles by Paul Stewart and Chris Riddell Elantris by Brandon Sanderson The Elenium series by David Eddings Elric of Melnibone by Michael Moorcock Ella Enchanted by Gail Carson Levine The Empire Trilogy by Raymond E. Feist and Janny Wurts The Enchanted Castle by E. Nesbit Enchanted Forest series by Patricia C. Wrede Eon: Dragoneye Reborn by Alison Goodman Eragon by Christopher Paolini Eldest by Christopher Paolini Excalibur by Sanders Anne Laubenthal Expecting Someone Taller by Tom Holt The Eyes of the Dragon by Stephen King F[edit] Fablehaven series by Brandon Mull Faery in Shadow by C. J. Cherryh The Face in the Frost by John Bellairs The Faerie Wars Chronicles by Herbie Brennan Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser series by Fritz Leiber Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by J.K. Rowling Farsala trilogy by Hilari Bell The Farseer Trilogy by Robin Hobb The Fates of the Princes of Dyfed by Kenneth Morris Fearsome Creatures of the Lumberwoods by William T. Cox A Fine and Private Place by Peter S. Beagle The Fionavar Tapestry by Guy Gavriel Kay Fisher King series by Tim Powers Fledgling by Octavia Butler Flesh and Fire by Laura Anne Gilman Flying Dutch by Tom Holt The Fool on the Hill by Matt Ruff The Forgotten Beasts of Eld by Patricia McKillip Fortress series by C. J. Cherryh Fourth Mansions by R. A. Lafferty G[edit] Garrett series by Glen Cook Gezeitenwelt series by Magus Magellan The Ghost and The Goth by Stacey Kade Ghost Blows Out the Light by Zhang Muye Ghostwritten by David Mitchell Giant of World's End by Lin Carter The Girl in a Swing by Richard Adams Gloriana, or The Unfulfill'd Queen by Michael Moorcock The Goblin Emperor by Katherine Addison The Goblin Mirror by C. J. Cherryh Gods of Jade and Shadow by Silvia Moreno-Garcia Gods upon a time by Dai Idris and Martin Newman The Golem and the Jinni by Helene Wecker Gormenghast series by Mervyn Peake - see at T (Titus), below Graceling by Kristin Cashore The Great God Pan by Arthur Machen The Green Child by Herbert Read The Green Round by Arthur Machen Green Rider by Kristen Britain Grendel by John Gardner Grishaverse by Leigh Bardugo H[edit] The Hagwood Books by Robin Jarvis The Halfblood Chronicles by Mercedes Lackey and Andre Norton Haroun and the Sea of Stories by Salman Rushdie Harry Potter series by J. K. Rowling Hart's Hope by Orson Scott Card The Haunted Woman by David Lindsay The Haunting of Hill House by Shirley Jackson The Heart of What Was Lost by Tad Williams The Heavenly Fox by Richard Parks Here Comes the Sun by Tom Holt Hereafter, and After by Richard Parks Heroes of the Valley by Jonathan Stroud The Heroes of Olympus by Rick Riordan The Hill of Dreams by Arthur Machen His Dark Materials series by Philip Pullman History of The Vollplaen by Daniel Johnson The Hobbit by J. R. R. Tolkien The Hounds of the Morrigan by Pat O'Shea The House on the Borderland by William Hope Hodgson House of Night by P.C. Cast The House on Parchment Street by Patricia A. McKillip The House with a Clock in Its Walls by John Bellairs Howl's Moving Castle by Diana Wynne Jones The Hum and the Shiver by Alex Bledsoe The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms by N. K. Jemisin Hush, Hush by Becca Fitzpatrick See also[edit] List of fantasy authors List of science fiction novels List of fantasy story collections List of alternate history fiction References[edit] ^ Hollands, Neil (2007). Read on... fantasy fiction : reading lists for every taste. Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited. ISBN 9781591583301. ^ Andrews, Stephen E.; Rennison, Nick (2009). 100 must-read fantasy novels. London: A & C Black. ISBN 9781408136072. ^ http://www.bestfantasybookshq.com/hqs-top-10-must-reads/ v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category