Wikipedia list article This page lists notable fantasy novels (and novel series).[1][2] The books appear in alphabetical order by title (beginning with I to R) (ignoring "A", "An", and "The"); series are alphabetical by author-designated name or, if there is no such, some reasonable designation. Science-fiction novels and short-story collections are not included here. This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources. Contents:   A–H (separate page) I J K L M N O P Q R  S–Z (separate page) References See also I[edit] The Idylls of the Queen by Phyllis Ann Karr Ile-Rien series by Martha Wells The Immortals series by Tamora Pierce Incarnations of Immortality series by Piers Anthony The Incorruptibles by John Hornor Jacobs Inda (novel) by Sherwood Smith In the Forests of Serre by Patricia McKillip The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman (aka The War of Dreams) by Angela Carter Ingo series by Helen Dunmore The Inheritance Cycle by Christopher Paolini Eragon, Eldest, Brisingr, Inheritance Inheritance by Steven Savile Ink Exchange | Wicked Lovely by Melissa Marr Inkheart Trilogy by Cornelia Funke Inkheart, Inkspell, Inkdeath The Invisible Library series by Genevieve Cogman The Invisible Library, The Masked City, The Burning Page, The Lost Plot Islandia by Austin Tappan Wright The Infernal Devices trilogy by Cassandra Clare Clockwork Angel, Clockwork Prince, Clockwork Princess J[edit] Jade City by Fonda Lee James and the Giant Peach by Roald Dahl Jonathan Strange & Mr. Norrell by Susanna Clarke Journalists (novel) by Sergei Aman K[edit] Kai Lung series by Ernest Bramah Kandide and the Secret of the Mists by Diana S. Zimmerman The Kane Chronicles by Rick Riordan Kellory the Warlock by Lin Carter The Keys to the Kingdom by Garth Nix The Khaavren Romances by Steven Brust Khaled: A Tale of Arabia by F. Marion Crawford The Kin of Ata Are Waiting for You, by Dorothy Bryant The King in Yellow by Robert W. Chambers The King of Elfland's Daughter by Lord Dunsany King Rat by China Miéville Kingdoms of Elfin by Sylvia Townsend Warner The Kingdoms of Thorn and Bone by Greg Keyes Kingfisher by Patricia A. McKillip The Kingkiller Chronicle by Patrick Rothfuss Krondor's Sons (The Riftwar Stories) by Raymond E. Feist Kushiel's Legacy by Jacqueline Carey L[edit] The Land Across by Gene Wolfe The Last Dragon by Silvana De Mari The Last Unicorn by Peter S. Beagle The Last Voyage of Somebody the Sailor by John Barth Latro series by Gene Wolfe The Lays of Anuskaya series by Bradley Beaulieu The Lays of Beleriand by J. R. R. Tolkien Legends of the Riftwar by Raymond E. Feist Letters from a Lost Uncle by Mervyn Peake The Library at Mount Char by Scott Hawkins The Lies of Locke Lamora by Scott Lynch Life of Pi by Yann Martel The Life and Opinions of the Tomcat Murr by E. T. A. Hoffmann Lilith by George MacDonald The Little Grey Men by BB The Little White Horse by Elizabeth Goudge Little People by Tom Holt Little, Big by John Crowley Lolly Willowes by Sylvia Townsend Warner Long Black Curl by Alex Bledsoe The Long Look by Richard Parks The Long Price Quartet series by Daniel Abraham The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien The Lost Continent: The Story of Atlantis by C. J. Cutcliffe Hyne Lost Tales by J. R. R. Tolkien Lud-in-the-Mist by Hope Mirrlees Lyonesse series by Jack Vance Lyra series by Patricia Wrede M[edit] May Bird and the Ever After series by Jodie Lynn Anderson M is for Magic series by Neil Gaiman The Magic City by E. Nesbit The Magician Out of Manchuria by Charles G. Finney The Magician Trilogy by Jenny Nimmo The Magicians by Lev Grossman Magyk by Angie Sage Malazan Book of the Fallen series by Steven Erikson The Malloreon by David and Leigh Eddings The Man Who Was Thursday by G. K. Chesterton Marianne by Sheri S. Tepper The Mark of the Demons by John Jakes Martin Dressler by Steven Millhauser Mary Poppins series by P. L. Travers The Mask of the Sorcerer by Darrell Schweitzer The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov Master Li by Barry Hughart Matilda by Roald Dahl Mention My Name in Atlantis by John Jakes Merlin's Ring by H. Warner Munn The Merman's Children by Poul Anderson Mickelsson's Ghosts by John Gardner Millroy the Magician by Paul Theroux Mistress Masham's Repose by T. H. White Mistborn series by Brandon Sanderson The Mists of Avalon by Marion Zimmer Bradley Memory, Sorrow, and Thorn by Tad Williams Moonheart by Charles de Lint The Mortal Instruments series by Cassandra Clare Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium by Suzanne Weyn Mr. Pye by Mervyn Peake The Murders of Molly Southbourne by Tade Thompson Myth Adventures series by Robert Asprin N[edit] The Nightrunner Series by Lynn Flewelling The Name of the Wind by Patrick Rothfuss The Chronicles of Narnia series by C.S. Lewis The Neverending Story by Michael Ende Neverwhere by Neil Gaiman A Night in the Lonesome October by Roger Zelazny The Night Land by William Hope Hodgson Nights at the Circus by Angela Carter Nothing But Blue Skies by Tom Holt Number9Dream by David Mitchell The Named by Marianne Curley O[edit] The Obernewtyn Chronicles by Isobelle Carmody Od Magic by Patricia McKillip Oksa Pollock series by Anne Plichota and Cendrine Wolf Ombria in Shadow by Patricia McKillip On Stranger Tides by Tim Powers The Once and Future King series by T.H. White Orlando by Virginia Woolf Our Ancestors a set by Italo Calvino Overtime by Tom Holt Oz series (40 "canonical" titles) by L. Frank Baum (original creator and author of 14 books of the series), Ruth Plumly Thompson (19 books), Rachel R. Cosgrove (1 book), John R. Neill (author of 3 books), Jack Snow (2 books), and Eloise Jarvis McGraw & Lauren McGraw Wagner (1 book as co-authors) P[edit] Paint Your Dragon by Tom Holt The Paladin by C. J. Cherryh Passing Strange by Ellen Klages Peace by Gene Wolfe Pellinor by Alison Croggon Pellucidar series by Edgar Rice Burroughs The Pendragon Adventure by D. J. MacHale Percy Jackson & The Olympians by Rick Riordan The Perilous Gard by Elizabeth Marie Pope Peter and Wendy aka Peter Pan by J. M. Barrie Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens by J. M. Barrie Phantastes by George MacDonald Pilgermann by Russell Hoban Pinocchio by Carlo Collodi The Piratica Series by Tanith Lee The Place of the Lion by Charles Williams Policeman Bluejay by L. Frank Baum The Poppy War by R. F. Kuang Portrait of Jennie by Robert Nathan The Power of Five Series (a.k.a. The Gatekeepers Series) by Anthony Horowitz Practical Magic by Alice Hoffman Prince of Nothing trilogy by R. Scott Bakker The Princes of the Golden Cage by Nathalie Mallet The Princess Bride by William Goldman Promise of Blood by Brian McClellan[3] Protector of the Small series by Tamora Pierce The Chronicles of Prydain by Lloyd Alexander Q[edit] The Quest of Kadji by Lin Carter Quidditch Through The Ages by J.K. Rowling The Quentaris Chronicles by various Australian writers Queste by Angie Sage R[edit] The Rage of Dragons by Evan Winter Ranger's Apprentice series by John Flanagan The Raven Cycle by Maggie Stiefvater The Raven Tower by Ann Leckie Red Moon and Black Mountain by Joy Chant Red Sister by Mark Lawrence The Red Threads of Fortune by JY Yang Redwall by Brian Jacques The Revenants by Sheri S. Tepper The Riddle-Master trilogy by Patricia A. McKillip Riftwar series by Raymond E. Feist Rose Daughter by Robin McKinley Roverandom by J. R. R. Tolkien The Runelords series by David Farland Rusalka by C. J. Cherryh See also[edit] List of science fiction publishers References[edit] ^ Hollands, Neil (2007). Read on... fantasy fiction : reading lists for every taste. Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited. ISBN 9781591583301. ^ Andrews, Stephen E.; Rennison, Nick (2009). 100 must-read fantasy novels. London: A & C Black. ISBN 9781408136072. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2015-02-21. Retrieved 2015-03-27.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category