Wikipedia list article This article appears to contain trivial, minor, or unrelated references to popular culture. Please reorganize this content to explain the subject's impact on popular culture, providing citations to reliable, secondary sources, rather than simply listing appearances. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2019) This article is about dragons in popular culture. For dragons in mythology and folklore, see List of dragons in mythology and folklore. This article contains incomplete lists that may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by expanding them with entries that are reliably sourced. Modern fan illustration by David Demaret of the dragon Smaug from J. R. R. Tolkien's 1937 high fantasy novel The Hobbit This is a list of dragons in popular culture. Dragons in some form are nearly universal across cultures and as such have become a staple of modern popular culture, especially in the fantasy genre. Contents 1 Dragons in fiction 1.1 Dragons in literature 1.2 Dragons in comics 1.3 Dragons in film 1.4 Dragons in television 1.5 Dragons in animation 1.6 Dragons in video games 2 Other appearances in popular culture 2.1 Dragons in online audiovisual media 2.2 Dragons in radio 2.3 Dragons in songs 2.4 Dragons in puppetry 2.5 Dragons in toys 2.6 Dragons in theme parks and shows 2.7 Dragons in sport 2.8 Dragons in Podcasts 3 See also 4 References Dragons in fiction[edit] This list of dragons in fiction is a collection of various notable draconic characters that appear in various works of fiction. It is limited to well-referenced examples of dragons in literature, comics, film, television, animation and video games. Dragons in literature[edit] Main article: List of dragons in literature Western literature tends either to affirm or pointedly subvert the traditional portrait of dragons from Western myth and folklore, as evil and greedy. Name Source Author Notes Ancalagon the Black Legendarium J.R.R. Tolkien The greatest of the winged dragons. Created by the Dark Lord Melkor. Destroyed by Eärendil during the War of Wrath. Chrysophylax Dives Farmer Giles of Ham Tolkien[A 1] A wily dragon who loses a battle of wills to Farmer Giles. Dagurashibanipal Grunts! Mary Gentle An ancient dragon, whose looted horde provides a tribe of orcs with the means to rise above their cannon-fodder station in the Evil Horde of Darkness. Dragon Jane and the Dragon Baynton[A 2] A friend of Jane. 300 years old. Orphaned. Drogon A Song of Ice and Fire George R. R. Martin A black-red dragon, hatched by Daenerys Targaryen. The largest and most vicious of her three dragons. Ember Hill Talon Saga Julie Kagawa Modern dragon Errol Guards! Guards! Pratchett[A 3] Small, underdeveloped dragon given to the Watch of Ankh-Morpork as a mascot by Sybil Ramkin. Faranth Dragonriders of Pern McCaffrey[A 4] The last gold dragon hatched from the first dragon hatching on Pern, and the most influential dragon in Pernese history. Fírnen Inheritance Paolini[A 5] A green, young, and kind dragon who has Arya as his rider. Glaedr Brisingr Paolini[A 5] An old, golden, and wise dragon who had Oromis as his rider. Glaurung The Silmarillion Tolkien[A 1] The first of the Dragons, and the main antagonist in the tale of The Children of Húrin. Wingless. May manipulate human minds. Griffin Griffin the Dragon Ken Mask[A 6] A dragon who learns the morals from wrongdoing such as lying and bullying. Heavenly Beings Sorcerous Stabber Orphen Yoshinobu Akita[1] Humanlike Dragons. Icefyre The Tawny Man Hobb[A 7] A black male dragon buried under ice who breaks free to mate with Tintaglia, a blue dragon, to save the dragon race. Igjarjuk Memory, Sorrow, & Thorn Williams An Ancient ice dragon who dwells far in the north of Osten Ard. Katla The Brothers Lionheart Lindgren[A 8] A fictional female dragon from the Swedish children's book. Montague Bunsen-Burner Dragon Boy King-Smith[A 9] A dragon on a human-free diet who finds and raises an orphaned boy John. He has a wife named Albertina and gains a daughter named Lucky. Mnementh Dragonriders of Pern McCaffrey[A 4] A bronze dragon ridden by F'lar, Weyrleader of Benden Weyr. Moon Baby Unicorn and Baby Dragon Marzollo[A 10] A young dragon named to match the crescent mark on his head. Became a great friend of Star after the Eight-Horn Friendship Spell in the prequel The Baby Unicorn. Norberta Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone Rowling[A 11] Previously named Norbert, she is a Norwegian Ridgeback dragon that Hagrid acquired as an egg from a stranger in the Hog's Head. Hagrid raises Norbert until Harry, Ron, and Hermione finally persuade Hagrid to send the dragon to Ron's older brother Charlie. Hagrid later learns that the dragon is female and has been renamed Norberta. Pyralspite Homestuck Andrew Hussie The companion of Neophyte Redglare. Ramoth Dragonriders of Pern McCaffrey[A 4] The golden queen dragon ridden by Lessa of Benden Weyr and Ruatha Hold. Rhaegal A Song of Ice and Fire George R. R. Martin A green-bronze dragon, recently hatched by Daenerys Targaryen. Ruth Dragonriders of Pern McCaffrey[A 4] A white dragon, one of a kind in Pern, ridden by Lord Jaxom of Ruatha Hold. Ruth has an unusually acute memory. Instrumental in the final end of Thread. Saphira Eragon Paolini[A 5] A kind, fierce, and blue dragon who has Eragon as her rider. Slathborg Slathborg's Gold Mark Forman[2] An evil dragon with a large hoard of gold. Sought to be killed for his evil deeds and to take the hoard by Alex and his company of Adventurers. Alex was able to look him in the eye to prove dominance over him and managed to kill him. Smaug The Hobbit Tolkien[A 1] A greedy and wicked golden-red dragon who slaughtered Thrór's dwarf clan along with the town of Dale and took the dwarves' treasure. While Bilbo Baggins talked with Smaug, he found a weak spot in Smaug's impenetrable scales. Hearing this from the Thrush the archer Bard killed Smaug. Temeraire Temeraire Novik[A 12] A black Chinese Celestial whose captain is William Laurence. Terezi's Lusus Homestuck Andrew Hussie Unborn parent figure and psychic mentor to Terezi Pyrope. Thorn Eldest Paolini[A 5] A red, immature, and vicious dragon who has Murtagh as his rider. Tintaglia The Liveship Traders Hobb[A 7] A female blue dragon, believed to be the last of her kind. She ultimately mates with Icefyre and saves the dragon race. Eldrax The Paper Bag Princess Munsch[A 13] A dragon who destroys Princess Elizabeth's kingdom and kidnaps her beloved Prince Ronald. Princess Elizabeth defeats the dragon by getting him to show off his full skills, exhausting him. Viserion A Song of Ice and Fire George R. R. Martin A cream-white dragon, recently hatched by Daenerys Targaryen. Various dragons The Frog Princess (novel) and its sequels E. D. Baker various dragons, can talk, some can transform to humans and back Various Dragons Talon Saga Julie Kagawa Various other dragons (inclding the deuterogonist and antagonists), can shift into humans and act like them Villentretenmerth The Witcher, Sword of Destiny Andrzej Sapkowski A golden Dragon, possibly the only of his kind, who travels with a pair of Zerrikania warrior woman while shape shifted and assuming the false name Borch three Jackdaws. Festus Heroes of Olympus Rick Riordan A machine Dragon, made by 9th cabin and protect Camp Half-blood. In The Lost Hero, It was found by Leo. Author name legend ^ a b c J. R. R. Tolkien ^ Martin Baynton ^ Terry Pratchett ^ a b c d Anne McCaffrey ^ a b c d Christopher Paolini ^ Mask, Ken. "Ken Mask's Publications". Retrieved 2020-08-04. ^ a b Robin Hobb ^ Astrid Lindgren ^ Dick King-Smith ^ Jean Marzollo ^ J.K. Rowling ^ Naomi Novik ^ Robert Munsch Dragons in comics[edit] Dragons appear in various manga and american comics, in the form of comic books, comic strips and webcomics. Name Origin Notes Acnologia Fairy Tail Acnologia, also known as The Black Dragon, and fearsomely reputed as The Black Dragon in the Book of Apocalypse and the Herald of New Ages, is a cataclysmically powerful Dragon Slayer that can take the form of a Dragon, that assaulted the Fairy Tail core Mages on Tenrou Island in the Year X784. Albion High School DxD Albion is one of the Two Heavenly Dragons and the arch-rival of Ddraig. He is called the White Dragon, also known as the Vanishing Dragon, Dragon Gwiber, White Dragon Emperor and White Dragon Emperor of Supremacy. He is currently residing within the Longinus, Divine Dividing, wielded by Vali Lucifer. Like his arch-rival Ddraig, he is also feared among Angels, Fallen Angels, Devils and the various factions in the world for his destructive powers, which are said to be able to kill both Gods and Satans. Alfred XDragoon In this webcomic, Rocky and Alfred are humanoid dragons, coming from the planet Gan-Mah Chibisuke Dragon Drive Chibisuke and various other dragons in this manga series. Cordelia Angel Dragon Slylock Fox & Comics for Kids An unnamed dragon appears in the strips "How to Draw", "Six Differences", "True or False", etc. The Dragon Sinfest Created by Tatsuya Ishida Dragon Man Fantastic Four Marvel Comics Ddraig High School DxD Ddraig is one of the Two Heavenly Dragons and the arch-rival of Albion. He is called the Red Dragon is known as the Welsh Dragon, Dragon Goch, Red Dragon Emperor and Red Dragon Emperor of Domination, who resides within the Longinus, Boosted Gear, wielded by Issei Hyoudou. He is feared among the Angels, Fallen Angels, Devils and the various other factions in the world for his destructive powers, which are said to be able to kill both Gods and Satans. Dragon of the Moon Defenders Marvel Comics Dulcy Sonic the Hedgehog Fafnir Thor #134 (Nov. 1966) First encountered in the guise of an old man by the warrior Volstagg. Drinks magical water which transforms him into a dragon. Powers of illusion. Intends to devour the Asgardians. Defeated by Odin's son Thor.[3] Fin Fang Foom Strange Tales #89 (Oct. 1961) Member of a race of alien dragons, the Kakaranatharans. Grandeeney Fairy Tail A sky dragon. Foster parent of Wendy Marvell, the sky dragon slayer. The Great Red Dragon Bone Created by Jeff Smith Igneel Fairy Tail Foster father of Natsu Dragneel. Taught Natsu a rare ancient magic called 'fire dragon slayer magic'. Lockheed X-Men The pet dragon of Kitty Pryde, or Shadowcat. Kozuki Momonosuke One Piece A young samurai who can turn into a dragon. Llewellyn Ozy and Millie Created by Dana Simpson. Long DC Comics The leader of a Chinese gang with ties to the Penguin. When Batwing (DC Comics) and Nightwing arrived in Beijing to investigate a conspiracy related to one of Penguin's black market dealings, Long ambushed them, transforming into a dragon. Metalicana Fairy Tail An iron dragon. Foster parent of Gajeel Redfox, the iron dragon slayer. Ming Rupert Bear Alfred Bestall Pet dragon of Pong Ping.[4] Nid Hogg Angel Sanctuary Porunga Dragon Ball Porunga is a dragon created by the grand Namekian elder to grant three wishes to anyone who can gather seven spheres known as the Dragon Balls. May revive only one deceased person per wish, however that limit was later removed. Pyralspite Homestuck The companion of Neophyte Redglare. Created by Andrew Hussie Rocky XDragoon Sennenryu One Piece Sennenryu appears in the anime on the Warship Island Arc. Shenron (Shenlong) Dragon Ball Created by Kami, the god of Earth, to grant a single wish to anyone who can gather seven spheres known as the Dragon Balls. Limited to only one wish per person (later expanded to two). Cannot grant the same wish twice, resurrect those who have died of natural causes, or grant a wish that exceeds the power of his creator. Shou-Lao Iron Fist An immortal Chinese red dragon who is the final test for an Iron Fist candidate. Those who defeat the dragon in combat are allowed to absorb his power by touching his molten heart, which is contained in a brazier. Skiadrum Fairy Tail An shadow dragon and foster father of Rouge Cheney, the shadow dragon slayer. Tohru Miss Kobayashi's Dragon Maid Tohru fell in love with and became the maid of Miss Kobayashi after being saved from a near-fatal injury by the latter; her presence in Kobayashi's world ends up attracting more dragons from Tohru's native realm, all of whom go on to befriend Kobayashi and company despite harboring racist beliefs towards humans. Weisslogia Fairy Tail A white dragon and foster father of Sting Eucliffe, the white dragon slayer. Wormy Wormy Created by David A. Trampier Dragons in film[edit] Main article: List of dragons in film and television Dragons have been portrayed in film and television in many different forms. They may terrorize human towns, or save human lives, even taking the role of passionate protectors. Name Film Notes Bio Dragon Dragon Fighter No official name; fans refer to this fire-breathing dragon as Bio Dragon or Genetic Dragon. Horned and spined, with dark grey coloring. Buraki Dragon Wars Main antagonist of Dragon Wars (2007). Leader of an army of dragons, dinosaurs, and frog-like creatures. Ruthless, despised and malevolent. Dagahra Rebirth of Mothra II Battles Mortha Leo. Transforms into Rainbow Mothra. Desghidorah Rebirth of Mothra Desghidorah is another Japanese fiction monster that resembles King Ghidorah, but is different from his counterpart. Desghidorah is the main antagonist who tries to destroy everything in his sight and wipe out the planet. But Mothra battles the monster, then she defeats Desghidorah and seals him back in the Earth. Draco Dragonheart The last remaining dragon. Voiced by Sean Connery. Drake, Griffin Dragonheart: A New Beginning Voiced by Robby Benson and Harry Von Gorkum. Drago Dragonheart 3: The Sorcerer's Curse, Dragonheart: Battle for the Heartfire Voiced by Ben Kingsley and Patrick Stewart. Dragonstorm Transformers: The Last Knight A three-headed combiner Cybertronian dragon made up of 12 individual Cybertronian Knights Fafnir Die Nibelungen An adaption of the Nibelung legend. The dragon is notable for being one of the first dragons in film, ever. Falkor The Neverending Story A Luckdragon and friend of Atreyu and Bastian. He is the only luckdragon to appear, although five others are mentioned in passing. He has an elongated, winged body and many white scales and hairs on the length of his body that can appear pink. The form of his head is described less precisely, though his eyes are mentioned as being the color of rubies. Falkor has distinctive canine features. Golden Dragon Beowulf Born from Grendel's mother and son of Beowulf. Grand King Ghidorah Rebirth of Mothra III Giant three-headed winged dragon. Battles Mothra Leo; destroyed by Armor Mothra. Keizer Ghidorah Godzilla: Final Wars Giant quadrupedal three-headed winged dragon. The last monster to be encountered by Godzilla. First appeared as a bipedal skeleton monster known as Monster X. King Ghidorah Godzilla A kaiju, a fictional Japanese monster featured in several of Toho Studios' Godzilla films. King Ghidorah appears as an armless, three-headed, two-tailed, bipedal dragon with large bat-like wings. Smaug The Hobbit film series A powerful, fearsome and intelligent red dragon who terrorizes the people of Dale, Lake-town and the Dwarves of Erebor. Vermithrax Pejorative Dragonslayer A flying red dragon who demands tribute from the Kingdom of Urland. Hero Galen Bradwarden learns, however, that Vermithrax is using the sacrifices to feed its young—three red dragon hatchlings. Unnamed dragons Reign of Fire Various dragons feature prominently as dangerous animals throughout the film. Unnamed dragons Dungeons & Dragons A failed attempt to control a gold dragon with a "rod" created by Profion is shown at the beginning of the film and two "dragon armies"-one of which is gold-the other-red-are featured in the Battle of Sumdall and The Empire of Izmir during the climax of the film. Dragons in television[edit] Main article: List of dragons in film and television Name Series Notes Aithusa Merlin A young white dragon that is rescued, hatched and named by Merlin. It later saves Morgana's life by healing her wounds. Drogon Game of Thrones A black-red dragon, recently hatched by Daenerys Targaryen. It is the largest and most vicious of her three dragons. Kilgharrah Merlin An ancient dragon (voiced by John Hurt) imprisoned by Uther Pendragon below Camelot. Thought to be the last of its kind. Mizunoeno Dragon Ultraman Gaia Mizunoeno Dragon (ミズノエノリュウ, Mizunoeno Ryū) also known as "Mizunoeryu," is a monster that appeared in the TV series, Ultraman Gaia. He appeared in episodes 11, 50, and 51. Natsunomeryu Ultraman Max Natsunomeryu (ナツノメリュウ Natsunomeryuu), also known as Natsunome Dragon is a peaceful dragon kaiju that slept in Lake Natsukawa for centuries. Pufnstuf Pufnstuf The mayor of Living Island, and a creation of Sid & Marty Kroft. Pyre Mystic Knights of Tir Na Nog An ancient Dragon associated with the Mystic Knight of Fire. Intolerant to human presence at first, he soon comes to admire Rohan, and later recognizes the Knight as Draganta, the legendary hero. Fiercely the rival of Tyrune the Hydra. Pyre wears a gemmed cuirass, through which he presumably makes contact with his rider's Dragon's Breath Dagger. His likeness is worked into the Mystic Knights armor. Scorch Scorch Scorch, a 1,300-year-old puppet dragon created and controlled by Ronn Lucas, the main character of a television series that aired on CBS in the early 1990s. Tamba Tikkabilla A small dragon puppet, who resembles Spyro the Dragon in colouration. Dragons in animation[edit] Main article: List of dragons in film and television Name Film Notes Devon & Cornwall Quest for Camelot A conjoined two-headed dragon - the sophisticated and intelligent Devon and the boorish but loyal Cornwall. Thanks to the bullying from the rest of the dragons due to their differences and their inability to fly, they want nothing more than to be apart from one another Discord My Little Pony: Friendship is Magic Recurring character first appearing as the main antagonist of the two-part Season 2 premiere "The Return of Harmony". Described as the spirit of chaos and disharmony. He is an eccentric ancient draconequus, a serpentine, chimeral creature with "the head of a pony and a body made up of all sorts of things". Dragon Shrek A nameless red fire-breathing female dragon with ruby-colored scales, leathery bat-like wings, long, crested ears, and a prehensile tail. Does not speak; uses body language and noises to communicate. She has a taste for knights, her favorite dish; has a recipe book for preparing them for dinner. Elliott Pete's Dragon A green friendly dragon. Voiced by Charlie Callas. Fang Roku's Dragon Avatar Roku's Spirit Guardian. Goliath Dragon and Slippers Friendly dragon. Voiced by Dom DeLuise. Haku Spirited Away A white dragon who befriends the protagonist, Sen/Chihiro, and eventually aids in her escape from Yubaba's bath house, although he is Yubaba's apprentice. He is able to turn into a human at will, as well as cast spells of unbinding, invisibility, and binding. Haku is the spirit of the Kohaku river, which a young Chihiro fell into as a child. Since then, the river has been paved over to make room for a mall. In smaller pieces of anime by the author concerning Spirited Away, it has been assumed that Chihiro's mother and father despised the river, for almost killing their daughter. Light Fury How to Train Your Dragon A white, sparkly dragon with blue eyes. She's first seen locked up in a cage. Later, Toothless sees her and throughout the movie, they fall in love, have kids in the end of the movie and joins Hiccup & Astrid's family in the Homecoming holiday special. Maleficent Sleeping Beauty Giant evil purple and black dragon. Breathes green fire. Transformed from human female.[5] Ranked #1 in Ultimate Disney's 'Top 30 Disney Villains'.[6] Also features in Kingdom Hearts video-game series. Mushu Mulan Fa Mulan's closest companion throughout the Mulan series and comic relief. He is a Chinese dragon with ears - his body is a red color and he has orange accents. He seems to be small, but hints that he is bigger in his "real size" He is voiced by Eddie Murphy in his first appearance and Mark Moseley afterward. Nazboo Shimmer and Shine Zeta’s pet blue dragon who talks in a strange way and voiced by Dee Bradley Baker. Predaking Transformers: Prime - Beast Hunters An intelligent and powerful robotic dragon. Created by the Decepticons and brought to life by Shockwave. Spike My Little Pony A baby dragon who first met the ponies in Firefly's Adventure and came to live them. In the Friendship is Magic series, he is the assistant of Twilight Sparkle, who raised him from an egg, and has the task of delivering her messages to Princess Celestia. Stormfly How to Train Your Dragon A large, bipedal, light blue dragon with very large wings and an array of horns sprouting from its crown. Stormfly is Astrid's dragon, and her species is known as the "Deadly Nadder." She, along with the rest of her kind, has the ability to release poisonous spines from her tail. Combined with the momentum of tail-whipping motions, Nadders like stormfly make excellent marksmen (or marksdragons, rather), despite their frontal blind spot. Summer DreamWorks Dragons: Rescue Riders A fastfin dragon who shoots water from her mouth and swims in bodies of water. Voiced by Skai Jackson. Tabaluga Tabaluga Tabaluga lives in the fictional place of Greenland. He is around 7 dragon-years old (700 human years). His father died when he was six. Nothing is known about his mother. After his father's death Tabaluga is the last of the dragons and the crown-prince of Greenland, defending his home from two rival kingdoms on either side of Greenland; a frigid arctic tundra, ruled by the evil snowman Arktos and a searing desert, ruled by an evil sand-spirit Humsin. Terezi's Lusus Homestuck Unborn parent figure and psychic mentor to Terezi Pyrope. Tiamat Dungeons & Dragons Venger's arch-rival is a fearsome dragon with a screeching, multi-level voice and five heads. Although Venger and the children both avoid Tiamat, the children make a deal with her in "The Dragon's Graveyard" to thwart Venger. Toothless How to Train Your Dragon A black, sleek-headed dragon with retractable teeth and green eyes. Became a loyal companion to Hiccup after he helped Toothless regain his flight when giving him a prostheses tail. His species is known as the "Night Fury" for its appearance and swift combat tactics. Night Furies such as Toothless have the ability to strike quickly and retreat to retaliate, but they are also adept in direct combat as well. Trogdor Trogdor Trogdor the Burninator is an original character created by Strong Bad in the sbemail dragon Whimsey Weatherbe My Little Pony: Twinkle Wish Adventure Winger DreamWorks Dragons: Rescue Riders A Swiftwing dragon. Voiced by Zach Callison. Dragons in video games[edit] Main article: List of dragons in games Dragons appear in numerous games with fictional setting as bosses, final bosses, and enemies, as well as player characters, companions, units, and supporting characters. Name Game Notes Alduin The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim A fearsome, powerful, black dragon. Also known as "The World Eater", "Nordic God of Destruction" and "Bane of Kings". Claimed as first-born of Akatosh (the Dragon God of Time). Ambitions of world-domination. Alexstrasza, The Life Binder Warcraft, Heroes of the Storm Aspect of the Red Dragon Flight. The guardian of all life in the world of Azeroth. She was one of five great dragons chosen by the titans to be empowered with a portion of the Pantheon's power and rule over her flight while they watched over Azeroth and its inhabitants. The titans also appointed her queen of all dragons Archdemons Dragon Age: Origins Archdemons possess intelligence far beyond the average dragon and are purely evil creatures. Aurene Guild Wars 2 A crystal dragon, scion of Glint, player's character companion. Bahamut Final Fantasy Series Known by many titles, he is revered as the lord of the sky in Final Fantasy. His destructive MegaFlare can consume multiple cities in one attack. Blotworx Dragon Epic Mickey 2 Giant Animatronic Dragon piloted by a Blotling. He is the first boss of Epic Mickey 2. Cynder The Legend of Spyro & Skylanders A purple (or black) dragon who shoots lightning. In The Legend of Spyro series, she's first as an antagonist to Spyro in A New Beginning, gets defeated and freed by him. Also appears in The Eternal Night and Dawn of the Dragon. In Skylanders, she represents the Undead element and her catchphrase is "Volts and Lightning". Darby Darby the Dragon A green dragon who bears the title Dragon Prince and goes on a quest to restore his shrunken sister Sparkle. Deathwing, The Destroyer World of Warcraft: Cataclysm, Heroes of the Storm Known as 'the Destroyer' and originally as 'Neltharion the Earth-Warder'. Once a kind benevolent dragon, but was driven mad by the Old Gods and came to inspire fear and contempt. Dracolich Dungeons & Dragons An undead dragon called Dragotha,[7] formerly consort to Tiamat, who was given his undead powers by the deity Kyuss. It is unknown whether other dracoliches exist in Greyhawk. Dragon Knight Heroes of the Storm Dragon Knight is a Playable Character Transformation on the Dragon Shire battleground. Heroes can liberate the Dragon Knight by activating the shrines and interacting with the Knight's statue in the middle lane of the battleground, taking control of him temporarily. Draigoch Lord of the Rings Online An evil red dragon found in the mountains of the Enedwaith. He has Arch-Nemesis rank and approximately 9,000,000 hit points. A raid party of 12 - 24 is required. Pictures of him put him at about the same size as Smaug. He speaks, has wings and breathes fire. Elvarg Runescape Elvarg is a female green dragon and is considerably stronger than most others of her kind. Elvarg lives on the island of Crandor and is found underground, in a cave that is connected to Karamja through a series of tunnels. During the quest Dragon Slayer, players must slay her and bring her head to Oziach in order to earn the right to wear the rune platebody, blue dragonhide body armor and mystic robe top. Ender Dragon Minecraft A giant black dragon with glowing purple eyes that lives in The End Dimension. Enywas Darkmere An evil destructive dragon who constantly slaughtered villagers until Prince Ebryn killed her for good. Feyrbrand Legend of Dragoon A dragon that appears as you start the game that is controlled by Emperor Doel. Known as "The Green-Tusked Dragon," it chases the protagonist at the start of the game until saved by another character known as Rose. Flammie Secret of Mana A white dragon that is found and rescued by the main characters early in the game, and rapidly grows into a full-size dragon capable of carrying at least three people on its back. Later in the game, Flammie is revealed to be the legendary "Mana Beast", and battles the characters in the game's finale. Grigori Dragon's Dogma An enormous red dragon who gruesomely tears out the heart of the "chosen one" who is known as an Arisen and steals it in Dragon's Dogma. The Arisen is destined to destroy the dragon to regain his/her heart. He takes refuge in the Tainted Mountain, waiting for the current Arisen to challenge him. He and his dragon apprentices appear without warning, ferociously terrorizing villages and the people of Cassardis. There isn't enough evidence to make any sort of theory about the dragons’ purpose. It's possible to think that the dragons are fulfilling some sort of role or duty. Grima Fire Emblem Awakening Also known as the "fell dragon," Grima is the manifestation of the corrupted earth dragon tribe seeking the genocide of all living creatures. He was sealed away in what is referred to as "The Dragon's Table" by the manakete queen, Naga. He is revered by a cult of fanatics known as "The Grimleal" who long for nothing more than his return. However, returning him to the world is not as easy as it sounds as he requires one particular person to serve as his vessel... Kalameet Dark Souls One of the remaining ancient dragons, one fearsome enough to be feared by Anor Londo the city of the gods, found in the skies of ancient Oolacile. Kasimir Æthelinde Warhearts A small red wyvern sworn to the Dominion as a Devout. In his juvenile state, he takes a humanoid form and is known for chili and other hot flavoured beverages that soothe his fiery soul Malygos, The Spellweaver Warcraft He was the Aspect of the Blue Dragon Flight and one of the most ancient creatures living on Azeroth and the eldest of the Aspects. Norgannon, the titan master-magician and keeper of lore, granted Malygos a portion of his vast power. From then on, Malygos would be known as the Spell-weaver, the guardian of arcane magic and hidden arcanum. Minerva Fire Emblem Minerva is a name that appears more than once in Fire Emblem Lore, most recently in Fire Emblem Awakening, which is ridden by the recruitable character Cherche and her son. Naga Fire Emblem Awakening Naga is the queen of the six dragon tribes that ruled over the land 3,000 years before the events of Fire Emblem Awakening. Even after her "suicide," she still watches over humanity to protect them from any threats that are beyond their control. When Grima threatens to destroy the entire world, she changes time itself to help the army of heroes stop the impending holocaust. Even with her divine intervention, the conflict quickly becomes more complex than anyone could have imagined. She had not prevented the world-ending threat like she had hoped, but with her interference, she manages to give mankind a fighting chance against impossible odds. Necrosan Primal Rage A deathly, zombie-like dragon with no skin to cover his muscular structure. Little is known about Necrosan other than his design, given that he was going to debut in the sequel to Primal Rage, which ended up being cancelled. However, we do know that he is the God of Death, and supposedly controls massive amounts of the undead as an army rather than the typical natives that willingly worshipped the other Gods. He also supposedly hatches from the "asteroid" which causes the Catyclisms. Nightshade The Palace of Deceit Nightshade is one of the rare dragons who escapes the Palace dungeons and vows to kill the evil wizard Garth before he can wipe out dragonkind completely. Nozdormu, The Timeless One Warcraft Aspect of the Bronze Dragon Flight and guardian of time, is one of the former Dragon Aspects empowered by the titans to watch over Azeroth. He fought against the demons during the War of the Ancients. Following this intervention, he retreated into seclusion, immersing himself in his duties. He emerges only infrequently when events require his direct presence. He intervened in the defeat of Deathwing at the hands of Krasus and his allies, one of the few times he has been seen in the skies of Azeroth. Paarthurnax The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim A wise old dragon met at the Throat of the World. Alduin's younger brother who helps the player defeat him by helping him to learn the shout, Dragonrend. It is optional in the game to kill Paarthurnax, but doing so is not recommended. He is also the master of the Greybeards and their "Way of the Voice". Ridley Metroid Portrayed in different ways in separate Metroid titles, with varying size and sometimes capable of speech. Shown to be male and to have purple skin and glowing eyes, and resembling a pterodactyl in Super Metroid. Also has cyborg and robotic forms.[8] Ridley has been described as the last of his species, native to Zebes. He is the leader of the Space Pirates, and the arch-enemy of Samus Aran, as Ridley was responsible for murdering her parents. Seath the Scaleless Dark Souls An albino dragon who helped Gwyn, Nito, and the Witch of Izalith destroy the everlasting dragons. Seath was born without the everlasting scales, making him mortal and an outcast. After the fall of the everlasting dragons, he founded sorcery which sparked animosity between him and Havel the Rock. He resides in the Duke's Archives and the crystal caves where he researches and protects the Primordial Crystal. Singe Dragon's Lair Captor of Princess Daphne and foe of heroic knight Dirk the Daring. Created by Rick Dyer and animator Don Bluth in 1983. Spyro Spyro the Dragon & Skylanders Throughout the original series, Spyro is portrayed as energetic and curious, with little regard for his own safety. He is also described as a courageous hero, despite his small size. Spyro is also known for his cocky attitude and can be stubborn at times. In Skylanders, Spyro's representing the Magic element and his catchphrase is "All Fired Up!" Synn Dungeons & Dragons: Shadow over Mystara A gigantic red wyrm dragon who takes the form of an Incantatrix and hungers to conquer the lands of Darokin. Portrayed as the final boss of the game. Tathamet, The Prime Evil Diablo He was a seven-headed dragon of all darkness and vileness. It was known as the Prime Evil and was created as a cast-off of all the dark attributes within Anu long before Sanctuary came into existence. Separated from one being, Tathamet and Anu were both trapped within the same place and they battled with each other for an indefinite length of time. Eventually, the evenly matched adversaries destroyed each other, causing the universe to come into being. After its death, Tathamet gave birth to the seven Great Evils, each being formed from one of Tathamet's heads while its body became the foundation of the Burning Hells. Tiamat Dungeons & Dragons A multi-headed dragon whose heads can breathe Fire, Ice, poison and lightning. The arch enemy of Venger. Trag'Oul Diablo He is a mysterious dragon-like being who guards Sanctuary and maintains the Balance between the High Heavens and the Burning Hells. In Richard A. Knaak's The Sin War trilogy, he is depicted as a constellation of stars, in each of which, a different part of life is shown - past, present, and future choices to be made, so one cannot see a definite future. Trag'Oul's exact origins are unknown, although it is hinted that he is not a unique being, that other worlds have guardians similar to him. He has not been seen since the Sin War ended. He is worshipped by the Necromancers of the Cult of Rathma. Tweek the Dragon Fur Fighters Tweek is a dragon born in Royston Vasey, Wales to Gwynth the Fur Fighter. He is the youngest of the Fur Fighters at 0.002 years. His special skill is Gliding. Ur Dragon Dragon's Dogma A dragon with a gray/lavender palette. However, unlike The Dragon, the Ur-Dragon has thirty "hearts" located all over his body, which will glow as the Arisen or their Pawns approach the area. Each time a heart is destroyed, the area around it will rot and fall, revealing the Ur-Dragon's true form. Volvagia The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time A corrupt dragon, who previously slept in the Fire Temple, whom Ganondorf awoke and unleashed. Killed by the hero Link. Ysera, The Dreamer Warcraft Aspect of the Green Dragon Flight, charged with keeping watch over the flowering wilds of Azeroth from within the Emerald Dream. Bound to this ethereal realm, she descended into an endless trance and became known thereafter as the Dreamer. She would later fight off the Emerald Nightmare and the corruption of her children. Other appearances in popular culture[edit] Dragons in online audiovisual media[edit] The Strong Bad Emails (flash cartoons) on the Homestar Runner website feature a dragon named Trogdor the Burninator. Dragons in radio[edit] Trorg, the Last Amber Dragon, and the blue sock-stealing dragons in Hordes of the Things Dragons in songs[edit] Albi, from the Flight of the Conchords song "Albi the Racist Dragon" "Puff, the Magic Dragon" is best known from the hit single by Peter, Paul and Mary, but has been performed by countless other artists. "Puff the Magic Dragon" was first a poem by Leonard Lipton and adapted by Peter Yarrow. The poem tells of an ageless dragon who befriends a young boy, only to be abandoned as the boy ages and forgets him. This is sometimes suspected of being riddled with references to marijuana, though the authors have publicly ridiculed this notion. The dragon in the song is most likely a reference to children's imagination and innocence. Tharos, from the Emerald Sword Saga, a collection of five albums by the symphonic metal band Rhapsody Dragons in puppetry[edit] Dirty Dragon from The BJ and Dirty Dragon Show and Gigglesnort Hotel Scorch the Teenaged Dragon, Ronn Lucas' ventriloquism puppet Delbert the Dragon, created by Jim Henson for La Choy commercials Dragons in toys[edit] Scorch, Slayer, Loong, Dragon, Legend, Magic in Beanie Baby Megatron in Beast Wars becomes a bio-mechanical dragon after absorbing the essence of his ancestor. Predaking and the Predacons in Transformers: Prime have robotic dragons as alternate forms.[9] Jinafire Long, the daughter of a Chinese dragon from Monster High Dragons in theme parks and shows[edit] Tradinno, the world's largest walking robot Prezzemolo in Gardaland Figment in Journey into Imagination with Figment Danny in Happy Hollow Park & Zoo The Dragon in Legoland Dragons in sport[edit] FC Porto, football team Mario the Magnificent, Drexel Dragons mascot Stuff the Magic Dragon, Orlando Magic mascot San Francisco Dragons, field lacrosse team Somerset County Cricket Club, cricket team St. George Illawarra Dragons, Rugby league team Wales national football team, national association football team of Wales Dragons in Podcasts[edit] Hiram McDaniels, a literal five headed dragon, and his sister Hadassah McDaniels from Welcome to Nightvale See also[edit] List of dragons in mythology and folklore Chinese dragon, the Eastern interpretation of the dragon European dragon, the Western interpretation of the dragon Dragon Day, a celebration at Cornell University References[edit] ^ Mizuno, Ryou (2019). Sorcerous Stabber Orphen Anthology. Commentary (in Japanese). TO Books. p. 236. ISBN 9784864728799. ^ Noble, Barnes &. "Slathbog's Gold (Adventurers Wanted Series #1)". Barnes & Noble. Retrieved 2018-02-06. ^ Thor #134-135 (Nov.-Dec. 1966) ^ "Alfred Bestall". Lambiek.net. Retrieved 5 December 2020. ^ "...one of the most menacing villains in the Disney canon". Rottentomatoes.com. Archived from the original on 2012-06-26. Retrieved 2012-06-27. ^ "UltimateDisney.com's Top 30 Disney Villains Countdown". Ultimatedisney.com. 2004-10-11. Retrieved 2012-06-27. ^ Schick, Lawrence. White Plume Mountain (TSR, 1979) ^ Metroid: Zero Mission Player's Guide. Nintendo of America. 2004. ^ Truitt, Brian. "Predaking rules in 'Transformers Prime' epilogue". USA TODAY. Retrieved 2019-07-24. v t e Dragons In mythology European Ajatar Amphiptere Balaur Bisterne Dragon Blue Ben Bolla Chuvash dragon Cockatrice Cuélebre Gargouille Greek Dragon Cychreides Delphyne Lernaean Hydra Ladon Pyrausta Python Guivre Herensuge Knucker Jaculus La Guita Xica Lambton Worm Laidly Worm of Spindleston Heugh Worm of Linton Lindworm Marraco Dragon of Mordiford Norse dragon Fafnir Jörmungandr Níðhöggr Oilliphéist Peluda Slavic dragon Sockburn Worm Stoor worm Sugaar Tugarin Wawel Dragon Welsh Dragon White dragon Wyvern Yelbeghen Zilant Zirnitra Asian Apalala Bakunawa Bašmu Chinese dragon Ao Guang Azure Dragon Chi Dilong Feilian Feilong Fucanglong Hong Jiaolong Panlong Pulao Qiulong Shenlong Teng Tianlong Yellow Dragon Yinglong Zhulong Druk Illuyanka Japanese dragon Kiyohime Kuraokami Kuzuryū Mizuchi Ryūjin Toyotama-hime Wani Watatsumi Yamata no Orochi Zennyo Ryūō Korean dragon Kur Labbu Lahamu Leviathan Lotan Pakhangba Phaya Naga Seraphim Tanin'iver Tannin (monster) Tiamat Vietnamese dragon Vishap Vritra Yam Zahhak Other Amaru Feathered Serpent Gaasyendietha Horned Serpent Nyami Nyami Ouroboros Peuchen Piasa Quetzalcoatl Rahab (Egypt) Sea serpent Snallygaster Teju Jagua Xiuhcoatl In culture Mythology and folklore Draco (constellation) Dragon dance Dragon boat Dragon (zodiac) Dragonslayers Princess and dragon In fiction Popular culture Film and television Games Dragons in Dungeons & Dragons Literature Dragons in J.R.R.Tolkien's legendarium Smaug Dragons in Dragon Prince Dragons in Pern In art Nine Dragons painting Nine-Dragon Wall Dragon jar Cádiz Memorial Dragon and Tiger Pagodas Dragon boundary mark Dragon Bridge (Da Nang) Dragon Bridge (Ljubljana) Merritt Island Dragon Pegasus and Dragon Related Dragon's Eye Here be dragons Dragon curve v t e Lists of fictional life forms Plants Plants Animals Arthropods Fish Parasites Worms Amphibians Frogs and toads animation Reptiles Crocodilians Dinosaurs Snakes Turtles Birds Birds of prey Ducks animation Penguins Mammals Canines Animation Comics Literature Dogs prose and poetry comics live-action film live-action television animation animated film animated television video games Foxes Wolves Felines Animation Comics Film Literature Television Big cats animation Rodents Animation Comics Literature Video Games Primates Animation Comics Film Literature Television Video games Ungulates Animation Horses Literature Pachyderms Pigs Miscellaneous Bears Marsupials Musteloids animation Badgers Raccoons Pinnipeds Rabbits and hares Rhinogradentia Humanoids General Animation Comics Film Literature Television Video games Specific Avian Piscine and Amphibian Reptilian Other Alien species Humanoids Parasites Symbionts Legendary By type Dragons popular culture film and television games literature mythology and folklore Equines Unicorns Winged horses Winged unicorns Ghosts Giants Hybrids Mermaids Vampires by region Dhampirs Werewolves popular Theological Fictional angels Fictional demons Fictional deities