Wikipedia list article This page lists notable fantasy novels (and novel series).[1][2] The books appear in alphabetical order by title (beginning with S to Z) (ignoring "A", "An", and "The"); series are alphabetical by author-designated name or, if there is no such, some reasonable designation. Science-fiction novels and short-story collections are not included here. This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources. Contents:   A–H (separate page)  I–R (separate page) S T U V W X Y Z References See also S[edit] Sangreal Trilogy by Jan Siegel The Scarlet Fig by Avram Davidson The School for Good and Evil series by Soman Chainani The Sea of Trolls by Nancy Farmer Senlin Ascends by Josiah Bancroft Septimus Heap series by Angie Sage The Shadow Campaigns by Django Wexler The Shadow of What Was Lost by James Islington Shadow Warrior series by Chris Bunch Shadowmarch by Tad Williams Shadowplay by Tad Williams Shadowslayers by Charlie Martin Shannara series by Terry Brooks The Shape-Changer's Wife by Sharon Shinn The Shapeshifter series by Ali Sparkes Shardik by Richard Adams The Shattered Goddess by Darrell Schweitzer Shattered Sea series by Joe Abercrombie The Shaving of Shagpat by George Meredith Shrek! by William Steig The Silmarillion by J. R. R. Tolkien Silver John series by Manly Wade Wellman Silverlock by John Myers Myers Snow White and Rose Red by Patricia C. Wrede Snow White and the Seven Samurai by Tom Holt Solstice Wood by Patricia A. McKillip Some Kind of Fairy Tale by Graham Joyce Something Rich and Strange by Patricia A. McKillip Song for the Basilisk by Patricia A. McKillip A Song of Ice and Fire series by George R. R. Martin The Song of the Lioness series by Tamora Pierce The Song of the Shattered Sands series by Bradley Beaulieu The Sorcerer's Ship by Hannes Bok The Sorceress and the Cygnet by Patricia A. McKillip The Spiderwick Chronicles by Holly Black Spindle's End by Robin McKinley The Stand by Stephen King The Starcatchers series by Dave Barry and Ridley Pearson Stardust by Neil Gaiman The Steerswoman by Rosemary Kirstein Stone and Sky trilogy by Graham Edwards Stone of Farewell by Tad Williams The Stormlight Archive series by Brandon Sanderson Stravaganza series by Mary Hoffman The Stress of Her Regard by Tim Powers Stuart Little by E. B. White The Sundering Flood by William Morris The Switchers Trilogy by Kate Thompson The Sword of Truth series by Terry Goodkind The Sword Smith by Eleanor Arnason Swordbird by Nancy Yi Fan Swords Against the Shadowland by Robin Wayne Bailey The Swords of Lankhmar by Fritz Leiber Swordspoint by Ellen Kushner Symphony of Ages series by Elizabeth Haydon T[edit] The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel series by Michael Scott Tales From The Flat Earth series by Tanith Lee The Tales of Alvin Maker, see at A, above The Tales Of Beedle The Bard by J.K. Rowling The Kane Chronicles by Rick Riordan The Tales of the Otori by Lian Hearn Talking Man by Terry Bisson Tam Lin by Pamela Dean The Tamuli series by David Eddings Tara of the Twilight by Lin Carter Tarzan series by Edgar Rice Burroughs A Taste of Honey by Kai Ashante Wilson Ten Silver Coins by Andrew Kooman The Thief of Always by Clive Barker The Thief Lord by Cornelia Funke Thieves' World series edited by Robert Asprin and Lynn Abbey The Third Policeman by Flann O'Brien Thongor Against the Gods by Lin Carter Thongor at the End of Time by Lin Carter Thongor Fights the Pirates of Tarakus by Lin Carter Thongor in the City of Magicians by Lin Carter Thongor of Lemuria by Lin Carter The Three Impostors by Arthur Machen The Three Worlds Cycle by Ian Irvine The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant series by Stephen R. Donaldson Three Hearts and Three Lions by Poul Anderson Three to See the King by Magnus Mills The Throme of the Erril of Sherill by Patricia A. McKillip Through the Looking-Glass by Lewis Carroll Thunder on the Left by Christopher Morley Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay Tithe: A Modern Faerie Tale by Holly Black Titus series (aka Gormenghast) by Mervyn Peake To Green Angel Tower by Tad Williams Tomoe Gozen series by Jessica Amanda Salmonson Topper duo by Thorne Smith The Touch of Evil by John Rackham The Tower at Stony Wood by Patricia McKillip Traitor's Blade by Sebastien de Castell Traitor Son Cycle series by Miles Cameron The Traitor Baru Cormorant by Seth Dickinson The Tree of Swords and Jewels by C. J. Cherryh The Twilight series by Stephenie Meyer The Tea Master and the Detective by Aliette de Bodard U[edit] Un Lun Dun by China Miéville The Underland Chronicles by Suzanne Collins Unfinished Tales by J. R. R. Tolkien The Unicorn Series by Tanith Lee The Unicorns of Balinor by Mary Stanton The Unspoken Name by A.K. Larkwood V[edit] Vampire Academy by Richelle Mead Valhalla by Tom Holt Velgarth series by Mercedes Lackey Villains by Necessity by Eve Forward Viriconium cycle by M. John Harrison The Vlad Taltos books by Steven Brust Von Bek series by Michael Moorcock A Voyage to Arcturus by David Lindsay W[edit] The Wardstone Chronicles by Joseph Delaney War in Heaven by Charles Williams The War of Dreams (aka The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman) by Angela Carter The War of the Flowers by Tad Williams Warbreaker by Brandon Sanderson The Warrior of World's End by Lin Carter Warriors Series by Erin Hunter The Water-Babies, A Fairy Tale for a Land Baby by Charles Kingsley The Water of the Wondrous Isles by William Morris Watership Down by Richard Adams Weaveworld by Clive Barker The Well at the World's End by William Morris The Well of the Unicorn by Fletcher Pratt Wheel of Time series by Robert Jordan When the Birds Fly South by Stanton A. Coblentz When the Idols Walked by John Jakes The Whitby Witches by Robin Jarvis The White Isle by Darrell Schweitzer Who's Afraid of Beowulf? by Tom Holt Who Censored Roger Rabbit? by Gary K. Wolf The Wind in the Willows by Kenneth Grahame ''Wings of Fire series by Tui T. Sutherland Winnie-The-Pooh by A.A. Milne Winter Rose by Patricia McKillip Winter's Tale by Mark Helprin Winternight trilogy by Katherine Arden Wish You Were Here by Tom Holt Wisp of a Thing by Alex Bledsoe Witch of the Four Winds by John Jakes The Witcher series by Andrzej Sapkowski The Wish Giver by Bill Brittain The Wizard of Lemuria by Lin Carter Wizard of the Pigeons by Megan Lindholm The Wizard of Zao by Lin Carter The Wolf Leader by Alexandre Dumas The Wolves in the Walls by Neil Gaiman Women of the Otherworld series by Canadian author Kelley Armstrong. The Wonderful Wizard of Oz by Frank L. Baum. The Wood Beyond the World by William Morris The World According to Novikoff by Andrei Gusev The Worldbreaker Saga by Kameron Hurley The Worm Ouroboros by E. R. Eddison A Wrinkle in Time by Madeleine L'Engle Wizard and Glass by Stephen King X[edit] Xanth series by Piers Anthony Y[edit] Yamada Monogatari: The Emperor in Shadow by Richard Parks Yamada Monogatari: The War God's Son by Richard Parks Yamada Monogatari: To Break the Demon Gate by Richard Parks Young Wizards series by Diane Duane Yvgenie by C. J. Cherryh Z[edit] Zimiamvia series by E. R. Eddison Zoo City by Lauren Beukes v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category References[edit] ^ Hollands, Neil (2007). Read on... fantasy fiction : reading lists for every taste. Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited. ISBN 9781591583301. ^ Andrews, Stephen E.; Rennison, Nick (2009). 100 must-read fantasy novels. London: A & C Black. ISBN 9781408136072.