Wikimedia list article This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. Please help to clean it up to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. Where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (February 2013) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This list of fictional primates is a subsidiary to the list of fictional animals. The list is restricted to notable non-human characters (including prehistoric human related species such as Homo erectus and humanoids) from the world of fiction including chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, bonobos, gibbons, monkeys, lemurs, and other primates. Contents 1 Literature 2 Comics 3 Primates in film 4 Animation 5 Television 6 Video games 7 Other 8 References Literature[edit] Main article: List of fictional primates in literature Character Species Origin and Author Notes Claw the Giant Ape Ape Beast Quest Claw is the second beast Tom fights in Series Two, The Golden Armor. He guards the chain mail. He has a tail with a sting rather like a scorpion. He lives in the Dark Jungle in Avantia. Francine Frensky Monkey Arthur's Valentine by Marc Brown A tomboy who loves sports, drumming, and singing. She is 8 years old, and she is the best player on her team in just about every sport they play, rivaled only by the Brain at soccer and basketball. Ishmael Gorilla Ishmael by Daniel Quinn A philosopher who was captured from the wild when young and sent to the zoo. After the zoo sold him to a menagerie, an old Jewish man bought him and could communicate with him through his mind. Ishmael teaches captivity to the unnamed narrator. The Librarian Orang-utan Discworld by Terry Pratchett The Librarian appeared in the first novel of the series, The Colour of Magic, and was transformed into an orang-utan in The Light Fantastic as the Octavo fired a beam of magic upwards. On discovering that being an orang-utan had certain advantages for a librarian - he can climb up to high shelves, for example - he refused to be transformed back into a human and has remained an orang-utan ever since. The other wizards have gradually become used to the situation, to the extent that, from Night Watch: 'if someone ever reported that there was an orang-utan in the Library, the wizards would probably go and ask the Librarian if he'd seen it'. Comics[edit] Main article: List of fictional primates in comics Ape Origin Notes Ape-X Squadron Supreme #5 A member of The Squadron Supreme; Also the name of a super hero who becomes a powerful gorilla after donning a magic Mexican wrestling mask Monsieur Mallah Doom Patrol (vol. 1) #86 An intelligent homosexual gorilla created by an evil brain in a jar. He was a member of the Brotherhood of Evil, enemies of the original Doom Patrol. Titano Superman A fictional character appearing in DC Comics, primarily as a foe of Superman. Primates in film[edit] Main article: List of fictional primates in film Ape Origin Notes Aldo Planet of the Apes The leader of the gorilla factions (and the ape revolution, by extension) during the rise of the ape society prior to humanity's downfall, as the "lowest species" of the planet. King Kong King Kong A giant movie monster resembling a gorilla, that has appeared in several movies since 1933. These include the groundbreaking 1933 movie, the film remakes of 1976 and 2005, as well as various sequels of the first two films. The character has become one of the world's most famous movie icons and, as such, has transcended the medium. Caesar Rise of the Planet of the Apes Intelligent Ape, who is abandoned and rallies a group of apes to escape from a cruel caging facility. Mighty Joe Young Mighty Joe Young An abnormally large gorilla who grew up in Africa who was brought to the USA by his owner/friend Jill after being convinced she and the ape could be a popular night club act. After a incident with 3 drunken patrons his human friend helped to return him to his homeland in Africa. Animation[edit] Main article: List of fictional primates in animation Name Species Origin Notes Lazlo Spider monkey Camp Lazlo Magilla Gorilla Gorilla The Magilla Gorilla Show Grape Ape Gorilla The Great Grape Ape Show Jake Spidermonkey Spider monkey My Gym Partner's a Monkey Rafiki Mandrill Lion King King Gorilla Gorilla The Venture Bros. Television[edit] Main article: List of fictional primates in television Name Species Origin Notes Bingo Gorilla The Banana Splits Member of The Banana Splits, an all-animal band. He played the drums. Professor Bobo Gorilla Mystery Science Theater 3000 Zoboomafoo Coquerel's sifaka Zoboomafoo Titular puppet lemur Video games[edit] Main article: List of fictional primates in video games Character Species Origin Platform(s) Notes Andross Star Fox SNES The archenemy of the Star Fox team. Conga the Gorilla Gorilla Banjo-Kazooie N64 · Xbox Live Arcade A giant gorilla who first appears in Mumbo's Mountain. Donkey Kong Gorilla[1] Donkey Kong Arcade · Atari 2600 · Amstrad CPC · Apple II · Atari 7800 · Atari 8-bit · C64 · ColecoVision · GBA · Intellivision · MSX, NES · 3DS · MS-DOS · TI-99/4A · TRS-80 · VIC-20 · Wii · ZX Spectrum Winston Gorilla Overwatch PlayStation 4 · Xbox One · PC One of the original members of Overwatch. Other[edit] Fatz Geronimo, a keyboard-playing gorilla for The Rock-afire Explosion at Showbiz Pizza Place.[2] References[edit] ^ "Developer Interview: Donkey Kong - Nintendo Entertainment System: NES Classic Edition – Official Site". www.nintendo.com. Retrieved 2017-04-14. ^ "Showbiz Pizza.com Fatz Geronimo". v t e Lists of fictional life forms Plants Plants Animals Arthropods Fish Parasites Worms Amphibians Frogs and toads animation Reptiles Crocodilians Dinosaurs Snakes Turtles Birds Birds of prey Ducks animation Penguins Mammals Canines Animation Comics Literature Dogs prose and poetry comics live-action film live-action television animation animated film animated television video games Foxes Wolves Felines Animation Comics Film Literature Television Big cats animation Rodents Animation Comics Literature Video Games Primates Animation Comics Film Literature Television Video games Ungulates Animation Horses Literature Pachyderms Pigs Miscellaneous Bears Marsupials Musteloids animation Badgers Raccoons Pinnipeds Rabbits and hares Rhinogradentia Humanoids General Animation Comics Film Literature Television Video games Specific Avian Piscine and Amphibian Reptilian Other Alien species Humanoids Parasites Symbionts Legendary By type Dragons popular culture film and television games literature mythology and folklore Equines Unicorns Winged horses Winged unicorns Ghosts Giants Hybrids Mermaids Vampires by region Dhampirs Werewolves popular Theological Fictional angels Fictional demons Fictional deities v t e Apes Extant ape species Human (Homo sapiens) Pan (genus) Bonobo (Pan paniscus) Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) Gorilla (Gorilla spp.) Western gorilla (Gorilla gorilla) Eastern gorilla (Gorilla beringei) Orangutan (Pongo spp.) Sumatran orangutan (Pongo abelii) Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus) Tapanuli orangutan (Pongo tapanuliensis) Gibbon (family: Hylobatidae) Study of apes Ape language Dian Fossey Birutė Galdikas Jane Goodall Chimpanzee genome project Human genome project Neanderthal genome project Willie Smits Lone Drøscher Nielsen Ian Redmond Elgin Center Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary Borneo Orangutan Survival Legal and social status Personhood Research ban Kinshasa Declaration Great Ape Project Survival Project International Primate Day Related List of individual apes (non-human) Apes in space (non-human) Bigfoot Bushmeat Chimpanzee–human last common ancestor Gorilla–human last common ancestor Orangutan–human last common ancestor Gibbon–human last common ancestor List of fictional primates (non-human) Great apes Human evolution Monkey Day Mythic humanoids Sasquatch Yeren Yeti Yowie Category