This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: The article lacks encyclopedic tone in many sections. Please help improve this article if you can. (November 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Ghostbusters franchise spans numerous films, animated series, novelizations, comic books, and video games. Beginning with the 1984 live-action film Ghostbusters written by Dan Aykroyd and Harold Ramis, the premise and storyline have inspired sequels, spinoffs, and reboots. These entries into the franchise include an ever-expanding list of both recurring and original characters. Contents 1 Ghostbusters (1984) 1.1 Human characters 1.1.1 Peter Venkman 1.1.2 Raymond Stantz 1.1.3 Egon Spengler 1.1.4 Winston Zeddemore 1.1.5 Dana Barrett 1.1.6 Janine Melnitz 1.1.7 Louis Tully 1.1.8 Walter Peck 1.2 Supernatural Entities 1.2.1 Slimer 1.2.2 The Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man 1.2.3 Gozer The Gozerian 1.2.4 The Terror Dogs: Zuul The Gatekeeper and Vinz Clortho The Keymaster 1.2.5 The Grey Lady 1.2.6 Ivo Shandor 2 Ghostbusters II (1989) 2.1 Human Characters 2.1.1 Oscar Barrett 2.1.2 Janosz Poha 2.2 Supernatural Entities 2.2.1 Vigo the Carpathian 2.2.2 The Scoleri Brothers 3 Extreme Ghostbusters (1997) 3.1 Eduardo Rivera 3.2 Kylie Griffin 3.3 Roland Jackson 3.4 Garrett Miller 4 Ghostbusters (2016) 4.1 Human characters 4.1.1 Erin Gilbert 4.1.2 Abby Yates 4.1.3 Jillian Holtzmann 4.1.4 Patty Tolan 4.1.5 Kevin Beckman 4.1.6 Rowan North 4.2 Ghosts 4.2.1 Gertrude Aldridge 4.2.2 Electrocuted Ghost 5 Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021) 5.1 Human Characters 5.1.1 Phoebe Spengler 5.1.2 Trevor Spengler 5.1.3 Callie Spengler 5.1.4 Mr. Grooberson 5.1.5 Sheriff Domingo 5.1.6 Elton 6 References Ghostbusters (1984)[edit] Human characters[edit] Peter Venkman[edit] Peter Venkman is a focal member of the Ghostbusters. He is portrayed by Bill Murray in both live action films, and is voiced in the animated series first by Lorenzo Music, followed by Dave Coulier. Peter is one of three doctors of parapsychology on the team; he also holds a PhD in psychology. In the movies, although he is the leader, he is characterized by his blunt persona, his laid-back approach to his profession, and his womanizing demeanor; of the three doctors in the Ghostbusters, he is the least committed to the academic and scientific side of their profession, and tends to regard his field, in the words of his employer in the first film, as "a dodge or hustle". In the first movie, he is shown to develop genuine concern and romantic feelings for the Ghostbusters' first client, Dana Barrett (Sigourney Weaver). Raymond Stantz[edit] Raymond "Ray" Stantz, another member of the Ghostbusters, is played by Dan Aykroyd in the films Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II, and is voiced by Frank Welker in the animated television series The Real Ghostbusters. He is one of the three doctors of parapsychology on the team and Peter’s closest friend. Ray is considered the "heart" of the Ghostbusters by the other members of the team and the second in command. He is an expert on paranormal history and metallurgy. He is characterized by his almost childlike enthusiasm towards his work, and his outspoken acceptance of paranormal activity. Egon Spengler[edit] Egon Spengler is the brains of the Ghostbusters – described in the original script as a "New Wave Mr. Spock" – and the creator of the Ghostbusters' equipment along with Raymond Stantz. Lacking much of a personality other than his focus on all things scientific, he is often shown as lacking social skills when dealing with people. Egon was portrayed by Harold Ramis in the films Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II, and voiced by Maurice LaMarche in the animated television series The Real Ghostbusters and later Extreme Ghostbusters. LaMarche was the only voice actor to remain for the entirety of both series. Before the movie was released, American Cinematographer described Egon as "maniacal" based on reading the script.[1] Ramis credited the part as launching his acting career, as up to that point he had been a director and writer, with a smaller acting role alongside Bill Murray in Stripes.[2] Winston Zeddemore[edit] Winston Zeddemore is played by Ernie Hudson in both movies and the 2009 video game, and was voiced by Arsenio Hall in the first season of The Real Ghostbusters. Buster Jones provided Winston's voice in the remaining seasons, and he reprised the role in a cameo on Extreme Ghostbusters. Hudson reportedly auditioned to reprise the role of Winston for the animated series, but he was rejected in favor of Hall. Unlike the other members of the team, Winston is not a scientist with a background in the paranormal; the novelization says that he was in the Marines. He is hired when the Ghostbusters' business begins to pick up. Despite not sharing the educational credentials of his coworkers, Winston often serves as the everyman of the team, acting as a voice of reason and displaying more common sense than the others. In the 2009 video game, Winston claims to have spent time in the Egypt exhibit of the museum while in college, suggesting experience in anthropology or a related science. Dana Barrett[edit] Portrayed by Sigourney Weaver in the first and second movie, Dana Barrett was a single cellist living at 550 Central Park West (55 Central Park West), a sinister apartment building which would become the gateway for the apocalyptic deity, Gozer the Gozerian. Dana is singled out early for unwelcome paranormal attention by Gozer's minions, and seeks the help of the Ghostbusters after seeing their advertisement on television. She is possessed by the demon Zuul, Gatekeeper of Gozer; who along with Keymaster Vinz Clortho opens the interdimensional gate to summon Gozer to Earth in the first film. She promptly attracts the romantic attention of Venkman, whose flippant behavior causes her to doubt her decision to seek aid from the Ghostbusters. In the sequel five years later, Dana is a divorced mother of an eight-month-old boy named Oscar; Venkman is neither her former husband nor Oscar's father. Dana was then working as a restorationist for the fictitious Manhattan Museum of Art. It is here that she (and later Baby Oscar) comes to the attention of the evil Prince Vigo the Carpathian, whose malign spirit inhabits his massive self portrait. When Dana and Baby Oscar becomes the target of Vigo's plot, the Ghostbusters re-enter her life to save her, Baby Oscar, and the world once more. She was also a neighbor of Louis Tully at 550 Central Park West in the first movie. The two remained acquainted, then became friends. Louis and Janine Melnitz baby-sat Oscar (and became a romantic item) during the second film. Weaver confirmed in June 2019 that she will reprise her role as Barrett in Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021).[3] Dana is the only character that didn't appear in The Real Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters: The Video Game. Janine Melnitz[edit] Janine Melnitz, the Ghostbusters's secretary, is played by Annie Potts in both movies, and is voiced by Laura Summer and Kath Soucie in The Real Ghostbusters and Pat Musick in Extreme Ghostbusters. Janine has occasionally worn the Ghostbusters uniform and used ghost-catching equipment in the animated series. During the first film, Janine often flirted with Egon but none of her advances were returned in kind. She later dated Louis Tully in the sequel. Louis Tully[edit] Louis Tully is a nerdy accountant and a neighbor of Dana Barrett, played by Rick Moranis in Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II and voiced by Rodger Bumpass in the Slimer! And the Real Ghostbusters animated series. He is possessed by the demon Vinz Clortho, the Keymaster who, along with Zuul, opens the interdimensional gate to bring Gozer to Earth in the first film. In Ghostbusters II, he is revealed to have graduated from night law school, representing the Ghostbusters at their trial and taking up permanent employment with them when they reestablish their business. In addition, he seeks to become the fifth Ghostbuster. He later borrows a Ghostbuster jumpsuit and proton pack to attempt to help defeat Vigo The Carpathian. After the release of Ghostbusters II, Louis became a semi-regular character on Slimer! And the Real Ghostbusters as the Ghostbusters' legal and financial adviser. Ghostbusters, like many films on which Moranis has worked, had him improvising some of his lines.[4] He appears as a non-playable character in Lego Dimensions voiced by Mick Wingert. In his sidequest on the Ghostbusters Adventure World, he requires the player's help to get more guests for his party. Although Louis did not appeared in Ghostbusters: The Video Game, it is obvious that he was the "other guy" that Peter referred to who tried to be a fifth Ghostbuster. Walter Peck[edit] Walter Peck is an inspector for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), for the third district in the greater New York area, played by William Atherton. Spurred on by "wild stories in the media," Peck is sent to "assess any possible environmental impact" by the Ghostbusters' operation. Venkman instantly dislikes Peck and refuses him access to inspect the premises, especially the Containment Unit Storage Facility. This confrontation leads to Peck getting official inspection orders and eventually having the Containment Unit shut off. The result is catastrophic, unleashing all the entities that were trapped and providing the 'sign' that Terror Dog Keymaster of Gozer, Vinz Clortho ( possessing Louis Tully ) was waiting for. Peck again confronts the Ghostbusters and orders them arrested, blaming them for the explosion at the firehouse. As The Manhattan Crossrip of 1984 begins, the Ghostbusters are released from jail and brought to City Hall. There they square off against Peck, trying to convince the mayor that the city, even the entire world is in danger. The mayor sides with the Ghostbusters and has a furious Peck removed from his office. With the mayor's support, the Ghostbusters gear up and head off with a police / military escort towards their fateful confrontation with Gozer The Gozerian. Peck also heads up to 550 Central Park West ( 55 Central Park West ) and bears witness to Gozer manifesting in It's Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man Destructor form. He eventually gets engulfed in Mr. Stay-Puft's melted remains, much to his public embarrassment and displeasure. Walter Peck appears only once in The Real Ghostbusters animated series in the episode "Big Trouble With Little Slimer," voiced by Robert Towers. Having been fired from the EPA, Peck became a member of the government organization B.U.F.O. (The Bureau of Unidentified Flying Organisms). He tried to bring the Ghostbusters down by destroying Slimer who he thinks is fake and ends up causing more trouble. In Ghostbusters: The Video Game, Peck – again played by Atherton – went on to lead the Paranormal Contracts Oversight Commission/PCOC, an agency overseeing the Ghostbusters; they remain having mutual enmity to each other. He still firmly believes that the Ghostbusters are scam artists despite the contraries and tries to discredit them, which again gotten himself more trouble when him being caught in the fights between them and the spirit of Ivo Shandor. Supernatural Entities[edit] Slimer[edit] Slimer is a translucent green blob creature, with two skinny arms, no feet, and several chins. In the first movie, Slimer was voiced by director Reitman, while Welker voiced the green ghost in The Real Ghostbusters. Slimer originally was a priest that led the circumcisions in the Anglican Methodist church when killed by one of his patients he vowed to haunt New York forever.[dubious – discuss] In the 1989 sequel Ghostbusters II, Robin Shelby performed Slimer and Reitman again voiced Slimer but most of the footage shot was not used. In the late 1990s cartoon Extreme Ghostbusters, Slimer's voice was provided by Billy West. Troy Baker voices Slimer in the 2009 video game, though with the sound effects used in the first movie. Aykroyd reportedly referred to Slimer as "The Ghost of John Belushi".[citation needed] In the script for Ghostbusters, Slimer is never called by any name. He is described by Dr. Ray Stantz (Dan Aykroyd) as an "Ugly Little Spud," just before he slimes Dr. Peter Venkman (Bill Murray). In Ghostbusters terminology, Slimer is designated as a "Focused, Non-Terminal Repeating Phantasm or a Class 5 Full-Roaming Vapor! (Real nasty one, too!)" The creature's original title was "The Onionhead Ghost", which the film crew dubbed him for the horrible odor he used to scare a couple in a scene cut from the original movie. Slimer's personality is one of tremendous gluttony, and he is referred to as a "disgusting blob". In the movies, he is not named and makes short appearances. In the cartoon, he is known as Slimer, is able to speak, and demonstrates a child's intelligence and intense loyalty to Peter and the Ghostbusters with the personality of a dog. His role in the series is explained in the episode "Citizen Ghost", which primarily consists of a flashback to the immediate aftermath of the movie, where Slimer returned to the firehouse as the Ghostbusters were the first people to show any interest in him, the team 'adopting' him as a means of testing ghosts and an ally after he helped them defeat ectoplasmic manifestations of themselves that had manifested from their old uniforms after the uniforms were exposed to ghostly energies from the containment unit. In the Marvel UK comics of the Real Ghostbusters, Slimer had his own half-page sketch, in which Slimer's past life was covered; he was originally called King Remils ("Slimer" spelled backwards), a greedy, obese monarch who had died of heart failure. Slimer's popularity soared from the subsequent spin-off animated television series The Real Ghostbusters. Slimer later starred in his own Slimer! cartoons when The Real Ghostbusters was extended to a one-hour format. SLIMER! was briefly published by NOW Comics, a defunct Chicago firm. Artists included Mitch O'Connell and Mark Braun. Writers included Larry Parr who also wrote for the animated series. Slimer also appeared as a representative of The Real Ghostbusters in the animated anti-drug television special Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue. Slimer was also the mascot for the Hi-C flavor "Ecto Cooler", which came out shortly after The Real Ghostbusters, and was colored green. Slimer remained on the box well after the Real Ghostbusters was cancelled; but in 1997 the drink was renamed "Shoutin' Orange Tangergreen", and Slimer was removed. Slimer also had a toothpaste named after him. A more monstrous and "evil-looking" incarnation of Slimer appears in the 2016 reboot, as voiced by Adam Ray: it appears in the ghost havoc scenes, as it ravages a hot dog cart, but, as the Ghostbusters near to investigate, he steals the Ecto-1 and starts joyriding with other ghosts (including a Lady Slimer) around Manhattan, but the Ghostbusters decide not to shoot him, as the car contains a nuclear reactor. Later, they actually do shoot at the car to use the reactor to reverse the effects of the ghost portal, with Slimer and Lady Slimer sharing a kiss before falling inside it. The Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man[edit] The Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man – mascot for the fictional Stay-Puft Marshmallows company – became the chosen Destructor form of Gozer ( towering roughly 112.5" feet tall ) after Dr. Ray Stantz "tried to think of the most harmless thing. Something I loved from my childhood. Something that could never, ever possibly destroy us... Mr. Stay-Puft..." Stay-Puft also makes appearances in the animated series The Real Ghostbusters (most times friendly due to not being possessed by Gozer any longer, other times a bit cranky), and returns as a boss – the resurrected Destructor avatar sans Gozer – in Ghostbusters: The Video Game. Stay-Puft was inspired by Peter O'Boyle, a security guard at Columbia Pictures whom director Reitman met filming his previous movie, Spacehunter: Adventures in the Forbidden Zone. According to Sam Delaney of The Guardian, "Stay-Puft's familiar mascot combined elements of real life brand ambassadors Bibendum (aka the Michelin tire man) and the Pillsbury Dough Boy."[5] The costume was created by Bill Bryan using miniatures, optical compositing and Bryan himself in a latex suit.[6] Gozer The Gozerian[edit] Gozer The Gozerian, also known as "The Destructor", "The Destroyer", "Volguus Zildrohar", "Lord of The Sebouillia", "Scourge of the Glethestements" and "The Traveler". An eldritch abomination of unknown origin, Gozer is a genderless, sadistic, shapeshifting, apocalyptic, cosmic entity (worshipped as a god by the Hittite, Mesopotamian and Sumerian cultures) who appears as the first film's main antagonist. In Ghostbusters terminology from West End Games' role-playing game, Gozer would be a Class 7 Metaspectre. Gozer never appeared in The Real Ghostbusters animated series and it never gave a classification for it (the 1984 film did not classify Gozer either, apart from indicating it was a god). However, Gozer is referred to several times and described by Ray Stantz as a "Primal God" in the episode, "Janine Melnitz, Ghostbuster". Gozer was also used as a benchmark for other potent entities encountered, such as Proteus, Nexxa, Murray The Mantis and Great Cthulhu. Gozer itself is reputed to be the most powerful being the Ghostbusters have ever faced. It displayed an extraordinary array of abilities including dimensional travel, shape-changing, telepathy, great agility and stamina, energy attacks (casting lightning bolts), invisibility, intangibility, pyrokinesis, teleportation and weather control. In fact, its mere entering and presence within Earth's dimension caused increases in paranormal activity and the disruption of natural forces (the storm clouds and earthquakes before/during the battle with the Ghostbusters). Gozer proved so powerful, that the Ghostbusters had to resort to crossing the streams, using Total Protonic Reversal to destroy the portal and hurl Gozer and its minions back their own universe. As briefly mentioned in the film and fully covered by the 2009 game sequel, cults worshipping Gozer and its minions arose around 6000 BC before being banished by the Babylonian goddess Tiamat following a protracted conflict between their followers. Via its chief minions – Terror Dogs Zuul the Gatekeeper and Vinz Clortho the Keymaster, Gozer can escape to other realities. Upon entering a given dimension – as a profane form of granting a last request, Gozer demands of those who witness its arrival to "CHOOSE THE FORM OF THE DESTRUCTOR", a physical avatar it will manifest as to destroy that plane of existence. In the 1920s, cult leader Ivo Shandor and his followers set Gozer's Coming in motion, eventually happening as the "Manhattan Crossrip of 1984", when Its minions Zuul and Vinz Clortho opened the portal for it to emerge from the rooftop temple of 550 Central Park West (55 Central Park West). Though initially appearing in the form of an androgynous humanoid woman, Gozer uses Ray's accidental thought to assume its Destructor form of the Stay-Puft Marshmallow Man before later being banished back to its hellish realm. Gozer "reappears" in the 2009 game via the Gozerian Mandala-revived form of Mr. Stay Puft. Without an actual portal to Gozer's domain, this Stay-Puft was a hollow avatar; comparatively weak and requiring far more power to become the true Destructor form it was supposed to be. Because of that, the Ghostbusters managed to defeat it a second time. Later in the story, a disillusioned Ivo Shandor (possessing the mayor of New York) confronted the Ghostbusters. He produced a facsimile of the skull of Gozer's female humanoid form, angrily renounced his faith in The Traveler and contemptuously discarded it. Yet even with this second defeat, the menace of Gozer is far from over. The Destructor still awaits in its universe for another opportunity to unleash its wrath. Gozer is best known for its phrases and quotes such as "Are you a god?" (Ray: "No...") "Then... DIE!!!" (blasts the Ghostbusters with lightning) or its disembodied voice saying "THE TRAVELER HAS COME!" and "CHOOSE AND PERISH!" Gozer was played by Yugoslav actress/model Slavitza Jovan and its demonic voice was provided by Paddi Edwards. The Terror Dogs: Zuul The Gatekeeper and Vinz Clortho The Keymaster[edit] Zuul and Vinz Clortho are the primary servants and harbingers of Gozer The Gozerian. Worshipped as demigods, they are known respectively as The Gatekeeper and The Keymaster. Their goal: possess a mortal male and female, perform a sexual rite combining their powers and open a gateway to allow The Destructor entry into a given world. After opening the portal, they take their places as guardians of Gozer's cosmic pyramid. The Terror Dogs are similar in appearance: horned (the male Vinz Clortho has longer horns) dog-like quadrupeds with powerful, dark-colored bodies, blazing demonic red eyes and vicious fangs and claws. In Ghostbusters terminology from West End Games' role-playing game, The Terror Dogs would each rank as a Class 7 Metaspectre. In addition to their ability to dematerialize and possess mortals, The Terror Dogs exhibit other supernatural powers such as summoning lesser entities, levitating, telekinesis and shape-changing (usually the physical form of those they possess into their own horrific forms). Atop 550 Central Park West (55 Central Park West), The Gozerian Temple featured twin gargoyles of The Gatekeeper and Keymaster, within which they manifested and emerged from during a colossal thunderstorm shortly before the "Manhattan Crossrip of 1984." They quickly tracked down and possessed their chosen mortal "fleshbags," specifically Dana Barrett (Sigourney Weaver) and Louis Tully (Rick Moranis). Eventually, Vinz Clortho reunited with Zuul after waiting 8,000 years. The two kissed passionately, then proceeded to the rooftop shrine to worship Gozer, perform the rite and summon their dark master. When Gozer appeared, It proceeded to lovingly pet them, when It was interrupted by the Ghostbusters' arrival. When the Ghostbusters finally resorted to crossing the streams, The Terror Dogs where hurled back along with Gozer to their hellish realm. And there they await for yet another chance to fulfill their unending goal of unleashing The Destructor once more. While not necessarily the origin of the word "Zuul," there is a similarity with the ancient Maya word for dog, "tzul".[7] The Grey Lady[edit] Dr. Eleanor Twitty a.k.a. The Grey Lady or "The Library Ghost" is the first ghost encountered by the original three Ghostbusters (Ray, Egon, and Peter) while they are investigating paranormal activity at the New York Public Library. When they attempt to touch her, she transforms into a much larger and more frightening skeletal form, and causes the trio to flee the library in terror. Though they do not catch her, they get a scan of her and use the information to construct their containment grid and ghost catching equipment, allowing the creation of their ghost-catching business. In Ghostbusters terminology from West End Games' role-playing game, The Grey Lady would be a Class 4 Free-Floating, Full-Torso, Vaporous Apparition, as she was human in appearance and later identified by the Ghostbusters. She returns in the 2009 video game, where much of her history is revealed, and the Ghostbusters uncover the tragic story of her death. She was once Dr. Eleanor Twitty, the head librarian of the New York Public Library in the 1920s, and overseer of its collection of ancient artifacts, stone tablets, long-forgotten tomes, and rare books. In March 1924, she goes missing, and the police are unable to find her. They discover that she has been murdered by philologist Edmund Hoover, The Collector, who seduces her to get to the rare books in her care, specifically the Gozerian Codex. In the video game, the Ghostbusters discover her reading the Codex before capturing her. Due to the ease of the capture, they state that she must have wanted them to recover the Codex to aid them in defeating the Collector. Ivo Shandor[edit] Ivo Shandor, an insane physician and an architect of some renown during the early 20th century with a penchant for performing macabre and unnecessary surgeries, is mentioned in the first film and features in the 2009 video game. Having extensive knowledge on the occult and science, his expertise in parapsychology rivals Egon Spengler and Ray Stantz's. The aftermath of the first World War convinced Shandor that humanity is beyond saving. He set up a cult of Gozer worshippers with close to a thousand followers, in the 1920s with his ancestral island home on the Hudson River as the center of it. Using his connections to International Steel's chairman and other corrupt company owners, Shandor designed 550 Central Park West (55 Central Park West) as a means to summon Gozer to bring about the end of the world. Other necessary materials for the apartment building's arcane construction were obtained by Shandor when a mining operation was established in Summerville, Oklahoma in 1927. Shandor also developed a mandala across the city, with the New York Public Library, the Museum of Natural History, the Sedgewick Hotel, and Shandor Island (before it sank) as key nodes protected by his most loyal followers: Azetlor the Collector, the Museum chairman, the Spider Witch/Evelyn Lewis, and a captured, otherworldly sloar that generates a steady stream of black slime used to power the Mandala system and Shandor's island lab. Shandor's original scheme comes to fruition during the events of the first film in the 1980s, when the sufficient energy collected causes Gozer's minions to physically manifest in preparation for their master's coming. The Ghostbusters foil Gozer's entry and neutralize it. As revealed in the video game, Shandor is also responsible for the events of Ghostbusters II, as the Psychomagnotheric "Mood" Slime produced on his island finds its way into an abandoned city subway line, causing a wave of ghosts to surface and strengthening the spirit of Vigo The Carpathian. Shandor finally makes an appearance in Ghostbusters: The Video Game as a main antagonist of the game. By 1991, Shandor possesses the body of Mayor Jack Mulligan and makes Peck head of PCOC to hinder the Ghostbusters, while he uses his only living descendant – Dr. Ilyssa Selwyn – to invoke the nodes of his mandala and revive Gozer's Mr. Stay-Puft Destructor form. Without the actual presence of Gozer, the weaker Marshmallow Man was defeated by the Ghostbusters and failed to capture Ilyssa. Frustrated with Gozer's failures, Shandor decides to use the mandala to merge the ghost world with the real world in order to become a god and fights the Ghostbusters himself. Declaring himself "The Architect," Shandor took on the form similar to a massive demon covered in molten rock. Having underestimated the Ghostbusters, Shandor is defeated after they cross their proton streams during the fight after following him into the ghost world. The Ghostbusters script lists the spelling of the surname as Sandor, which is pronounced "shandor" and in fact is spelled Šandor as a moderately common Croatian surname. Ghostbusters II (1989)[edit] Human Characters[edit] Oscar Barrett[edit] Oscar Barrett (played by William T. Deutschendorf and Hank J. Deutschendorf II) is Dana Barrett's baby boy, born 8 months prior to the beginning of Ghostbusters II. He is nearly sacrificed to serve as a new earthly incarnation of Vigo the Carpathian, but is saved by the Ghostbusters. There has been speculation as to who Oscar's father actually is. Sigourney Weaver – on the June 14, 1989 episode of "The Arsenio Hall Show" – recalled she thought the father was the Violinist from the Lincoln Center scene. Referred to by Venkman as "The Stiff," the Violinist is given the name "Andre Wallance" in the novelization of the 1984 movie, 'Ghostbusters: The Supernatural Spectacular.' On the 1999 Ghostbusters DVD commentary track, both Joe Medjuck and Ivan Reitman state that Oscar's father is the Violinist. However, in July 2016, Ivan Reitman changed his opinion to Oscar's father probably being Peter Venkman ( Bill Murray ). Peter says to Oscar in their first scene together, "You know, I... I should have been your father. I mean, I could have been..." Janosz Poha[edit] Dr. Janosz Poha (played by Peter MacNicol) is Dana Barrett's boss at the fictional Manhattan Museum of Art. He is somewhat nerdy and harbours a hopeless love interest in her. Dr. Poha is later enslaved by Vigo the Carpathian to bring Dana's baby Oscar to serve as a new vessel for Vigo's evil spirit. However, Vigo's plan for reanimation is stopped by the Ghostbusters, who also manage to free Dr. Poha from Vigo's spell. Supernatural Entities[edit] Vigo the Carpathian[edit] Vigo the Carpathian (full name: "Prince Vigo von Homburg Deutschendorf") (Wilhelm von Homburg) appears in the second film as the main antagonist. Known as a powerful magician, genius, lunatic, and genocidal madman, Vigo was a sadistic, power-hungry 16th/17th Century tyrant of Carpathia. Self-described as the "Scourge of Carpathia" and "the Sorrow of Moldavia," Vigo's unfortunate subjects gave him other titles: Vigo the Cruel, Vigo the Torturer, Vigo the Despised and Vigo the Unholy. Peter Venkman (Bill Murray)—upon hearing all these unflattering titles—cynically commented, "Wasn't he also 'Vigo the Butch?'" Born in 1505, Vigo was an expert in sorcery and black magic, enabling him with an unnaturally long life span. It came to an equally unnatural end when in the year 1610, he was "poisoned, stabbed, shot, hung, stretched, disemboweled, drawn and quartered." In spite of all that, as Ray Stantz (Dan Aykroyd) notes about Vigo, "just before his head died, his last words were, 'Death is but a Door; Time is but a Window... I'll be back!'" Vigo was based on Vlad the Impaler (the inspiration for Dracula by Bram Stoker), and in part on Grigori Rasputin, who also survived several attempts on his life. In addition to the dark arts, Vigo was also skilled in painting. And it was a combination of the two that provided him with the means to remain within the mortal realm after death. Vigo's spirit possesses and remains within his life-size self portrait, which inevitably arrives at the restoration department of the fictitious Manhattan Museum of Art in 1989 (the setting for the Ghostbusters II). In Ghostbusters terminology from West End Games' role-playing game, Vigo would be a Class 4 Full-Torso Apparition, as he was human in appearance and identified easily. However as the events of Ghostbusters II progressed, Vigo drew strength from the negatively-charged rivers of Psychomagnotheric "Mood" Slime flowing beneath Manhattan. In doing so, his potency increased to the comparable levels of a Class 7 entity. With his new found power, Vigo manipulates art gallery curator Dr. Janosz Poha (Peter MacNicol) into finding a child (Dana's son Oscar) whose body he can permanently inhabit. His plan is foiled by the Ghostbusters' use of positive mood slime, disrupting his attempts to possess Oscar. After briefly possessing Ray Stantz, Vigo is trapped within his painting once and for all. In Ghostbusters: The Video Game, the portrait of Vigo is stored in the Ghostbusters' firehouse as one of the cursed objects the collect and study. Though no longer a threat, Vigo enjoys insulting and taunting anybody who approaches him. He also makes cryptic predictions based on real-world history, as the game's release post-dates the time period of the game by nearly two decades. Vigo's full name is a combination of the stage name of Norbert Grupe (aka Wilhelm von Homburg), who played Vigo, and William and Henry Deutschendorf, the twins that played the baby Oscar. The menacing voice of Vigo was provided by Max von Sydow. The Scoleri Brothers[edit] Nunzio and Tony Scoleri were convicted murderers sentenced to death by electric chair by Judge Stephen "The Hammer" Wexler. They later return as electrified ghosts when Judge Wexler was trying the Ghostbusters in court. Extreme Ghostbusters (1997)[edit] Eduardo Rivera[edit] Eduardo Rivera (voiced by Rino Romano) was first introduced as one of the next generation of Ghostbusters in Extreme Ghostbusters. He seemingly a lazy, sarcastic and somewhat clueless character, Eduardo nevertheless makes himself an integral part of the team by being determined and reliable. Eduardo, along with Garrett, resembles original Ghostbuster Peter Venkman in that, like Venkman, Eduardo is sarcastic, has a penchant for pursuing attractive women, and is generally unscientific and constantly spouts pop culture references. He also reads "J.N. Kline" young-adult horror novels. Eduardo has a long-running subplot dealing with a love/hate relationship between him and Kylie, although it is very much revealed "In Your Dreams" that he has intimate feelings and dreams about her. These feelings are further enforced in that he is usually the one to rescue Kylie from dangerous situations, and vice versa, in several episodes. He once said to Kylie herself that nothing was going to happen to her "while [he's] around". In fact, in the episode "Darkness at Noon" he outright admitted to Kylie, who was possessed by a ghost at the time, that he felt an attraction of sorts when he saw her for the first time and even showed the intention of kissing her when Kylie asked him to. In "The Unseen" he takes the rap for Kylie's mistake, not wanting "the worst day of her life to get any worse". In "Rage", Eduardo reveals to have an older brother, Carlos "Carl" Rivera, an NYPD officer who is angry with Eduardo for not being a police officer like the rest of their family, and thinks the Ghostbuster are a scam, which is why Eduardo kept his job a secret. In the same episode it is also implied that his father is dead (or at least retired) as he and Carlos refer to him in the past tense during a heated argument. In "Fear Itself", it is revealed that Eduardo has a fear of death (specifically his own). He has a vicious rivalry with Slimer, but has ended up working with the ghost, and volunteered to save him in "Slimer's Sacrifice". He also has an on the surface rivalry with Garrett with the two often mocking each other and attempting to one up the other. In spite of this as the series goes on the two seem to have the closest thing to a friendship even though Garrett's enthusiastic personality completely contrasts Eduardo's cynical attitude. (The official website claimed he slacks off due to fear of failure.[8]) Despite all his cynicism and slacking he demonstrates a reasonably high level of intelligence as in the episode "Eyes of a Dragon" he states how the proton aspect of light works to Kylie and later on how to defeat the ghost of that episode. Eduardo was also the one to smash a cursed orb, causing the eye-stealing ghost to disintegrate in the episode "The Unseen" and also continued the incantation that destroyed the demon of an alternate dimension in which he, Roland and Kylie were imprisoned in the episode "Casting the Runes". Eduardo has also exhibited bouts of jealousy whenever Kylie seemingly flirts with other men and in "Till Death Do Us Start" he showed signs of sheepish nervousness when asked if he and Kylie were together. Kylie Griffin[edit] Kylie Griffin (voiced by Tara Charendoff) was first introduced as one of the next generation of Ghostbusters in Extreme Ghostbusters. She is appointed by the group to carry the ghost trap on her back. She becomes involved with the Ghostbusters after enrolling in Egon Spengler's course at City College of New York. Kylie shares certain traits with Egon, such as knowledge of the supernatural. Both are eccentric and socially awkward and they both had encounters with supernatural beings from their childhood (Egon met the Boogeyman and Kylie's friend was taken by the Grundel). As part of Extreme Ghostbusters, Kylie is featured in the video games Extreme Ghostbusters for the Game Boy Color, Extreme Ghostbusters: Code Ecto-1 for Game Boy Advance and Extreme Ghostbusters: The Ultimate Invasion for the PlayStation. She was also the basis of several action figures from Trendmasters. Kylie is widely regarded as the fan favorite of Extreme Ghostbusters.[9][10] Kylie reappears as a supporting character in IDW Publishing's Ghostbusters comic. She first appears in issue 5 in 2012 as the manager of Ray Stantz's occult book shop. In November 2012, it was announced that Kylie would be made an official Ghostbuster in issues beginning in February 2013.[11][12] Roland Jackson[edit] Roland Jackson (voiced by Alfonso Ribeiro) was first introduced as one of the next generation of Ghostbusters in Extreme Ghostbusters. He the mechanic of the group. Roland is the most level-headed and mechanically-gifted of the new Ghostbusters, helping Egon repair and improve the Proton Packs and Ecto-1; his reason for joining Egon's class was seeing the Ecto-1 at an auto show. Roland approaches the paranormal from a practical point-of-view, and in the episode "Fear Itself" reveals that his only fear is the dangerous breakdown of his equipment. In "The Infernal Machine", he became disgruntled that his technological efforts were being taken for granted. Roland's strongest wish is to get into the Ivy League and become a doctor. He's a very staid, square personality, slow to anger, though he came close to striking one of the racists in "The True Face of the Monster"; it is implied he has had to deal with racist attitudes before. Roland has twice come under the mental control of villains, the Siren in "Sonic Youth" and Luko in "The Infernal Machine". "Grease" reveals Roland is the oldest in a lower-middle-class family and volunteers for the Little League and helps the homeless; in "Grundelesque" we meet his very mischievous younger brother whom Roland (at first) refuses to believe is a troublemaker. Like Winston, Roland is the only African American member of the team, yet he has a talent with machines like Ray. Garrett Miller[edit] Garrett Miller (voiced by Jason Marsden) was first introduced as one of the next generation of Ghostbusters in Extreme Ghostbusters. Garrett is a lifelong wheelchair user, has a very 'jock'-like attitude and is a huge fan of extreme sports and attempting mad stunts. In the episode "Grease", it is revealed that Garrett was born with the inability to walk and studying to be a physical therapist, and throughout the series he only refers to his condition to mock it (and in "Be Careful What You Wish For", uses it as an excuse to dump some work on Eduardo). He is the most headstrong and enthusiastic of the new Ghostbusters, often claiming that he is in it only for the adrenaline rush; he was left bitterly disappointed in "Ghost Apocalyptic Future" to learn he was the only Ghostbuster not remembered in the future dystopia. While he studies to be a physical therapist to help other disabled people, his secret dream is to be an NBA star. In "Fear Itself", it is revealed that Garrett is claustrophobic (though he never admits it to anyone), and has a deep disdain towards the FBI ever since the incident where two agents arrested them under the belief they were causing the sabotages and released a gremlin they recently captured while they were on a plane. He has a rivalry with Eduardo, the two of them constantly bantering and trying to one-up each other. In "Deadliners", we find out Garrett wrote a (bad) horror story starring himself (the other Ghostbusters died on the first page, to their annoyance). Like Ray, Garrett is the most enthusiastic. Garrett is the only Ghostbuster in the history of the franchise never to be made as a toy (all other Ghostbusters received at least two toys, including Louis and Janine), presumably due to the implausibility of having the wheelchair as a separate assembling piece. Though a prototype figure was made. Bob Higgins has said that during a focus group of young children, the creators found Garrett was the most popular character: "when we asked... which of these characters would you want to be and they all wanted to be Garrett, they all wanted to be the guy that does the crazy things. They all wanted to be the guy that was the leader and they all kind of saw him as the leader of this group [even though he wasn't]".[13] Ghostbusters (2016)[edit] Human characters[edit] Erin Gilbert[edit] Dr. Erin Gilbert in the 2016 film, played by Kristen Wiig, is Abby Yates' second-in-command. She is introduced as an assistant physics professor at Columbia University, but her bid for tenure fails after her previous research into the paranormal with Abby comes to light. She has long since dismissed her belief in ghosts, but regains it after being slimed by Gertrude Aldridge during a face-to-face encounter. In the novelization, she is depicted as having grown up near Battle Creek, Michigan; she met Abby in her senior year of high school, and spent much of her time at the University of Michigan researching ghosts with Abby. She did postgraduate work at Princeton University, and got her doctorate at MIT. She shares traits with Peter Venkman as both kept getting slimed, they are also team leaders with a sense of humor and attraction to the opposite gender. Abby Yates[edit] Dr. Abigail L. "Abby" Yates is portrayed by Melissa McCarthy in the 2016 film, and is the Ghostbusters' de facto leader. In the novelization, she transferred to Erin's high school after moving from Indiana in her senior year. The two became fast friends, and spent their college years at the University of Michigan researching ghosts. They collaborated on a book about their findings, but Erin backed out of a planned interview after her graduate advisor at Princeton panned the project. Undaunted, she moved to New York City to continue her research. In the film, she rereleases her book without Erin's consent, threatening her bid for tenure. When Erin demands to have the book taken down, Abby complies, in exchange for her participation at a ghost investigation with Holtzmann at the Aldridge Mansion Museum. She shares traits to Ray Stantz for both are sometimes get possessed, and they both have the same enthusiasm and talent for invention. Jillian Holtzmann[edit] Dr. Jillian "Holtz" Holtzmann is portrayed by Kate McKinnon in the 2016 film. A nuclear engineer by training, she is introduced as Abby's research partner and becomes the team's equipment designer, constructing their proton packs as well as a range of auxiliary weapons. She is hinted to have a romantic interest in Erin, as seen in an alternate ending scene where she claims that they are dating, as well as several other instances of flirting throughout the film. Her mentor is Dr. Rebecca Gorin (Sigourney Weaver). In the novelization, it is revealed that she narrowly missed being admitted to CERN. Several of her peers in school started calling her by her last name because "Jillian" sounded too feminine, and by the time of the film she almost never answers to her first name. She shares traits with Egon Spengler for both are intelligent and tend to do strange things. Director Paul Feig confirmed in an interview with The Daily Beast that Holtzmann was supposed to be a lesbian, or somewhere on the LGBT+ spectrum, but the studio refused to allow that detail into the movie and instead left the audience with the freedom of more personal interpretation of her character.[14] She was also observed by some viewers to depict autistic traits, or more specifically, someone with Asperger syndrome.[15] Patty Tolan[edit] Patricia "Patty" Tolan is portrayed by Leslie Jones in the 2016 film. She works for the New York MTA as a subway booth attendant, and is the only member of Abby's team who does not have an advanced degree. She is however, a big fan of non-fiction and is a municipal historian with intense knowledge of New York's history. After contacting them to report a ghost sighting in one of the tunnels, she joins the team and borrows a hearse from her uncle's funeral home that is eventually converted into Ecto-1, a vehicle for personnel and equipment transport. She shares traits with Winston Zeddemore as both believe in the supernatural without being scientists, and also both are African American. Kevin Beckman[edit] Kevin Beckman is a receptionist in the office building of the Ghostbusters team in 2016 film, played by Chris Hemsworth. He serves as the male counterpart to Janine Melnitz from the first two films. In the film, he applies for job in office building where Erin and her mates are establishing ghost and supernatural business headquarters. They are skeptical to hire him for being silly and bit dumb, but he gets the job as he is seen as a nice, calm guy. Kevin sometimes provides jokes and statements to the team throughout the film. Later he becomes possessed by the spirit of Rowan North who uses him as a host and goes to Mercado Hotel to activate the device to unleash the ghost army in New York City. The Ghostbusters arrive in the building to save him and Rowan discards him but the girls catch him when Kevin falls down to the floor. After repelling Rowan's invasion, Kevin is back in his job as the girls see him as a valuable worker in their business. Rowan North[edit] Rowan North is an occultist and a former employee of the Mercado Hotel in the 2016 film as the main antagonist, portrayed by Neil Casey. In the film, he left his former job and became an occultist because he felt his life became miserable when he was mistreated in own life. Obsessed with the supernatural, Rowan attempted to unleash the ghost army in New York City by putting devices across the city connected to main machine in the Mercado Hotel in Times Square, as a former site of paranormal history, along with Ley lines within the New York area to activate the portal and create the vortex between the two worlds. Rowan also used the book called "Ghost From Our Past", written by Erin Gilbert and Abby Yates as inspiration for his plans. When the Ghostbusters discovered his plans, he planned to turned it on, but as the police arrived, he committed suicide. However, as the Ghostbusters later discovered, he had planned all along to commit suicide, so he could become a ghost. Rowan possessed Abby briefly, then Kevin Beckman as host to get to the Mercado hotel and activate the portal machine, resulting in the unleashing of the ghosts in New York. When the Ghostbusters arrived, Rowan discarded the host and transformed into the Ghostbusters logo, a demonic gigantic version of the cartoon ghost. When the girls destroyed the vortex, he was pulled into the ghost dimension, but caught Abby, trying to kill her. Erin entered the dimension and saved her, while Rowan was disintegrated in that dimension, ending his invasion. Ghosts[edit] Gertrude Aldridge[edit] Gertrude Aldridge was the first ghost seen by Erin, Abby and Holtzmann in the 2016 film. She was portrayed by Bess Rous. Gertrude Aldridge was the horribly disturbed daughter of a wealthy New York aristocrat who was responsible for the murder of the family's servants. As a result, she spent the rest of her life locked away in her family manor's basement instead of being turned over to the police, being occasionally fed food through a small slot in the door. In the present day, she haunts the Aldridge Mansion Museum when Tour Guide Garrett (Zach Woods) was about to head home. As soon as Garrett heard her banging on the basement door, he attempted to run out, but the doorknob was red hot. He later attempts to throw a chair to the window, but the chair floats and hit him instead. After going through the basement door and down the stairs, he discovers some green slime on the basement floor, then noticed he got some on his hands. He runs up the stairs to the door, but they collapsed, leaving him clinging on for dear life. Gertrude later reveals herself from the slime on the floor, with Garrett screaming in terror. While Abby and the group were inspecting the mansion, her ghost appears from the basement door, moving towards the group. When Erin tries to communicate with her, Gertrude suddenly transmogrifies and projects ectoplasmic vomit on Erin, then escapes out of a wall and into the streets. During Rowan's invasion of New York City, the team, calling themselves "Ghostbusters" encounter her again, alongside the Electrocuted Ghost found in the subway and Mayhem. She participates in the battle by picking Erin up off the ground and throwing her to a nearby pilgrim ghost. She later attempts to attack Erin again with "Sparky", but they end up getting knocked back by a proton shotgun blast. Electrocuted Ghost[edit] The Electrocuted Ghost (not to be confused with the Scoleri brothers of the 1989 film), also known as "Sparky", is the second ghost Erin, Abby and Holtzmann spotted. It is implied that he is the ghost of a criminal executed by the electric chair. He is portrayed by Dave Allen. Shortly after Rowan North (Neil Casey) gave his train ticket to Patty Tolan, he disappeared onto the tracks, causing Patty to go tell him to get out. Instead of finding him, she finds a device on the tracks. The device then opens, revealing the Electrocuted Ghost, causing Patty to flee. Later, the team arrive with Patty and after inspecting the tracks for a bit, Sparky appears. The team decides to test their new proton lasers on him, but the first attempt did not have enough power to even reach the ghost. After being caught in the second attempt, a train later hits Sparky, nearly killing the group as well. Patty then states he will be the third scariest thing on the train. The Ghostbusters encounter "Sparky" again, alongside Gertrude Aldridge and Mayhem during the Battle for New York. He joins Gertrude Aldridge in trying to attack Erin, but they get knocked back by a proton shotgun blast, which caused him to disintegrate. Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021)[edit] Human Characters[edit] Phoebe Spengler[edit] Phoebe Spengler is portrayed by Mckenna Grace in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Phoebe is the youngest grandchild of founding Ghostbusters member, Dr. Egon Spengler (Harold Ramis). She is science-loving, intelligent, resourceful, inquisitive; and bears a resemblance to her grandfather. Due to financial troubles and eviction, Phoebe travels with her mother Callie and older brother Trevor to Summerville, Oklahoma to begin anew at the farmhouse left to them by the now deceased Egon. It is here that she discovers a hidden Ghost Trap in the farmhouse and her special lineage and connection with the original Ghostbusters team. Trevor Spengler[edit] Trevor Spengler is portrayed by Finn Wolfhard in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Trevor is the eldest grandchild of founding Ghostbusters member, Dr. Egon Spengler (Harold Ramis). A motorhead, he loves cars and has a gift for auto mechanics. He finds and eventually restores the Ghostbusters official vehicle, ECTO-1. Like his sister, Trevor bears a resemblance to their grandfather. At the same time, he adjusts to their new life in Summerville, Oklahoma, meeting locals his age as supernatural phenomena begins to occur. Callie Spengler[edit] Callie Spengler is portrayed by Carrie Coon in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Struggling to make ends meet (even giving her children haircuts herself to save money), Callie is eventually evicted from her apartment due to delinquent rent payments. But she receives news that a farmhouse in Summerville, Oklahoma was left to her following the death of Dr. Egon Spengler (Harold Ramis). Mr. Grooberson[edit] Mr. Grooberson is portrayed by Paul Rudd in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. He is Phoebe's science teacher, while also working on a private project of investigating mysterious local earthquakes. There are no geological explanations for the tremors that are affecting Summerville with greater frequency and intensity. When Phoebe brings Grooberson a Ghost Trap she found in the Spengler farmhouse, he assumes it is a replica. When she asks a replica of what, Grooberson informs her and a fellow classmate of its purpose and origin. He plays a news clip on YouTube, showing them footage of the Ghostbusters during what came to be known as the Manhattan Crossrip of 1984. Sheriff Domingo[edit] Summerville's Sheriff Domingo is portrayed by Bokeem Woodbine in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Elton[edit] Elton is portrayed by Oliver Cooper in Ghostbusters: Afterlife. References[edit] ^ "Interview: Jean-Marc Lofficier". Proton Charging.com. October 9, 1998. Retrieved August 14, 2007. ^ Quint (November 17, 2005). "Quint chats with Harold Ramis about ICE HARVEST, GHOSTBUSTERS and much more!!!". Ain't It Cool News. Retrieved August 13, 2007. ^ Kofi Outlaw (June 7, 2019). "Sigourney Weaver Confirms Return for New Ghostbusters, Bill Murray Likely Involved". comicbook.com. ^ "Interview: Rick Moranis". IGN. May 27, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved August 16, 2007. ^ Delaney, Sam (July 26, 2007). "Brand designs". The Guardian. London. Retrieved August 13, 2007. ^ Vince Lambolito (February 3, 2003). "Our Top 20 FX Suits!". Cardboard Monocle. Archived from the original on July 16, 2007. Retrieved August 13, 2007. ^ "FAMSI - John Montgomery, Dictionary of Maya Hieroglyphs". research.famsi.org. Retrieved 2020-12-15. ^ "Extreme Ghostbusters.com – Eduardo". Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2014. ^ Burlingame, Ross (November 14, 2012). "IDW's Ghostbusters Get Extreme in February". comicbook.com. Retrieved November 25, 2012. ^ "Top Animated Hotties". UGO Networks. December 2, 2008. Archived from the original on December 11, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. ^ Rex, Generator (February 15, 2012). "God Bless you IDW". Scans Daily. Retrieved November 25, 2012. ^ Goellner, Caleb (November 15, 2012). "'Ghostbusters' Gets New Recruits This February in IDW's Ongoing Series". Comics Alliance. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. ^ "ABILITY Magazine". ABILITY Magazine. Retrieved December 11, 2012. ^ "Ghostbusters: Paul Feig confirms Kate McKinnon character is gay but studio stopped him from saying so". The Independent. July 14, 2016. Retrieved September 10, 2019. ^ http://fusion.net/story/350298/ghostbusters-holtzmann-kate-mckinnon-queer-autism/ v t e Ghostbusters Ghost Corps Films Ghostbusters Ghostbusters II Ghostbusters (2016) Ghostbusters: Afterlife Television The Real Ghostbusters episodes Extreme Ghostbusters Comics The Real Ghostbusters Ghostbusters: Legion Video games Ghostbusters (1984) The Real Ghostbusters (1987) Ghostbusters (1990) Ghostbusters II NES Ghostbusters II The Computer Game New Ghostbusters II The Real Ghostbusters (1993) Ghostbusters: The Video Game Ghostbusters: Sanctum of Slime Ghostbusters (2016) Characters Peter Venkman Ray Stantz Egon Spengler Winston Zeddemore Janine Melnitz Stay Puft Marshmallow Man Slimer Music Ghostbusters "Ghostbusters" Ghostbusters II "On Our Own" 2016 soundtrack "Good Girls" "Girls Talk Boys" 2016 score Ghostbusters: Afterlife Related Ghostheads Proton pack Ectomobile 55 Central Park West Firehouse interior Role-playing game Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue The Earth Day Special Casper Zuul Lego Ghostbusters Category