Wikipedia list article This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This is a list of mythological places which appear in mythological tales, folklore, and varying religious texts. Name Description Agartha A legendary city at Earth's core. Alfheim Land of elves in Norse mythology. Alomkik A place accessible to the Abenaki peoples' mythological protector Pamola, where he holds those who trespass on Maine's Mount Katahdin. Annwn The "otherworld" of Welsh mythology. Antillia An island from an old Iberian legend set during the Muslim conquest of Hispania. The legend says that during this time seven Christian Visigothic bishops, whom where fleeing Muslim Conquerors, embarked with their flocks on ships and set sail westwards into the Atlantic Ocean, leading them to an island (Antilla or Isle Of Seven Cities) where they founded seven settlements. Amaravati A holy city within another location known as Indraloka where siddhas make their home.[1] Arcadia A vision of pastoralism and harmony with nature, derived from the Greek province of the same name which dates to antiquity. Asgard The high placed city of the gods, built by Odin, chief god of the Norse pantheon. Asphodel Meadows In Greek mythology, the section of the underworld where ordinary souls were sent to live after death. Atlantis The legendary (and almost archetypal) lost continent that was supposed to have sunk into the Atlantic Ocean. Avalon Legendary Island of Apples, believed by some to be the final resting place of King Arthur. Axis Mundi The center of the world or the connection between Heaven and Earth in various religions and mythologies. Ayotha Amirtha Gangai An important river in Ayyavazhi mythology. Aztlán Legendary original homeland of the Mexica people in Mexica/Aztec mythology. Baltia An island of amber somewhere in northern Europe. Biarmaland A geographical area around the White Sea in the northern part of (European) Russia, referred to in Norse sagas. Biringan City A mythical city that is said to invisibly lie between Gandara, Tarangnan, and Pagsanghan in Samar province of the Philippines. Biringan means "the black city" or the City of the Unknown in Waray. Brahmapura The abode of Brahma, the Hindu god of creation. Brasil or Hy-Brasil A mythical island to the west of Ireland. Brittia A mythical island off the coast of Austrasia. Camelot The city in which King Arthur reigned. City of the Caesars A city between a mountain of gold and another of diamonds supposed to be situated in Patagonia. Cloud cuckoo land A perfect city between the clouds in the play The Birds by Aristophanes. Cockaigne In medieval mythology, it is a land of plenty where want does not exist. Dinas Affaraon/Ffaraon Legendary home to a branch of the Druids called the Pheryllt, who worked as metallurgists and alchemists. Also known as “The City of Higher Powers,” or the “Ambrosial City”, its rumored location is Snowdonia and is said to be the original placename of Dinas Emrys. Diyu The realm of the dead or Hell in Chinese mythology. El Dorado Rumored city of gold in South America.[2] Elysian Fields In Greek mythology, the final resting place of the souls of the heroic and the virtuous. Feather Mountain One of many important mythological mountains in Chinese mythology, particularly associated with the Great Flood. Garden of Eden The garden of God, described in the Book of Genesis. Garden of the Hesperides In Greek mythology, the sacred garden of Hera from where the gods got their immortality. Gorias, Finias, Murias, and Falias In Irish Mythology the Tuatha Dé Danann get their four magical treasures from four legendary cities: Gorias in the east; Finias, in the south; Murias in the west; and Falias in the north. Hawaiki The ancestral island of the Polynesians, particularly the Māori. Heaven The realm in Abrahamic religions, in which the righteous people who have died continue to exist in an afterlife. Hel (heimr) Underworld in Norse mythology. Hell The underworld in Abrahamic religions, in which evil or unrepentant people are punished after death. Hyperborea A land to the north in Greek mythology. Irkalla The underworld from which there is no return in Babylonian mythology. Islands of the Blessed In Greek mythology, a paradise reserved for the souls of the great heroes. Jabulqa and Jabulsa Two cities mentioned in Shi'i hadith. Jambudvīpa Name for the terrestrial universe in Hindu, Buddhist and Jain traditions. Jotunheim Land of the giants in Norse mythology.[3] Ketumati A pure land belonging to Maitreya within Buddhism.[4] Kingdom of Reynes A country mentioned in the Middle English romance King Horn. Kingdom of Saguenay According to the French, an Iroquoian story of a kingdom of blonde men rich in gold and fur that existed in northern Canada prior to French colonization. Kitezh A legendary city beneath the waters of Lake Svetloyar. Kolob An astronomical body (star or planet) said to be near the throne of God in Mormon cosmology. Kunlun Mountain A place where immortals lived according to Chinese mythology. Kvenland A geographical area referred to in several medieval texts as well as in Norse sagas. The exact location of Kvenland is unknown, though, with several competing theories placing it in either the northern part of the Scandinavian peninsula or the southwestern part of what is now Finland. Kyöpelinvuori (Finnish for ghosts' mountain), in Finnish mythology, is the place which dead women haunt. La Ciudad Blanca "The White city", a legendary city of Honduras. Laestrygon Home to a tribe of giant cannibals that Odysseus encountered on his way back home from the Trojan War. Lake Parime An enormous lake in northeastern South America, supposedly the site of El Dorado. Land of Manu Western abode of the Sun god Ra.[5] Lemuria A hypothetical "lost land" variously located in the Indian and Pacific Oceans. Lintukoto In Finnish mythology, a paradise-like place where birds migrate every winter; because it was located near the edge of the sky dome, the sky was very close to the ground and therefore its inhabitants were dwarfs. Lyonesse A country in Arthurian legend, which is said to border Cornwall in England. Mag Mell A mythical underworld plain in Irish mythology, achievable only through death or glory. Meaning 'plains of joy', Mag Mell was a hedonistic and pleasurable paradise, usually associated with the sea. Meropis A gigantic island created purely as a parody of Plato's Atlantis. Mictlan The afterworld of the Mexica. Mount Penglai A legendary mountain in Chinese mythology, said to be situated on an island in the Bohai sea, home to Taoist immortals. Mu A hypothetical continent that allegedly disappeared at the dawn of human history. Muspelheim Land of fire in Norse mythology. Naraka A realm resembling Hell in Dharmic religions where souls are temporarily punished before reincarnation. New Jerusalem A future city seen in a vision by the prophet Ezekiel, and by John of Patmos in the Book of Revelation. Nibiru A mythological planet described by the Babylonians. Niflheim World of cold in Norse mythology. Niflhel Cold underworld in Norse mythology. Nirvana The ultimate state of soteriological release (liberation from repeated rebirth) commonly associated with Hinduism, Jainism and Buddhism. Norumbega A legendary settlement in northeastern North America, connected with attempts to demonstrate Viking incursions in New England. Nysa A beautiful valley full of nymphs in Greek mythology. Olympus "Olympus" was the name of the home of the Twelve Olympian gods of the ancient Greek world.[6] Paititi A legendary Inca lost city or utopian rich land said to lie east of the Andes. Panchaia /Pangaia A group of islands South of the Arabian peninsula inhabited by several tribes and rich with scented oils. Assumed by some to be the birthplace of the Olympian gods. Pandæmonium The capital of Hell in John Milton's Paradise Lost. Pleroma Abode of the holy aeons in Gnosticism. Pohjola The realm of Louhi in Finnish Mythology, literally translated its name means "North". Purgatory In the Catholic religion, a place where impure souls of those who die are made ready for Heaven. Quivira and Cíbola Two of the legendary Seven Cities of Gold supposed by Spanish conquistadors to have existed in the Americas. Ram Setu Believed to be built by apes for the Hindu god Rama, this is a series of limestone shoals between India and Sri Lanka. Also referred to as Adam's Bridge. Ryūgū-jō The undersea palace of Ryūjin, the dragon kami of the sea. Samavasarana Meeting place of the tirthankaras in Jainism. Scholomance A legendary school of black magic run by the Devil himself, located in Hermannstadt (now: Sibiu, Romania). Located in the mountains, south of the city Sibiu, near an unnamed lake. Sierra de la Plata (Spanish: Silver Mountains), was a legendary treasury of silver that was believed to be located in South America. Shambhala In Tibetan Buddhist tradition, a kingdom hidden somewhere in the Himalayas; Theosophists regard it as the home on the etheric plane of the governing deity of our planet Sanat Kumara. Shangri-La A mystical, harmonious valley enclosed in the western end of the Kunlun Mountains. Sodom and Gomorrah Cities mentioned in the Bible which were destroyed by God because their people were corrupted and evil. Suddene A country found in the Middle English romance King Horn. Summerland The name given by Theosophists, Wiccans and some earth-based contemporary pagan religions to their conceptualization of an (mostly pastoral) afterlife. Svarga A celestial realm of bliss in Hinduism. Svartálfaheimr The land of the Dark Elves in Norse mythology. Takama-ga-hara The dwelling place of the Shinto kami. Tartarus In Greek mythology, a pit in the underworld for condemned souls. Themiscyra The capital city of the Amazons in Greek mythology. Thule An island somewhere in the belt of Scandinavia, northern Great Britain, Iceland, and Greenland. Thuvaraiyam Pathi In Ayyavazhi mythology, it was a sunken island some 150 miles off the south coast of India. Tír na nÓg The Celtic Otherworld in Irish mythology. Vaikuntha Heavenly abode (dwelling) of Vishnu.[7] Valhalla (from Old Norse Valhöll "hall of the slain") is a majestic, enormous hall located in Asgard, ruled over by the god Odin. Vanaheimr The Land of the Vanir, another tribe of gods, according to Norse legends. Westernesse A country found in the Middle English romance King Horn. Xanadu / Shangdu The summer capital of Kublai Khan's Yuan empire became a mythological place and a metaphor for splendor and opulence, caused by the popular 1816 poem Kubla Khan an Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Xibalba The underworld in Mayan mythology. Yomi The land of the dead according to Shinto mythology, as related in the Kojiki. Ys A city located in Brittany, France that was supposedly built below sea level, and demolished when the Devil destroyed the dam protecting it. Zarahemla A civilization which was constructed in the ancient Americas, according to Mormon belief. Zerzura Saharan city known as the "oasis of little birds" rumored to be full of treasure. Zion A place name often used as a metaphor for Jerusalem, and Olam Haba ("the After world", ״העולם הבא״). References[edit] ^ Roshen Dalal (2014). Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide. Penguin Books. ISBN 9788184752779. Entry: "Indraloka" ^ "El Dorado". nationalgeographic.com. ^ "Jotunheim". norse-mythology.org. ^ Kim, Inchang (1996). The Future Buddha Maitreya: An Iconological Study. D.K. Printworld. p. 21. ^ Massey, Gerald (2014) [First published 1907]. Ancient Egypt - Light Of The World. 1. Jazzybee Verlag. p. 465. ISBN 978-3849644444. ^ Wilson, Nigel (31 October 2005). Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece. Abingdon, England: Routledge. p. 516. ^ Maehle, Gregor (2012). Ashtanga Yoga The Intermediate Series: Mythology, Anatomy, and Practice. New World Library. p. 207. ISBN 9781577319870. v t e Afterlife locations Abrahamic religions Judaism 7 Heavens and 7 Earths Throne of God Garden of Eden Olam Haba Sheol Christianity Heaven Hell Kingdom of God Garden of Eden Paradise Purgatory Limbo New Jerusalem Pearly gates Islam Barzakh Naar Jannah (and Jabarut) Sidrat al-Muntaha A'raf As-Sirāt Mormonism Celestial Kingdom Terrestrial Kingdom Telestial Kingdom Spirit world European mythologies Celtic Otherworld Annwn Tír na nÓg Mag Mell Tech Duinn Finnic Tuonela Germanic Asgard Fólkvangr Valhalla Neorxnawang Gimlé Helheimr Greek Hades Elysium Erebus Orcus Asphodel Meadows Myth of Er Empyrean Tartarus Fortunate Isles Slavic Vyraj Eastern/Asian religions Buddhism Desire Realm Hell Pretaloka Animal world Human world Asura Heaven Form Realm Brahmā worlds Formless Realm Nirvana Hinduism 14 planetary systems Ādi Śeṣa Svarga Naraka Vaikuntha Kailash Goloka Akshardham Jainism Three Worlds Urdhva Loka Madhya Loka Adho Loka Sikhism Sach Khand Taoism Grotto-heavens Chinese Tian Diyu Youdu Japanese Yomi Zoroastrianism Chinvat Bridge Hamistagan Tengrism Uçmag Tamağ Others Mesoamerican Mictlān Tamoanchan Thirteen Heavens Tlālōcān Xibalba Plains Indians Happy hunting ground Tupi Land without evil Wicca The Summerland Theosophy Summerland Devachan Nirvana Ancient Egyptian Aaru Duat Millennialism Utopianism Great Unity Golden Age Arcadia Avalon The Guf Well of Souls Existential planes Underworld List of mythological places v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category