This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Loch Ness Monster (oil painting) by Heikenwaelder Hugo. The legend of the Loch Ness Monster is well known throughout Scotland and the rest of the world and has entered into popular culture. Contents 1 Literature 2 Music 3 Theatre 4 Films 5 Television 6 Comics 7 Games 8 Theme park rides 9 Sculpture 10 Podcasts 11 Toys 12 Further reading 13 See also 14 References Literature[edit] In the book Breaking Dawn, the final book in the Twilight series by Stephenie Meyer, main character Isabella "Bella" Cullen is angered after her best friend, werewolf Jacob Black, has imprinted on her infant daughter, Renesmee, but livid when he nicknames her "Nessie", after the former claims that the name she has come up with for her daughter is "kind of a mouthful". In the book Reaper (2014) by Brock Allen, the Loch Ness monster lives as a pet to the Reaper in another dimension. There the monster is known as the Snelochs and is released in our world by some kids that are trying to rescue the main character's sister from the Reaper. In the Leslie Charteris short story "The Convenient Monster" (1959, coll. 1962) Simon Templar investigates an alleged monster attack, finding a human culprit - who is then attacked by the real monster. A 1966 TV adaptation ends more ambiguously. The Scottish poet Edwin Morgan published the sound poem "The Loch Ness Monster's Song" in 1973. In Roger Zelazny's short story, "The Horses of Lir" (1981), collected in the anthology Unicorn Variations (1983), the Loch Ness Monster is one of several creatures stabled in a cave near the loch who draw the chariot of the Celtic sea-god Lir. In the book The Boggart and the Monster (1997) by Susan Cooper, the Loch Ness Monster is actually an invisible shape-shifting creature that has become trapped in one form. In the book Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them (2001) by J.K. Rowling, the "Loch Ness Monster" is said to be a misunderstanding of what is in fact the world's largest kelpie. The Loch (2005) by Steve Alten is a novel about the Loch Ness Monster which incorporates many historical and scientific elements into the story line. In the book, the creature is said to be a species of gigantic and carnivorous Eel. The Peter and the Starcatchers series by Dave Barry and Ridley Pearson features a minor reference to Nessie. In the novel Peter and the Shadow Thieves, a heroic organization mentions a reptile that was exposed to the magical substance known as "starstuff" and escaped into Loch Ness before it could be caught. The tabloid Weekly World News often reports on the creature, claiming that it has become pregnant, or been captured, sold, or killed. In Keri Arthur's book Destiny Kills (2009), Destiny is a shape-changing sea dragon whose ancestral home is Loch Ness. She states that the legend of the Loch Ness Monster often provided her family the cover they needed to live among the humans undetected. The Cryptid Files: Loch Ness (2010) by Jean Flitcroft is a novel for children published by Little Island that features the Loch Ness Monster and which interweaves the story of a budding cryptozoologist Vanessa Day with facts about Nessie and Loch Ness. In the 39 clues (by Rick Riordan and other authors) the Loch Ness is actually a monster-shaped submarine by the Ekaterinas. In the Scotland-based Outlander time travel series by Diana Gabaldon sighting of the Loch Ness Monster and discussion of the subject appears in the early books. The central character and heroine, Claire, not only sees the 'Monster' (when she has gone back to the Jacobite period by passing through a circle of standing stones), but later back in her own present time discusses the theory that there could be a similar 'time passage' under the loch which would explain the infrequency of the 'Monster's' appearance - it surfaces in present-day occasionally but then goes back to its own time - she identifies the 'Monster' she has seen as 'probably a Plesiosaur'. Dick King-Smith wrote a novel, The Water Horse, which was the basis for a film (see below, under Movies). Laurence Yep's A Dragon's Guide to Making Your Human Smarter features Nessie as a character, a sentient creature who prefers privacy and is the guardian of the creatures and environment of Loch Ness. She is also friends with the series' dragon protagonist Ms. Drake, and declines to identify herself as a plesiosaur or any particular magical creature. Music[edit] The Sensational Alex Harvey Band wrote a song based on the Loch Ness Monster called "Water Beastie", which can be heard on their 1978 album Rock Drill. The previous year frontman Alex Harvey recorded and released a spoken-word album, Alex Harvey Presents: The Loch Ness Monster, after spending a summer at Invermoriston and interviewing locals about the Monster. "Synchronicity II" by The Police from their 1983 album Synchronicity, recounts the ever-deepening frustrations of a suburbanite middle-manager as, unbeknownst to him, "many miles away" a monster rises from a Scottish loch and encroaches ominously on a lakeside cottage. In Spitting Image's 1986 song "I've Never Met a Nice South African", the narrator claims that he has "met the Loch Ness Monster, and he looks like Fred Astaire". Lo-fi rock band Some Velvet Sidewalk included a song titled "Loch Ness" detailing the exploits of the lake's mythical monster on their 1992 album "Avalanche". An alternate version of the song was featured on the 1991 compilation album "Kill Rock Stars". Accordion rock band Those Darn Accordions recorded a song for their 1996 album No Strings Attached entitled "Deathbed Confessions", told through the perspective of a dying man who confesses that he faked the Loch Ness Monster. Composer Guto Puw wrote a piece for SATB choir in 1998 called "The Loch Ness Monster's Song". The Real McKenzies' 2001 album Loch'd and Loaded features a song titled "Nessie," which protests the capture and search for Nessie. American progressive metal band Mastodon have a song titled "Ol'e Nessie", named after the Loch Ness Monster, on their 2002 album Remission. The Judas Priest song "Lochness" from their 2005 album Angel of Retribution is about the Loch Ness Monster. The music video for the Reggie and the Full Effect song "Get Well Soon" from their 2005 album Songs Not to Get Married To chronicles the Loch Ness Monster struggling with a divorce, mirroring the album's themes. The music video,[1] for the song "Monster" by the band The Automatic, features some clips of the Loch Ness Monster. The radio comedy duo Hudson & Landry performed a skit where Landry interviews a German man named Wolfgang Lauderbach who claims, among other things, that he feeds the Loch Ness monster, the Monster looks like actor Tab Hunter, that he was originally German and brought to Scotland by Rudolf Hess, and that his wife is constantly cheating on him with famous baseball players. On his album The Slim Shady LP, American rapper Eminem refers to the creature in the song "Cum On Everybody" featuring Dina Rae. The Dutch band Pater Moeskroen have a song titled Nessie, which is about the sex life of the monster. The Loch Ness Monster was referenced in the Grinderman song Worm Tamer in the line "My baby calls me the Loch Ness monster, two great big humps and then I’m gone"[2] Scottish folk singer/songwriter Dougie MacLean released an album of instrumental music in 1990 called The Search: Instrumental Music Commissioned For The Official Loch Ness Monster Exhibition (Dunkeld Records DUNC011). Theatre[edit] In the stage musical Love Birds (2015), plesiosaur impresario "Armitage Shanks" admits that when he isn't emceeing a vaudeville show, he is the Loch Ness Monster. Films[edit] The first film to deal with the creature was Secret of the Loch (1934) an English feature film directed by Milton Rosmer, a "mildly amusing exploitation item".[3] The monster appeared at the end and was an iguana enhanced by special effects. The monster is treated in a tongue-in-cheek fashion in the comedy film What a Whopper (1961). The monster makes a cartoon appearance in the film's ending. The film 7 Faces of Dr. Lao (1964) features the monster as a small fish in a fish bowl which balloons into gigantic proportions when removed from the bowl. In the film The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes (1970), the monster is revealed to be a miniature submarine in disguise. The monster is featured in the American horror film The Loch Ness Horror (1981), directed by Larry Buchanan. In Ghostbusters (1984), the Loch Ness Monster is among the various things Janine Melnitz asks Winston Zeddemore whether he believes in. Nessie – das verrückteste Monster der Welt [de] is a West German film made in 1985. The film Amazon Women on the Moon (1987) features a sketch involving a mock TV program, Bullshit or Not?, hosted by Henry Silva in which it is postulated that the Monster was, in fact, Jack the Ripper. In the animated film Freddie as F.R.O.7 (1992), Nessie befriends an enchanted frog prince called Frederic who uses powers of telekinesis to free her tail trapped under a fallen boulder. It is later revealed she has a family, who, along with Nessie herself, help Freddie defeat an enemy invasion of Britain. Ted Danson starred in the film Loch Ness (1996) in which he plays an American scientist trying to disprove the existence of the Loch Ness Monster, only to later disprove his own evidence when he comes to recognise that the Monster is best left alone to survive by itself. The horror film Beneath Loch Ness (2001) deals with a series of attacks allegedly made by the monster. In the Disney-Pixar film Monsters, Inc., the Loch Ness monster is mentioned as one of the monsters who got banished from Monstropolis. In the film Scooby-Doo! and the Loch Ness Monster (2004), the Mystery, Inc. gang travel to Loch Ness in Scotland to see the famous Blake Castle, the home of Daphne Blake's cousin, Shannon. The Castle grounds is home to the first annual Highland Games, composed of many traditional Scottish sports. But when they arrive Shannon informs them that the Castle had recently been terrorized by the Loch Ness Monster. The gang investigate with help from Professor Fiona Pembrooke (who believes Nessie exists) and Sir Ian Locksley (a sceptic). Due to their opposing views, Locksley and Pembrooke share a mutual hatred for each other. It is later revealed the monster that has been terrorizing Blake Castle are actually two fakes (one land-based and the other an aquatic sub) perpatraited by Professor Pembrooke. Pembrooke's plan was to use her fake Nessie to convince Locksley the real monster existed, and enlist his aide in finding it. The next day, the games begin on schedule; But Locksley calls everyone to his ship to look at new pictures of the monster his underwater cameras had taken. These, plus other pictures Pembrooke had taken convince him the monster does exist. The film ends with the gang leaving Blake Castle and shows Scooby briefly seeing the real Loch Ness Monster. In the beginning of the comedy film Napoleon Dynamite (2004), Napoleon gives a speech about the Loch Ness Monster. A mockumentary starring director Werner Herzog titled Incident at Loch Ness (2004) shows the director filming scenes around Loch Ness in an attempt to disprove the theories of the monster. His writer/producer continually tries to make a "blockbuster" film that Werner does not want. They eventually run afoul of the real Nessie with eerie results. In the film Lassie (2005), Nessie can be seen swimming in the Loch Ness. The film The Water Horse: Legend of the Deep (2007) featured a young boy who discovers and hatches an egg belonging to the legendary Celtic creature, the Water Horse. Naming it Crusoe after the fictional character, he eventually is forced to release it into Loch Ness and the world begins to notice. Based on a novel by Dick King-Smith, the movie includes a scene that suggests the Surgeon's Photo (depicted inaccurately as happening in 1942) was not so much a hoax as a staged re-enactment of a genuine sighting. In the film Futurama: Bender's Big Score (2007), Philip J. Fry takes a job caring for a narwhal at an aquarium in Old New York. Eventually the narwhal is returned to the wild and replaced with the "Loch Ness Monster", which has been proven to be just a log with a mask stapled to it. Despite the fact that it is inanimate, it is a huge attraction for the aquarium. Beyond Loch Ness (at one point named Loch Ness Terror[4]) is a 2008 horror television film made for the Sci-Fi Channel, directed by Paul Ziller. Disney released The Ballad of Nessie along with their main feature Winnie the Pooh in 2011. It is a short 2D cartoon narrated by Scottish comedian Billy Connolly and is a story about Nessie's origins. In K-ON!: The Movie (2011), Yui Hirasawa informs a pair of students from the high school's Occult Club of her and the Light Music Club's trip to London, to which the two students reply jokingly with "Take a photo of Nessie for us". The joke however goes over Yui's head, and she is saddened when she hears[5] from the others that Loch Ness is too far away from London, and that the creature may not actually exist anyway. In Nessie & Me (2016), Jamie Williams befriends a Sea Captain who claims to have seen Nessie. He also learns that a mogul, Maxwell Gordon, is forcing people to sell their land, and believes that if he can prove Nessie is real, she is the perfect solution to save the town from Maxwell. Nessie & Me marks the first time that Jim Wynorski directed a children's film. Television[edit] While no direct reference is made, in a 1956 episode of Soldiers of Fortune "The Monster of Loch MacGora" is supposed to dwell in a Scottish lake. Courage The Cowardly Dog's episode where Muriel and Eustage travel around Loch Ness and Courage meets a giant sea creature called Nessie, referring to the "Loch Ness Monster" The 1964 Gerry Anderson puppet television series, Stingray, included an episode where the crew was transported to Scotland to find the Loch Ness Monster. They discovered that the monster was secretly a robot operated by locals to attract tourists. The Stingray crew agreed to keep the secret once they left Loch Ness. In the 1971 Goodies episode Scotland, the Goodies travel to Scotland in order to capture the Loch Ness Monster as an exhibit for the new Monster House at London Zoo. In the 1971 Bewitched episode "Samantha and the Loch Ness Monster", the monster turns out to be a warlock named Bruce that Serena put a spell on.[6] In the 1975 Doctor Who story Terror of the Zygons, the Loch Ness Monster is revealed to be a Skarasen, an alien cyborg controlled by the extraterrestrial race known as the Zygons, who use it in a bid for world conquest. When that scheme is foiled by the Fourth Doctor and its masters killed, the creature peacefully returns to its watery home. In the 1985 story Timelash, the Loch Ness Monster is implied to be the Borad, a tyrant whose DNA got mixed with a reptilian monster and was sent back to twelfth-century Scotland through a time corridor by the Sixth Doctor (Although the Borad was later revealed to have been killed almost immediately after his arrival in the Eighth Doctor novel The Taking of Planet 5). In the 2006 episode "School Reunion", Sarah Jane Smith trumps new companion Rose Tyler, who believes she has met far more interesting beings in her travels with the Ninth and Tenth Doctors than Sarah, by mentioning the time she encountered the Loch Ness Monster (in Terror of the Zygons), causing Rose to respond, "Seriously?" In Swiss TV-show "Teleboy", a candid camera version, in 1976 a "Nessie"-like dummy was used in Lake Lucerne, later titled "Urnie" by Yellow press (after the part Urnersee (Lake of Uri)). The BBC television series The Family-Ness showed the adventures of a whole family of Loch Ness Monsters and their human friends, Elspeth and Angus McTout. The anime series Sherlock Hound episode "The Adventure of Three Students" contains a cameo appearance of the Loch Ness Monster near the end. An animated series, Happy Ness: Secret of the Loch, featured two groups of the creatures. The friendly Nessies included Happy Ness, Brave Ness, Forgetful Ness, Silly Ness, and Bright Ness, while the villains included Pompous Ness, Mean Ness, Devious Ness and Dark Ness. A trio of human children Hannah, Hosie and Hayden befriended the good Nessies, assisting them in occasional conflicts with the bad Nessies, while their uncle who owned a hotel in a Scottish castle is more keen on catching the Nessies. Both groups wore Loch-ets, each capable of performing a "Ness Bless", making its target temporarily feel the same as the caster. In addition, the Loch-ets protect the wearer from prying eyes, rendering them invisible to all but other Nessies and their trusted human friends. In the Rambo and the Forces of Freedom episode "Horror of the Highlands", a remote controlled submarine version of the Loch Ness Monster operated by General Warhawk. In the Aaahh!!! Real Monsters episode "The Loch Ness Mess", the Loch Ness monster (depicted as male and named Lochie or Mr. Ness) visits the school to lecture the monsters on scaring but they all find him obnoxious with his boistrious dancing, singing of Scottish songs, and reenacting scares. In the Extreme Dinosaurs episode "Loch Ness Mess", the Loch Ness monster is depicted as a species of plesiosaur surviving in the Loch. The evil Raptors attempt to manipulate one into destroying their Dinosaur enemies, only to incur the wrath of its larger mother. The Extreme Dinosaurs themselves are also mistaken for a species of Nessie by Scottish locals. In the first episode of The Troop the Loch Ness monster is one of the monsters Hayley mentions to be released into the outside world. In the eleventh episode "Bad Day at Castle Loch" of the seventh season of Thomas & Friends the legend of the monster in Castle loch is the same as the legend of the Lochness Monster in Scotland. There was a British spoof of the documentary style 'investigation' titled Nessie: Real or Pretend?, hosted by two British comedians named Arthur Smith and Phil Nice, part of a short comedy series they made which was aired in December, 1985 called "Arthur and Phil Goes Off", made for the British "Channel 4" television network. One of the scenes had tourists standing by the castle looking at the lake. When the monster did not appear, the film crew handed out "special glasses" which had silhouettes of the monster on the lenses. The tourists immediately "saw" the monster, pointing at it in whatever direction they were looking, including one tourist looking at the sky shouting "It's flying! It's flying!" The special was run on America's A & E cable channel in 1986. In an episode of the animated James Bond, Jr. titled “No Such Loch” (episode 16, original airdate 7 October 1991), Bond and company, while visiting Scotland, hear about a monster in Loch Ness using its giant jaws to sink a small fishing boat. They discover that the monster is actually a converted submarine operated by S.C.U.M., an enemy spy organization. S.C.U.M. uses the giant jaws to steal two advanced missiles from a Royal Navy cruiser. Bond rescues the fishing boat crew (and also rescues the girl, of course) and foils S.C.U.M.’s plot to use the missiles to shoot down a Western spy satellite. In the TV series How I Met Your Mother one of the main characters, Marshall, has a continuing obsession with the Loch Ness Monster. He believes that Nessie is a "gentle creature" and derides the fact that it is referred to as a 'monster'. He spent 10 days during his honeymoon looking for Nessie with his wife, Lily. In Season 3 Episode 02, in a foreshadow showing Marshall's office, there is a cutout from a newspaper where the headline is "N.Y.C lawyer captures 'Nessie'". The TV series The Simpsons featured the Loch Ness Monster in the episode Monty Can't Buy Me Love, in which Montgomery Burns captures the monster with the help of Homer Simpson, Professor Frink and Groundskeeper Willie. At the end of the episode, the Monster is given a job at a casino (along with Homer Simpson). In the TV series South Park, Chef's parents, Thomas and Nellie, live in Scotland and claim (in the episode "The Succubus", for instance) to have been repeatedly harassed by the monster, who constantly begs them for three dollars and fifty cents ("tree fiddy", as Thomas pronounces it). They claim that the monster uses elaborate ruses and disguises to get money from them (such as selling cookies in disguise as a Girl Scout, or abducting them in the guise of a space alien), and say that even giving him money won't make him go away. These stories are always told primarily by Thomas, with Nellie offering support. In Godzilla: The Series, which is an animated 'continuation' of the 1998 film, one episode features the Loch Ness monster as a foe of Godzilla. The episode is one of few in the series with what seems like inter-monster communication, in this case between Godzilla and 'Nessie' who seem to be able to understand one another, or at least read each other's body language. 'Nessie' is portrayed in a positive light and a creature the audience is supposed to sympathize with rather than root for being destroyed or otherwise defeated by Godzilla. The reason for this being is that Nessie has been attacking scientific installations along the Loch because they have captured and stolen her one offspring. In this episode, rather than being a plesiosaur as commonly depicted, Nessie's species is a gigantic type of mosasaur. In the series of Dinosaur King, there is an episode called A Loch Ness Mess where the D-team and Alpha Gang travel to Loch ness to find Nessie. A water attribute dinosaur called Amargasaurus is mistaken by a local Scottish boy for the real nessie, but easily identified for the spines on its back. At the end of the episode, the Alpha gang make off with fake money for making the locals mistake their T-rex Terry for nessie. When the Alpha Gang are sailing along loch ness, they encounter nessie's ghost which vanishes, spooking them. In an episode of The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, when Carl says going to Egypt during school hours will get on their permanent record, Sheen replies that a permanent record is a myth like the Loch Ness monster and North Dakota. An episode of Disney's Gargoyles titled "Monsters" featured a captured female plesiosaur Dr. Sevarius kept in a hidden cavern within his base of operations beneath Urquhart Castle. His goal was to collect a variety of "exotic DNA" for future mutation experiments and Nessie was merely bait to lure out "Big Daddy" - her larger and more fearsome mate. The main character Angela befriends the monster when she is also taken into Sevarius's captivity. The episode also featured a submarine and a mini-sub designed to look like the monsters as well. There is a final appearance of Nessie's entire family - revealing the pair had at least two offspring when reunited at the end. One episode of Phineas and Ferb show the brothers visiting a place called "Lake Nose" and going in search for the "Lake Nose Monster", or "Nosey" for short (a pun on the Loch Ness Monster's nickname "Nessie"). Meanwhile, Candace goes crazy during her lifeguard shift when she sees several sitings of Nosey, which all turn out to be hoaxes. Once Phineas and Ferb found the monster, they become friends with Nosey and learn that he just wants his existence to remain a secret so he could live in peace. In "Achilles Heel", the second story in series 7 of The Tomorrow People, a pair of aliens visiting earth to extract a rare mineral found in the vicinity of Loch Ness note that another race of aliens who had previously dominated the earth had transplanted a "giant plascadron" in the lake to ward off the natives. The Lupin the Third episode "50 Ways to Leave Your 50 foot Lover" reveals the monster is actual and surfaces when it hears Fujiko Mine singing. A criminal researcher determined to capture the monster kidnaps her, compelling Lupin and gang to take action. The researcher, crippled by the Creature's attack years earlier, has an undersea craft made in the image of Nessie. In Swiss TV-show "Teleboy", a candid camera version, in 1976 a "Nessie"-like dummy, later by Yellow press called "Urnie", was used in Lake Lucerne. In the Futurama episode, "Spanish Fry", Fry is certain that Bigfoot exists, but is repeatedly told it does not. When the creature's existence is indeed later confirmed, Fry exclaims, "The Loch Ness Monster's book was right!" In a Toyota commercial featuring fresh water biologist Adrian Shine, the Loch Ness Monster tossed around a Toyota Tacoma. In The Secret Saturdays Doyle and Van Rook are shown to be going to the Loch Ness, where they are searching for V.V. Argost, and instead find Munya, where they believe Argost is dead. An episode of Wonder Pets featured the trio rescuing the Loch Ness Monster. In the seventeenth episode of Samurai Jack, the Loch Ness Monster can be seen swimming in the water behind the Scotsman's castle as the Scotsman carries Jack away to the Castle of Boon. A 1978 episode of Scooby-Doo ("A Highland Fling With a Monstrous Thing") featured a case that tied the Mystery Inc. gang between the Loch Ness Monster, and a phantom that seemed to be controlling it. In this episode the monster was actually a submarine designed to look like the Loch Ness Monster, and it was radio-controlled by using the sound of a bagpipe. In Episode 67 of Sailor Moon Usagi(Chibi-Usa) gets saved by the Sea Monster's child from vicious sharks and names it Kirin for its long neck. In River Monsters, Jeremy Wade attempts to search for Nessie, and draws the conclusion that the beast is a Greenland shark (which can reach up to 20 ft in length). In Celebrity Deathmatch, Loch Ness Monster is featured in a wrestling match against Bigfoot. Nessie wins the match by slicing Bigfoot in half with her tail. In the Home Improvement episode "What About Bob", Tim and Bob Vila are trying to explain how to install a light switch. Bob Vila says that when installing a switch, people should use a "locked nut connector". Tim wittily replies, "I was in Scotland the other year, and I actually saw the 'Locked Nut Connector'", referring to the Loch Ness Monster. An episode of The Fairly OddParents features the spoofing "Loch Dimsdale Monster" (with the loch also spoofing), in one scene after Timmy Turner lost track of Poof, he went searching in the loch and mistook the monster's ball-shaped tip of the nose as Poof. In the Gravity Falls episode (The Legend of the Gobblewonker), Dipper, Mabel, and Soos are hunting down a legendary monster called the Gobblewonker, the monster makes a strong appearance to the Loch Ness Monster. In the episode of Doki (Castles and Monsters), While Team Doki travels to Loch Ness, Scotland, Fico wanted to discover the Loch Ness Monster joining Gabi on a hunt. But instead, he's trying to pull a prank on her believing that there's a real monster. Episode three of Xiaolin Showdown, "A Tangled Web", features the main characters traveling on Loch Ness using Dojo Kanojo Cho, a shapeshifting dragon who takes the form of a boat. Complaining about the cold, he remarks "I don't know how my cousin Nessie stands living here!" but later comments that in his opinion she enjoys the attention. The Jackie Chan Adventures episode "Sheep In, Sheep Out" features the Chan family traveling to Scotland in search of the noble sheep who possesses the power of astral projection. In the opening scene Jade Chan — tagging along without permission as usual — is mistaken for the monster by her uncle Jackie and Uncle Chan. A version of the creature later appears in Jade's dream where she communicates with the sheep, who expresses the thought that the Loch Ness Monster doesn't exist, to which Jade responds "It does in my dreams!" In the SpongeBob SquarePants episode "Scavenger Pants", Squidward assigns SpongeBob and Patrick in finding the Loch Ness Monster and bringing it back alive, as an excuse for them to leave him alone. They succeed in locating the monster by playing bagpipes, which the monster hates, and it ends up swallowing Squidward whole. Comics[edit] In the webcomic George the Dragon the Loch Ness monster plays a large role. It is revealed that her name is actually Gladys[7] and in the course of the story she becomes the love interest of the title character. She and the titular dragon eventually wed and she moves out of Loch Ness (which explains why no scientist has ever found her). There is an entire story arc which occurs inside the stomach of the Loch Ness Monster. In issue 5 of Doc Savage entitled "The Earth Wreckers" and published in July 1976. Subtitled "The Man of Bronze uncovers the Secret of The Loch Ness Monster" as the hero of the book pursues his enemy Iron Mask to Loch Ness. Prince Nathan, son of Prince Valiant, once saved the life of an endangered Loch Ness Monster. In a serial in the Alley Oop comic strip, Alley goes back to prehistoric times to capture two baby plesiosaurs (male and female) and bring them back for scientific study. Alley is provided with a truck equipped with an open-top aquarium tank to transport them. But when he is recalled to the present day, an error in the time transmission lands Alley in ancient Scotland. At the climax of the adventure, the truck gets out of Alley's control and plunges into a lake. Guess which lake? In the French comic book Asterix and the Picts, which takes place in Scotland, the Loch Ness monster is portrayed as a gentle, friendly and playful plesiosaur named Afnor in the original translation, who is not only the protector of the Mac Brass clan, as well as their mascot, whose favorite sport is to dive. An early Doonesbury comic had characters searching for the Loch Ness monster. Zonker made an important observation but was so excited, that he forgot to turn on the recording equipment. Games[edit] A board game of the hunt for Nessie was produced by Searchglen called Nessie Hunt in 1987.[8] The game was designed by Anthony Harmsworth[9] The Pokemon Lapras and Milotic are based on Nessie. In the Hazy Maze Cave level of "Super Mario 64", you can find Nessie-like creature named Dorrie swimming in a cavern at the bottom of the level. Dorrie would later make appearances in several of the Mario Party titles. Nessie appears as a secret in "The Sims" (Original). On the neighborhood screen if you type "nessie" in the cheat window Nessie will appear in the neighborhood's river briefly, making a splashing sound. In Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney, Nessie the Loch Ness Monster is referred to as the namesake for "Gourdy", the Gourd Lake Monster which was captured in a photo. Gourdy is later proven to be a hoax, much like the real Nessie. The Tomb Raider III expansion pack The Lost Artefact begins in a castle by Loch Ness, with the monster itself putting in an appearance towards the end of the first level. Apparently, there are two versions of Nessie at this level. One is the robotic version, and another is the true version of Nessie. The robotic version takes the shape of a plesiosaur, whereas the real Nessie is a marine serpent. Loch Ness Monster,[10] built in 1985, was the final pinball machine built by Game Plan,[11] before the Game Plan company went out of business. As the factory "production run" was but a single prototype, the machine is almost as rare as the monster itself. Among the few who have played it, Loch Ness Monster is said to be Game Plan's best game, by far. Unlike all previous Game Plan games, it featured speech, a ramp, and a strobe-lit mechanical animation below the playfield. In the game EarthBound, to get through Winters, you must ride a monster in the lake named "Tessie" which you may ride afterwards if you go back. In the game Final Fantasy V (Snes) and PlayStation Portable (Psp) game Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy, a Summon Monster/Esper/Sea Dragon called Hydra/Syldra that resembles the Loch Ness monster. In World of Warcraft, an NPC named "Nessy" can occasionally be seen swimming in the water midway through the Deeprun Tram. Also, in the Loch Modan region there is an NPC named "Modan Monster". Nessy resembles the traditional Nessie [2]; the Modan Monster resembles a kraken-type monster, which is really just a tough-looking, spiky fish [3]. The Forgotten Futures tabletop RPG adventure Free Nessie (1994, part of Forgotten Futures III) involves an attempt to free the Loch Ness Monster from captivity. In the MMORPG City of Heroes, a creature modeled after the Loch Ness Monster, called "Sally", can be found in the Croatoa zone. The creature is attack-able but will not attack back, and takes only one hit to defeat, at which point it will retreat beneath the water. In Sea Doo for Sony PlayStation, Loch Ness is one of the unlockable levels. Several of the creatures can be seen basking on the shore. In the game, The Cameron Files: Secret at Loch Ness, detective Alan Parker Cameron is investigating the secret case of the monster. In Splashdown, Loch Ness is one of the race courses. If the player goes through a hidden cave behind a waterfall, the Loch Ness Monster will appear near the start/finish line. In Apex Legends, there are several Loch Ness dolls called "Nessy" that can be found around the map and when shot, a message saying "A Nessy appears" shows up on the killfeed. These dolls were also hidden in previous Titanfall maps. In Mega Man Star Force 2, the boss Plesio Surf is based on the Loch Ness Monster. Loch Ness appears as Loch Mess in game, and this same boss even appears in the anime adaptation of the series in Mega Man Star Force (TV series). "Hunt the Nessy" is a level in Lemmings, and the level's terrain is shaped into a series of humps and a long neck and head, like the popular conception of the monster. Theme park rides[edit] There is a Loch Ness Monster rollercoaster at Busch Gardens Williamsburg, Virginia. There is a Nessie rollercoaster at Hansa-Park, Germany Sculpture[edit] A 2009 Art Prize entry was titled Nessie, and was a large sea monster in the Grand River in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Nessie is currently on display at the John Ball Park Zoo. Podcasts[edit] The Scottish history podcast Stories of Scotland compared the Loch Ness monster to ancient illustrations of the Pictish Beast. Toys[edit] In Monster High, the Loch Ness Monster has a daughter named Lorna McNessie. Further reading[edit] Bauer, Henry H. "Common Knowledge about the Loch Ness Monster: Television, Videos, and Films", Journal of Scientific Exploration (2002) Vol. 16. No. 3, pp. 455–477. A critical appraisal of seventeen television and film documentaries on the Loch Ness Monster, which concludes that they promulgate various errors of fact and interpretation, by chemistry professor Henry H. Bauer. See also[edit] Bigfoot in popular culture References[edit] ^ Monster video at YouTube ^ [1] ^ John Walker (ed.) Halliwell's Film and Video Guide 2000, London: HarperCollins, 1999, p.731 ^ Loch Ness Terror page at Insight Film Studios ^ Official Nessie & Me Trailer ^ "Bewitched: Samantha and the Loch Ness Monster". tv.com. Retrieved 2010-02-10. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Gladys page at George the Dragon ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 30 August 2011.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ http://www.loch-ness.org/webmaster.html ^ Loch Ness Monster pinball machine ^ Tribute page for Game Plan, a pinball machine manufacturer that went out of business in 1985