This article is about Locus (magazine). For other uses, see Locus. This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Monthly magazine on the science fiction and fantasy publishing field API Editor Liza Groen Trombi Frequency Monthly Year founded 1968 Country United States Based in Oakland, California Language English Website locusmag.com ISSN 0047-4959 Locus: The Magazine of The Science Fiction & Fantasy Field, is an American magazine published monthly in Oakland, California. It is the news organ and trade journal for the English language science fiction and fantasy fields.[1] It also publishes comprehensive listings of all new books published in the genres.[2] The magazine also presents the annual Locus Awards. Locus Online was launched in April 1997, as a semi-autonomous web version of Locus Magazine. Contents 1 History 2 Locus Online 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History[edit] Charles N. Brown, Ed Meskys, and Dave Vanderwerf founded Locus in 1968 as a news fanzine to promote the (ultimately successful) bid to host the 1971 World Science Fiction Convention in Boston, Massachusetts. Originally intended to run only until the site-selection vote was taken at St. Louiscon, the 1969 Worldcon in St. Louis, Missouri, Brown decided to continue publishing Locus as a mimeographed general science fiction and fantasy newszine. Locus succeeded the monthly newszine Science Fiction Times (formerly Fantasy Times, founded 1941), when SFT ceased publication in 1970. Brown directed Locus as publisher and editor-in-chief for more than 40 years, from 1968 until his death at age 72 in July 2009. Locus announced that the magazine would continue operations, with then executive editor Liza Groen Trombi succeeding Brown as editor-in-chief in 2009.[3] The magazine is now owned by the Locus Science Fiction Foundation, a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt, nonprofit corporation.[4] Locus publishes: News about the science fiction, fantasy, and horror publishing field—stories about publishers, awards, and conferences—including "The Data File", "People & Publishing" (rights sold, books sold, books resold, books delivered, publishing news, promotions; people news and photos about vacations, weddings, and births), and obituaries Interviews with well-known and up-and-coming writers (and sometimes editors and artists), usually two per issue Reviews of new and forthcoming books, usually 20–25 per issue, by notable SF critics including Gary K. Wolfe, Faren Miller, Nick Gevers, Jonathan Strahan, Adrienne Martini, Russell Letson, Gwenda Bond, Stefan Dziemanowicz, Carolyn Cushman, Karen Burnham, and Richard Lupoff plus short fiction reviews by Gardner Dozois and Rich Horton[5][6] A bimonthly commentary column by Cory Doctorow Reports from around the world about the SF scenes in various countries Listings of US and UK books and magazines published (monthly), bestsellers (monthly), and forthcoming books (every three months) Convention reports, with many photos Annual year-in-review coverage, with extensive recommended reading lists and the annual Locus Poll and Survey Letters and classified ads Locus has won many Hugo Awards, first the Hugo Award for Best Fanzine, and then in 1984 when the new category "Best Semiprozine" was established. As of 2012[update], Locus won the award for "Best Fanzine" eight times and for "Best Semiprozine" 22 times during the category's first 29 years. In 2012 "Best Semiprozine" was redefined to exclude all small, independent genre magazines as "professional publications" if they had either "(1) provided at least a quarter the income of any one person or, (2) was owned or published by any entity which provided at least a quarter the income of any of its staff and/or owner."; this included Locus.[7] There is no longer a "Professional Magazine" Hugo Award; that original category was replaced in 1973 by the current "Best Editor." Locus Online[edit] Locus Online (founded 1997)[8] is the online component of Locus Magazine. It publishes news briefs related to the science fiction, fantasy and horror publishing world, along with original reviews and feature articles, and excerpts of articles that appeared in the print edition. Information for Locus Online is compiled and edited by Mark R. Kelly.[9] In 2002, Locus Online won the first Hugo Award for Best Web Site.[10] It was nominated again in 2005.[11] In January 2016, longtime short-fiction reviewer Lois Tilton announced her resignation. She wrote, "Without consulting or informing me, they had begun deleting material they considered negative from my reviews. To me, this is censorship and completely unacceptable." [12] It was later clarified by Locus that the edits were not intended to be made to work already published, but rather going forward, to future reviews. None of her past columns were changed, she was paid for the unpublished work, and the relationship ended amicably.[13] See also[edit] List of literary magazines References[edit] ^ "Charles N. Brown: Sci-Fi enthusiast and founder of 'Locus' magazine". The Independent. London, England. 2 September 2009. Obituaries. Retrieved 4 April 2011. ^ Aversa, Elizabeth. Miller, Cynthia J. Perrault, Anna. Wohlmuth, Sonia Ramirez. Information Resources in the Humanities and the Arts, 6th Edition. p. 161. ^ "Charles N. Brown, 1937-2009". Locus Online. 13 July 2009. Retrieved 4 April 2011. ^ "Working to Promote and Preserve Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror". Locus Science Fiction Foundation. Retrieved 18 March 2015. ^ "Staff". Locus Online. Retrieved 2017-09-18. ^ "Index to Locus Magazine". Locus Online. Retrieved 2017-09-18. ^ "Hugo Award Categories". Archived from the original on 2011-05-07. Retrieved 2017-04-05. ^ "Locus Online: About the Website". Locus Online. Archived from the original on 2019-04-17. ^ Dozois, Gardner, ed. (July 5, 2011). The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Eighth Annual Collection. St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 9781429983068. ^ "2002 Hugo Awards". The Hugo Awards. Archived from the original on 2019-07-29. Retrieved May 2, 2010. ^ "2005 Hugo Awards". The Hugo Awards. Archived from the original on 2019-06-29. Retrieved November 25, 2019. ^ Lois Tilton Leaves Locus Online, File 770, Posted on January 10, 2016 ^ Glyer, Mike (Jan 11, 2016). "Locus Responds to Tilton Departure". Retrieved Dec 30, 2020. External links[edit] Official website v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Current American science fiction magazines Abyss & Apex Amazing Stories Analog Science Fiction and Fact Asimov's Science Fiction Clarkesworld Magazine Daily Science Fiction Escape Pod The Future Fire Lightspeed Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Not One of Us Perihelion Science Fiction Space and Time Strange Horizons Three-lobed Burning Eye Tor.com Uncanny Magazine