For other uses of the term Lost city, see Lost city (disambiguation). In the popular imagination lost cities are real, prosperous, well-populated areas of human habitation that have fallen into terminal decline and been lost to history. Most real lost cities are of ancient origins, and have been studied extensively by archaeologists. Abandoned urban sites of relatively recent origin are generally referred to as ghost towns. Fictional lost cities have been created by many authors as the setting for stories and myths throughout the ages. These include: Atlantis – An island and city described by Plato Brigadoon – from the musical of the same name Camelot – the seat of King Arthur Charn – from The Chronicles of Narnia El Dorado – the noted city of gold Kitezh (Russian: Ки́теж) - is a legendary city beneath the waters of Lake Svetloyar Kutchemes – from the Conan the Barbarian stories Lemuria – a supposed Indian-Pacific land Númenor – from The Lord of the Rings Opar – from the Tarzan novels Perrioe (fictional city in the Kara Kum desert) - from the Officer of the Crown novels Python – from the Conan the Barbarian stories R'lyeh – sunken city referenced in many of the works of H. P. Lovecraft, where the godlike being Cthulhu is buried Sarnath – city described in H.P. Lovecraft's short story "The Doom that Came to Sarnath" Skull Island – from the King Kong movies Valyria - from George R. R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire universe Xak Tsaroth – from the Dragonlance novels Xuchotl – from the Conan the Barbarian stories Xuthal – from the Conan the Barbarian stories Ys – legendary submerged city off the coast of Brittany See also[edit] List of mythological places Lost World (genre) References[edit] This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)