For other uses, see Lost World (disambiguation). Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Contemporary fantasy Comedy Creatures Fantastic Fantastique Fantasy of manners History Historical fantasy Lovecraftian horror Magic Magic system Magician Races Religious themes Sources Tropes Worlds Subgenres Bangsian fantasy‎ Dark fantasy‎ Dieselpunk‎ Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairy tales‎ Gaslamp fantasy Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction‎ Grimdark Hard fantasy Heroic fantasy High fantasy‎ Historical fantasy‎ Isekai Kaiju‎ LitRPG Low fantasy Magic realism‎ Magical girl‎ Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Romantic fantasy‎ Science fantasy‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Steampunk‎ Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban fantasy‎ Weird fiction‎ Weird West‎ Wuxia‎ Fandom Harry Potter fandom Tolkien fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e The lost world is a subgenre of the fantasy or science fiction genres that involves the discovery of an unknown world out of time, place, or both. It began as a subgenre of the late-Victorian adventure romance[citation needed] and remains popular into the 21st century. The genre arose during an era when the remnants of lost civilizations around the world were being discovered by Westerners, such as the tombs of Egypt's Valley of the Kings, the semi-mythical stronghold of Troy, the jungle-shrouded pyramids of the Maya, and the cities and palaces of the empire of Assyria. Thus, real stories of archaeological finds by imperial adventurers succeeded in capturing the public's imagination. Between 1871 and the First World War, the number of published lost world narratives, set in every continent, increased significantly.[1] The genre has similar themes to "mythical kingdoms", such as Atlantis and El Dorado. Contents 1 History 2 Contemporary examples 3 Geographic settings 3.1 Lost worlds in Africa 3.2 Lost worlds in North America 3.3 Lost worlds in Central America 3.4 Lost worlds in South America 3.5 Lost worlds in Asia 3.6 Lost worlds in Europe and the Middle East 3.7 Lost worlds in Australia 3.8 Lost worlds at the Poles 3.9 Hollow Earth 3.10 The Caspak Trilogy 4 See also 5 References 6 External links History[edit] King Solomon's Mines (1885) by H. Rider Haggard is sometimes considered the first lost world narrative.[2] Haggard's novel shaped the form and influenced later lost world narratives, including Rudyard Kipling's The Man Who Would Be King (1888), Arthur Conan Doyle's The Lost World (1912), Edgar Rice Burroughs' The Land That Time Forgot (1918), A. Merritt's The Moon Pool (1918), and H. P. Lovecraft's At the Mountains of Madness (1931). Earlier works, such as Edward Bulwer-Lytton's Vril: The Power of the Coming Race (1871) and Samuel Butler's Erewhon (1872) use a similar plot as a vehicle for Swiftian social satire rather than romantic adventure. Other early examples are Simon Tyssot de Patot's Voyages et Aventures de Jacques Massé (1710), which includes a prehistoric fauna and flora, and Robert Paltock's The Life and Adventures of Peter Wilkins (1751), an 18th-century imaginary voyage inspired by both Defoe and Swift, where a man named Peter Wilkins discovers a race of winged people on an isolated island surrounded by high cliffs as in Burroughs's Caspak. The 1820 Hollow Earth novel Symzonia has also been cited as the first of the lost world form, and Jules Verne's Journey to the Center of the Earth (1864) and The Village in the Treetops (1901) popularized the theme of surviving pockets of prehistoric species.[3] J.-H. Rosny aîné would later publish The Amazing Journey of Hareton Ironcastle (1922), a novel where an expedition in the heart of Africa discovers a mysterious area with an ecosystem from another world, with alien flora and fauna. Edgar Allan Poe's The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket (1838) has certain lost world elements towards the end of the tale. James Hilton's Lost Horizon (1933) enjoyed popular success in using the genre as a takeoff for popular philosophy and social comment. It introduced the name Shangri-La, a meme for the idealization of the lost world as a Paradise. Similar books where the inhabitants of the lost world are seen as superior to the outsiders, are Joseph O'Neill's Land under England (1935) and Douglas Valder Duff's Jack Harding’s Quest (1939).[4] Hergé also explores the theme in his comics The Seven Crystal Balls and Prisoners of the Sun (1944–48). Here the protagonists encounter an unknown Inca kingdom in the Andes. Contemporary examples[edit] Contemporary American novelist Michael Crichton invokes this tradition in his novel Congo (1980), which involves a quest for King Solomon's mines, fabled to be in a lost African city called Zinj. During the 1990s, James Gurney published a series of juvenile novels about a lost island called Dinotopia, in which humans live alongside living dinosaurs. The lost world is present in many other media. In video games, it is most notably present in Tomb Raider and its sequels, and in the Uncharted franchise. The Hanna-Barbera action cartoon Space Ghost features a segment Dino Boy in the Lost Valley, about a young boy named Todd who survives a plane crash and lands In a hidden prehistoric valley in South America. In movies, the Indiana Jones franchise makes use of similar concepts. Also comics make use of the idea, such as the Savage Land in Marvel Comics and Themyscira in DC comics. Geographic settings[edit] Early lost world novels were typically set in parts of the world as yet unexplored by Europeans. Favorite locations were the interior of Africa (many of Haggard's novels, Burroughs' Tarzan novels) or inland South America (Doyle's The Lost World, Merritt's The Face in the Abyss), as well as Central Asia (Kipling's The Man Who Would Be King, Haggard's Ayesha, the Return of She, Merritt's The Metal Monster, Hilton's Lost Horizon) and Australia (James Francis Hogan's The Lost Explorer and Eureka by Owen Hall (pseudonym of New Zealand politician Hugh Lusk)). Later writers favored Antarctica, especially as a refuge for prehistoric species. Burroughs' The Land That Time Forgot and its sequels were set on the island of Caprona (a.k.a. Caspak) in the Southern Ocean. In Edison Marshall's Dian of the Lost Land (1935), Cro-Magnons, Neanderthals, and mammoths survive in the "Moss Country", a sheltered warm corner of the continent. Dennis Wheatley's novel The Man Who Missed the War (1945) also deals with a warm and hidden area on the continent, where there live humans such as the descendants of Atlantis.[5] In Jeremy Robinson's Antarktos Rising (2007), dinosaurs and Nephilim emerge as the icecap melts. Mat Johnson's Pym (2011) describes giant white hominids living in ice caves. Ian Cameron's The Mountains at the Bottom of the World (1972) has a relict population of Paranthropus living not quite in Antarctica, but in the southern Chilean Andes. Crusoe Warburton (1954), by Victor Wallace Germains, describes an island in the far South Atlantic, with a lost, pre-gunpowder empire. According to Allienne Becker, there was a logical evolution from the lost world subgenre to the planetary romance genre: "When there were no longer any unexplored corners of our earth, the Lost Worlds Romance turned to space."[3] Brian Stableford makes a related point about Lost Worlds: "The motif has gradually fallen into disuse by virtue of increasing geographical knowledge; these days lost lands have to be very well hidden indeed or displaced beyond some kind of magical or dimensional boundary. Such displacement [...] so transforms their significance that they are better thought of as Secondary Worlds or Otherworlds."[6] Below is a list of classic lost world titles drawn from Lost Worlds: The Ultimate Anthology. Titles were selected from drawn from 333: A Bibliography of the Science-Fantasy Novel, Jessica Amanda Salmonson's Lost Race checklist and E. F. Bleiler's Science-fiction, the Early Years. Lost worlds in Africa[edit] King Solomon's Mines by H. Rider Haggard Allan Quatermain by H. Rider Haggard She: A History of Adventure by H. Rider Haggard A Rip Van Winkle of the Kalahari by Frederick Carruthers Cornell The Great White Queen: A Tale of Treasure and Treason by William Le Queux By the Gods Beloved (also known as The Gates of Kamt) by Baroness Orczy Wings of Danger by Arthur A. Nelson The Lost World (1992 film) Lost worlds in North America[edit] The Aztec Treasure House by Thomas A. Janvier Fruit of the Desert by Richard Hayes Barry The Haunted Mesa by Louis L'Amour Lost worlds in Central America[edit] Phantom City: A Volcanic Romance by William Westall The Lost Canyon of the Toltecs by Charles Sumner Seeley The Bridge of Light by A. Hyatt Verrill Lost worlds in South America[edit] The Lost World by Arthur Conan Doyle The Web of the Sun by T. S. Stribling Immortal Athalia by Harry F. Haley Lost worlds in Asia[edit] The Man Who Would Be King by Rudyard Kipling The Mountain Kingdom: A Narrative of Adventure by David Lawson Johnstone Om: The Secret of Abhor Valley by Talbot Mundy Lost Horizon by James Hilton The Valley of Eyes Unseen by Gilbert Henry Collins Harilek: A Romance of Modern Central Asia by Ganpat (Louis Gompertz) Fields of Sleep by E. C. Vivian The Purple Sapphire by John Taine The Metal Monster by A. Merritt Lost worlds in Europe and the Middle East[edit] No-Man’s-Land by John Buchan The Knight of the Silver Star by Percy James Brebner Lost worlds in Australia[edit] The Lost Explorer by James Francis Hogan Marooned on Australia by Ernest Favenc Eureka by Owen Hall Lost worlds at the Poles[edit] A Strange Manuscript Found in a Copper Cylinder by James De Mille The Ke Whonkus People: A Story of the North Pole Country by John O. Greene Beyond The Great South Wall by Frank Savile Polaris of the Snows by Charles B. Stilson The Smoky God by Willis George Emerson Hollow Earth[edit] At the Earth's Core by Edgar Rice Burroughs The Coming Race by Edward Bulwer-Lytton Under the Auroras: A Marvelous Tale of the Interior World, William Jenkins Shaw The Moon Pool by A. Merritt Dwellers in the Mirage by A. Merritt Zanthodon by Lin Carter Journey to the Center of the Earth by Jules Verne The Caspak Trilogy[edit] The Land That Time Forgot by Edgar Rice Burroughs The People That Time Forgot by Edgar Rice Burroughs Out of Time’s Abyss by Edgar Rice Burroughs See also[edit] Lost city (fiction) Lost world films (category) References[edit] ^ Deane, Bradley (2008). "Imperial Barbarians: Primitive masculinity in Lost World fiction". Victorian Literature and Culture. 36: 205–25. doi:10.1017/S1060150308080121. Retrieved 2012-05-18. ^ According to Robert E. Morsberger in the "Afterword" of King Solomon's Mines, The Reader's Digest (1993). ^ a b Becker, Allienne R. (1992). The Lost Worlds Romance: From Dawn Till Dusk. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-26123-7. ^ "The Lost World". "Reader's Guide" (from file name) to Doyle's The Lost World. The Lost World Read 2009 (lostworldread.com). ^ "Sex, Jingoism & Black Magic: The Weird Fiction of Dennis Wheatley". Jessica Amanda Salmonson. ©2000. Violet Books (violetbooks.com). Archived 2013-07-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ Stableford, Brian (1997). "Lost Lands and Continents". The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Online at Science Fiction Encyclopedia (sf-encyclopedia.uk). Retrieved 2019-03-11.   In two linked entries by editor John Clute, the encyclopedia distinguishes "Otherworld" from its subclass "Secondary World", and also from the settings of Supernatural Fiction and Planetary Romance, and from related concepts. La Gazette des Français du Paraguay, Le Monde Perdu, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle - El Mundo Perdido, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle bilingual French Spanish, Numéro 9, Année 1, Asuncion 2013. External links[edit] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Science Fiction Literature/Lost Worlds Jessica Amanda Salmonson's checklist of lost-world/lost-race books. A checklist of lost-world/lost-race books, and related material at Violet Books Lost Worlds: The Ultimate Anthology. A collection of 33 classic tales "Lost Worlds" at The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction – with linked entries on "Lost Races" and related themes "Lost Lands and Continents" and "Lost Races" entries in The Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1997) v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category