Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown DVD cover Directed by Frank H. Woodward Produced by William Janczewski James B. Myers Frank H. Woodward Starring Ramsey Campbell John Carpenter Guillermo del Toro Neil Gaiman Stuart Gordon S. T. Joshi Caitlin R. Kiernan Andrew Migliore Robert M. Price Peter Straub Cinematography Don Spiro Release date July 24, 2008 (2008-07-24) (Comic-Con) Running time 90 minutes Country United States Language English Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown is a 2008 documentary film that examines the life, work, and mind of American writer H. P. Lovecraft, creator of the Cthulhu Mythos.[1][2][3] The film features interviews with Guillermo del Toro, Neil Gaiman, John Carpenter, Peter Straub, Caitlin R. Kiernan, Ramsey Campbell, Stuart Gordon, S. T. Joshi, Robert M. Price, and Andrew Migliore. Contents 1 Release and reception 2 Awards 3 References 4 External links Release and reception[edit] The film was released on Blu-ray and DVD in the United States on October 27, 2009. Johnny Butane of the website Dread Central gave the film a score of 4 out of 5, calling it a "solid documentary that’s sure to appeal to everyone from casual Lovecraft readers to the most hardcore of his fans".[4] Awards[edit] The film won Best Documentary at the 2008 Comic-Con International Independent Film Festival.[5] It was the official selection at: Cinema Du Parc in Collaboration With The Fantasia Festival 2008; Erie Horror Film Festival 2008; Buenos Aires Rojo Sangre Festival 2008; Shriekfest Horror Film Festival 2008; The H.P. Lovecraft Film Festival 2008; TromaDance 2009 and Porto Alegre, Brazil's Fantaspoa Festival 2009. References[edit] ^ "Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown". Movies & TV Dept. The New York Times. Baseline & All Movie Guide. 2016. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2020. ^ Burchby, Casey (3 November 2009). "Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown". DVD Talk. Retrieved 15 August 2020. ^ Sammons, Brain M. (14 July 2010). "Cthulhu Eats the Movies: Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown". Innsmouth Free Press. Retrieved 15 August 2020. ^ Butane, Johnny (30 August 2008). "Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (2008)". Dread Central. Retrieved 1 November 2016. ^ "Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (Free Documentary)". Open Culture. 13 January 2011. Retrieved 1 November 2016. External links[edit] Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown – full documentary at Arkham Trailer Park YouTube channel Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown at IMDb Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown at AllMovie v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category This article about a biographical documentary film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e