For other uses, see Low German (disambiguation) and Low Saxon. West Germanic language spoken mainly in northern Germany and the eastern part of the Netherlands Low German Low Saxon Plattdütsch, Plattdüütsch, Plattdütsk, Plattdüütsk, Plattduitsk (South-Westphalian), Plattduitsch (Eastphalian), Plattdietsch (Low Prussian); Neddersassisch; Nedderdüütsch German: Plattdeutsch, Niedersächsisch, Niederdeutsch (in a stricter sense) Dutch: Nedersaksisch Danish: Plattysk, Nedertysk, Nedersaksisk, Lavtysk (rarely) Native to Northern and western Germany Eastern Netherlands Southern Denmark Ethnicity Dutch Germans (including East Frisians); Historically Saxons (both the ethnic group and modern regional subgroup of Germans) Native speakers Estimated 4.35-7.15 million [a][1][2][3] Up to 10 million second-language speakers (2001)[4] Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic North Sea Germanic Low German Early forms Old Saxon Middle Low German Dialects West Low German East Low German Official status Official language in  Germany[5]  Schleswig-Holstein  Hamburg  Lower Saxony  Mecklenburg-Vorpommern[6]  Brandenburg[7][8]  Netherlands[9] Recognised minority language in  Mexico (100,000)[10]  Bolivia (70,000)[11]  Paraguay (30,000)[12] Language codes ISO 639-2 nds ISO 639-3 nds (Dutch varieties and Westphalian have separate codes) Glottolog lowg1239  Low German Linguasphere 52-ACB Approximate area in which Low German/Low Saxon dialects are spoken in Europe (after the expulsion of Germans) This article contains IPA phonetic symbols. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA. Low German or Low Saxon[b] (German: Plattdeutsch, pronounced [ˈplatdɔʏtʃ] (listen), or Platt, pronounced [plat] (listen)) is a West Germanic language variety spoken mainly in Northern Germany and the northeastern part of the Netherlands. It is also spoken to a lesser extent in the German diaspora worldwide (e.g. Plautdietsch). Low German is most closely related to Frisian and English, with which it forms the North Sea Germanic group of the West Germanic languages. Like Dutch, it is spoken north of the Benrath and Uerdingen isoglosses, while (Standard/High) German is spoken south of those lines. Like Frisian, English, Dutch and the North Germanic languages, Low German has not undergone the High German consonant shift, as opposed to German, which is based upon High German dialects. Low German evolved from Old Saxon (Old Low German), which is most closely related to Old Frisian and Old English (Anglo-Saxon). The Low German dialects spoken in the Netherlands are mostly referred to as Low Saxon, those spoken in northwestern Germany (Lower Saxony, Westphalia, Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, Bremen, and Saxony-Anhalt west of the Elbe) as either Low German or Low Saxon, and those spoken in northeastern Germany (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Brandenburg, and Saxony-Anhalt east of the Elbe) mostly as Low German. This is because northwestern Germany and the northeastern Netherlands were the area of settlement of the Saxons (Old Saxony), while Low German spread to northeastern Germany through eastward migration of Low German speakers into areas with a Slavic-speaking population (Germania Slavica). It has been estimated that Low German has approximately 2.2–5 million speakers in Germany, primarily Northern Germany,[13] and 2.15 million in the Netherlands.[14] Contents 1 Geographical extent 1.1 Inside Europe 1.1.1 Germany 1.1.2 The Netherlands 1.2 Outside Europe and the Mennonites 2 Nomenclature 3 Classification 3.1 Language or dialect 3.2 Legal status 4 Varieties of Low German 4.1 In Germany 4.2 In the Netherlands 5 History 5.1 Old Saxon 5.2 Middle Low German 5.3 Contemporary 5.3.1 Germany 5.3.2 Netherlands 6 Sound change 7 Grammar 7.1 Nouns 7.2 Dative den/dän 7.3 Verbs 7.4 Adjectives 7.5 Personal pronouns 8 Phonology 8.1 Consonants 8.2 Vowels 9 Writing system 10 Notable Low German writers and performers 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Bibliography 15 External links 15.1 Online dictionaries 15.2 Information 15.3 Organizations Geographical extent[edit] Inside Europe[edit] Germany[edit] City limit sign in Lower Saxony: Cuxhaven-Altenbruch (German) Cuxhoben-Olenbrook (Low German) It has been estimated that Low German has approximately 2 to 5 million speakers (depending on the definition of 'native speaker') in Germany, primarily in Northern Germany.[15] Variants of Low German are spoken in most parts of Northern Germany, for instance in the states of Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Hamburg, Bremen, Schleswig-Holstein, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Saxony-Anhalt, and Brandenburg. Small portions of northern Hesse and northern Thuringia are traditionally Low Saxon-speaking too. Historically, Low German was also spoken in formerly German parts of Poland as well as in East Prussia and the Baltic provinces (modern Estonia and Latvia). The Baltic Germans spoke a distinct Low German dialect, which has influenced the vocabulary and phonetics of both Estonian and Latvian. The historical Sprachraum of Low German also included contemporary northern Poland, East Prussia (the modern Kaliningrad Oblast of Russia), a part of western Lithuania, and the German communities in Estonia and Latvia, most notably their Hanseatic cities. German speakers in this area fled the Red Army or were forcibly expelled after the border changes at the end of World War II. The language was also formerly spoken in the outer areas of what is now the city-state of Berlin, but in the course of urbanisation and national centralisation in that city, the language has vanished (the Berlin dialect itself is a northern outpost of High German, though it has some Low German features). Today, there are still speakers outside Germany to be found in the coastal areas of present-day Poland (minority of ethnic German East Pomeranian speakers who were not expelled from Pomerania, as well as the regions around Braniewo).[citation needed] In the Southern Jutland region of Denmark there may still be some Low German speakers in some German minority communities, but the Low German and North Frisian dialects of Denmark can be considered moribund at this time.[citation needed] Self-reported Low German speakers State 'Well' or 'very well'[16] 'Very well' only[16] % of pop. Numbers % of pop. Numbers Schleswig-Holstein 24.5% 694,085 16.5% 467,445 North Rhine-Westphalia 11.8% 2,103,940 5.2% 927,160 Lower Saxony 15.4% 1,218,756 4.7% 371,958 Hamburg 9.5% 169,860 3.2% 57,216 Bremen 17.6% 116,336 9.9% 65,439 Brandenburg 2.8% 70,000 2.6% 65,000 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern 20.7% 339,273 5.9% 96,701 Saxony-Anhalt 11.8% 275,058 2.2% 51,282 Entire Low German dialect area 15.7% 4,987,308 6.2% 2,197,205 The Netherlands[edit] Dialects of Low German are spoken in the northeastern area of the Netherlands (Dutch Low Saxon) and are written there with an unstandardized orthography based on Standard Dutch orthography. The position of the language is, according to UNESCO, vulnerable.[17] Between 1995 and 2011 the numbers of parent speakers dropped from 34% in 1995 to 15% in 2011. Numbers of child speakers dropped from 8% to 2% in the same period.[18] According to a 2005 study 53% speak Low Saxon or Low Saxon and Dutch at home and 71% could speak it in the researched area.[19] The total number of speakers is estimated at 1.7 million speakers.[3] There are speakers in the Dutch north and eastern provinces of Groningen, Drenthe, Stellingwerf (part of Friesland), Overijssel, Gelderland, Utrecht and Flevoland, in several dialect groups per province. Outside Europe and the Mennonites[edit] Main articles: Plautdietsch and East Low German There are also immigrant communities where Low German is spoken in the Western hemisphere, including Canada, the United States, Mexico, Belize, Venezuela, Bolivia, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay. In some of these countries, the language is part of the Mennonite religion and culture.[20] There are Mennonite communities in Ontario, Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Kansas and Minnesota which use Low German in their religious services and communities. These Mennonites are descended from primarily Dutch settlers that had initially settled in the Vistula delta region of Prussia in the 16th and 17th centuries before moving to newly-acquired Russian territories in Ukraine in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, and then to the Americas in the 19th and early 20th centuries. The types of Low German spoken in these communities and in the Midwest region of the United States have diverged since emigration. The survival of the language is tenuous in many places, and has died out in many places where assimilation has occurred. Members and friends of the Historical Society of North German Settlements in Western New York (Bergholz, NY), a community of Lutherans who trace their immigration from Pomerania in the 1840s, hold quarterly "Plattdeutsch lunch" events, where remaining speakers of the language gather to share and preserve the dialect. Mennonite colonies in Paraguay, Belize, and Chihuahua, Mexico have made Low German a "co-official language" of the community.[citation needed] A public school in Witmarsum Colony (Paraná, Southern Brazil) teaches in the Portuguese language and in Plautdietsch.[21] East Pomeranian is also spoken in parts of Southern and Southeastern Brazil, in the latter especially in the state of Espírito Santo, being official in five municipalities, and spoken among its ethnically European migrants elsewhere, primarily in the states of Rio de Janeiro and Rondônia. East Pomeranian-speaking regions of Southern Brazil are often assimilated into the general German Brazilian population and culture, for example celebrating the Oktoberfest, and there can even be a language shift from it to Riograndenser Hunsrückisch in some areas. In Espírito Santo, nevertheless, Pomeranian Brazilians are more often proud of their language, and particular religious traditions and culture,[22] and not uncommonly inheriting the nationalism of their ancestors, being more likely to accept marriages of its members with Brazilians of origins other than a Germanic Central European one than to assimilate with Brazilians of Swiss, Austrian, Czech, and non-East Pomeranian-speaking German and Prussian heritage[clarification needed] – that were much more numerous immigrants to both Brazilian regions (and whose language almost faded out in the latter, due to assimilation and internal migration)[clarification needed], by themselves less numerous than the Italian ones (with only Venetian communities in areas of highly Venetian presence conserving Talian, and other Italian languages and dialects fading out elsewhere).[clarification needed] Speakers of low German outside Europe Approximate distribution of native speakers of German or a German variety outside Europe (according to Ethnologue 2016[23] unless referenced otherwise) Numbers of speakers should not be summed up per country, as they most likely overlap considerably. Table includes varieties with disputed statuses as separate language. Standard German Hunsrik/Hunsrückisch Low German & Plautdietsch Pennsylvania Dutch Hutterite Argentina 400,000 N/A 4,000 N/A N/A Australia 79,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A Belize N/A N/A 9,360 N/A N/A Bolivia 160,000 N/A 60,000 N/A N/A Brazil 1,500,000 3,000,000 8,000 N/A N/A Canada 430,000 N/A 80,000 15,000 23,200 Chile 35,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A Costa Rica N/A N/A 2,000 N/A N/A Israel 200,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A Kazakhstan 30,400 N/A 100,000 N/A N/A Mexico N/A N/A 40,000 N/A N/A Namibia 22,500 N/A N/A N/A N/A New Zealand 36,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A Paraguay 166,000 N/A 40,000 N/A N/A Russia N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A South Africa 12,000 N/A N/A N/A N/A Uruguay 28,000 N/A 2,000 N/A N/A United States 1,104,354[24] N/A 12,000 118,000 10,800 Sum 4,597,392 3,000,000 357,360 133,000 34,000 Nomenclature[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There are different uses of the term "Low German": A specific name of any West Germanic varieties that neither have taken part in the High German consonant shift nor classify as Low Franconian or Anglo-Frisian; this is the scope discussed in this article. A broader term for the closely related, continental West Germanic languages unaffected by the High German consonant shift, nor classifying as Anglo-Frisian, and thus including Low Franconian varieties. In Germany, native speakers of Low German call their language Platt, Plattdütsch, Plattdüütsch, Plattdütsk, Plattdüütsk, Plattduitsk (South-Westphalian), Plattduitsch (Eastphalian), Plattdietsch (Low Prussian), or Nedderdüütsch. In the Netherlands, native speakers refer to their language as dialect, plat, nedersaksies, or the name of their village, town or district. Officially, Low German is called niederdeutsche Sprache or plattdeutsche Sprache (Nether or Low German language), Niederdeutsch or Plattdeutsch (Nether or Low German) in High German by the German authorities, nedderdüütsche Spraak (Nether or Low German language), Nedderdüütsch or Plattdüütsch (Nether or Low German) in Low German by the German authorities and Nedersaksisch (Nether or Low Saxon) by the Dutch authorities. Plattdeutsch, Niederdeutsch and Platduits, Nedersaksisch are seen in linguistic texts from the German and Dutch linguistic communities respectively. In Danish it is called Plattysk, Nedertysk or, rarely, Lavtysk. Mennonite Low German is called Plautdietsch. "Low" refers to the flat plains and coastal area of the northern European lowlands, contrasted with the mountainous areas of central and southern Germany, Switzerland, and Austria, where High German (Highland German) is spoken.[25] Etymologically however, Platt meant "clear" in the sense of a language the simple people could understand. In Dutch, the word Plat can also mean "improper", "rude" or "too simple" which is why the term is not popular in the Netherlands. The colloquial term Platt denotes both Low German dialects and any non-standard Western variety of German; this use is chiefly found in northern and Western Germany and is not considered to be linguistically correct.[26] The ISO 639-2 language code for Low German (Low Saxon) has been nds (niedersächsisch or nedersaksisch, neddersassisch) since May 2000. Classification[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Low German is a part of the continental West Germanic dialect continuum. To the West, it blends into the Low Franconian languages, including Dutch. A distinguishing feature between the Southern Low Franconian varieties and Low German varieties is the plural of the verbs. Low German varieties have a common verbal plural ending, whereas Low Franconian varieties have a different form for the second person plural. This is complicated in that in most Low Franconian varieties, including standard Dutch, the original second-person plural form has replaced the singular. Some dialects, including again standard Dutch, innovated a new second-person plural form in the last few centuries, using the other plural forms as the source. To the South, Low German blends into the High German dialects of Central German that have been affected by the High German consonant shift. The division is usually drawn at the Benrath line that traces the maken – machen isogloss. To the East, it abuts the Kashubian language (the only remnant of the Pomeranian language) and, since the expulsion of nearly all Germans from the Polish part of Pomerania following the Second World War, also by the Polish language. East Pomeranian and Central Pomeranian are dialects of Low German. To the North and Northwest, it abuts the Danish and the Frisian languages. Note that in Germany, Low German has replaced the Frisian languages in many regions. Saterland Frisian is the only remnant of East Frisian language and is surrounded by Low German, as are the few remaining North Frisian varieties, and the Low German dialects of those regions have influences from Frisian substrates. Most linguists classify the dialects of Low German together with English and Frisian as the North Sea Germanic or Ingvaeonic languages. However, most exclude Low German from the group often called Anglo-Frisian languages because some distinctive features of that group of languages are only partially observed in Low German, for instance the Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law (some dialects have us, os for "us" whereas others have uns, ons), and because other distinctive features do not occur in Low German at all, for instance the palatalization of /k/ (compare palatalized forms such as English cheese, Frisian tsiis to non-palatalized forms such as Low German Kees or Kaise, Dutch kaas, German Käse). Language or dialect[edit] The question of whether today's Low German should be considered a separate language or a dialect of German or even Dutch has been a point of contention. Linguistics offers no simple, generally accepted criterion to decide the question. Scholarly arguments have been put forward for classifying Low German as a German dialect.[27] As stated above, the arguments are not linguistic but rather sociopolitical and revolve mainly around the fact that Low German has no official standard form or use in sophisticated media. The situation of Low German may thus be considered a "pseudo-dialectized abstand language" ("scheindialektisierte Abstandsprache").[28] In contrast, Old Saxon and Middle Low German are generally considered separate languages in their own rights. Since Low German has strongly declined since the 18th century, the perceived similarities with High German or Dutch may often be direct adaptations from the dominating standard language, resulting in a growing inability by speakers to speak correctly what was once Low German proper.[29] Others have argued for the independence of today's Low German dialects, taken as continuous outflow of the Old Saxon and Middle Low German tradition.[30] Glottolog classifies six varieties of Low German as distinct languages, based on a low degree of mutual intelligibility.[31] Legal status[edit] Low German has been recognized by the Netherlands and by Germany (since 1999) as a regional language according to the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Within the official terminology defined in the charter, this status would not be available to a dialect of an official language (as per article 1a), and hence not to Low German in Germany if it were considered a dialect of German. Advocates of the promotion of Low German have expressed considerable hope that this political development will at once lend legitimacy to their claim that Low German is a separate language, and help mitigate the functional limits[clarification needed] of the language that may still be cited as objective criteria for a mere dialect (such as the virtually complete absence from legal and administrative contexts, schools, the media, etc.).[32] At the request of Schleswig-Holstein, the German government has declared Low German as a regional language. German offices in Schleswig-Holstein are obliged to accept and handle applications in Low German on the same footing as Standard High German applications.[33] The Bundesgerichtshof ruled in a case that this was even to be done at the patent office in Munich, in a non–Low German region, when the applicant then had to pay the charge for a translator,[34] because applications in Low German are considered "nicht in deutscher Sprache abgefasst" (not written in the German language). Varieties of Low German[edit] In Germany[edit] West Low German (Westniederdeutsch) East Frisian Low Saxon Northern Low Saxon Westphalian (Westfälisch) Eastphalian (Ostfälisch) East Low German (Ostniederdeutsch) Brandenburgisch Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Central Pomeranian (Mittelpommersch) East Pomeranian (Ostpommersch) Low Prussian (Niederpreußisch) Plautdietsch (Mennonite Low German, used also in many other countries) In the Netherlands[edit] The Dutch Low Saxon varieties, which are also defined as Dutch dialects, consist of: Gronings and Noord-Drents Hogelandsters Oldambtsters Stadsgronings Veenkoloniaals Westerkwartiers Kollumerpompsters Kollumerlands Middaglands Midden-Westerkwartiers Zuid-Westerkwartiers Westerwolds Stellingwerfs Drents Midden-Drents Zuid-Drents Twents Twents-Graafschaps Twents Gelders-Overijssels Achterhoeks Sallands Oost-Veluws (partly classified as Veluws) Urkers Veluws Oost-Veluws (partly classified as Gelders-Overijssels) West-Veluws History[edit] Main article: History of Low German Old Saxon[edit] Main article: Old Saxon Old Saxon (Altsächsisch), also known as Old Low German (Altniederdeutsch), is a West Germanic language. It is documented from the 9th century until the 12th century, when it evolved into Middle Low German. It was spoken on the north-west coast of Germany and in Denmark (Schleswig-Holstein) by Saxon peoples. It is closely related to Old Anglo-Frisian (Old Frisian, Old English), partially participating in the Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law. Only a few texts survive, predominantly in baptismal vows the Saxons were required to perform at the behest of Charlemagne. The only literary texts preserved are Heliand and the Old Saxon Genesis. Middle Low German[edit] Main article: Middle Low German The Middle Low German language (Mittelniederdeutsch) is an ancestor of modern Low German. It was spoken from about 1100 to 1600. The neighbouring languages within the dialect continuum of the West Germanic languages were Middle Dutch in the West and Middle High German in the South, later substituted by Early New High German. Middle Low German was the lingua franca of the Hanseatic League, spoken all around the North Sea and the Baltic Sea.[35] It had a significant influence on the Scandinavian languages and other languages around the Baltic Sea.. Based on the language of Lübeck, a standardized written language was developing, though it was never codified. Contemporary[edit] There is a distinction between the German and the Dutch Low Saxon/Low German situation. Germany[edit] After mass education in Germany in the 19th and 20th centuries, the slow decline which Low German had been experiencing since the end of the Hanseatic League turned into a free fall. The decision to exclude Low German in formal education was not without controversy, however. On one hand, proponents of Low German advocated that since it had a strong cultural and historical value and was the native language of students in northern Germany, it had a place in the classroom. On the other hand, High German was considered the language of education, science, and national unity, and since schools promoted these values, High German was seen as the best candidate for the language of instruction.[36] Initially, regional languages and dialects were thought to limit the intellectual ability of their speakers. When historical linguists illustrated the archaic character of certain features and constructions of Low German, this was seen as a sign of its "backwardness." It wasn't until the efforts of proponents such as Klaus Groth that this impression changed. Groth's publications demonstrated that Low German was a valuable language in its own right, and he was able to convince others that Low German was suitable for literary arts and was a national treasure worth keeping.[36] Through the works of advocates like Groth, both proponents and opponents of Low German in formal education saw the language's innate value as the cultural and historical language of northern Germany. Nevertheless, opponents claimed that it should simply remain a spoken and informal language to be used on the street and in the home, but not in formal schooling. In their opinion, it simply did not match the nationally unifying power of High German. As a result, while Low German literature was deemed worthy of being taught in school, High German was chosen as the language of scholarly instruction. With High German the language of education and Low German the language of the home and daily life, a stable diglossia developed in Northern Germany.[36] Various Low German dialects are understood by 10 million people, but many fewer are native speakers. Total users in all countries are 301,000.[37] The KDE project supports Low German (nds) as a language for its computer desktop environment,[38] as does the GNOME Desktop Project. Open-source software has been translated into Low German; this used to be coordinated via a page on Sourceforge,[39] but as of 2015, the most active project is that of KDE.[40] Netherlands[edit] In the early 20th century, scholars in the Netherlands argued that speaking dialects hindered language acquisition, and it was therefore strongly discouraged. As education improved, and mass communication became more widespread, the Low Saxon dialects further declined, although decline has been greater in urban centres of the Low Saxon regions. When in 1975 dialect folk and rock bands such as Normaal and Boh Foi Toch [nl] became successful with their overt disapproval of what they experienced as "misplaced Dutch snobbery" and the Western Dutch contempt for (speakers of) Low Saxon dialects, they gained a following among the more rurally oriented inhabitants, launching Low Saxon as a sub-culture. They inspired contemporary dialect artists and rock bands, such as Daniël Lohues [nl], Mooi Wark [Nl], Jovink en de Voederbietels [Nl], Hádiejan [Nl] Nonetheless, the position of the language is vulnerable according to UNESCO.[17] Low Saxon is still spoken more widely than in Northern Germany. Efforts are made in Germany and in the Netherlands to protect Low German as a regional language. Sound change[edit] As with the Anglo-Frisian languages and the North Germanic languages, Low German has not been influenced by the High German consonant shift except for old /ð/ having shifted to /d/. Therefore, a lot of Low German words sound similar to their English counterparts. One feature that does distinguish Low German from English generally is final devoicing of obstruents, as exemplified by the words 'good' and 'wind' below. This is a characteristic of Dutch and German as well and involves positional neutralization of voicing contrast in the coda position for obstruents (i.e. t = d at the end of a syllable.) This is not used in English except in the Yorkshire dialect, where there is a process known as Yorkshire assimilation.[41] For instance: water [wɒtɜ, ˈwatɜ, ˈwætɜ], later [ˈlɒːtɜ, ˈlaːtɜ, ˈlæːtɜ], bit [bɪt], dish [dis, diʃ], ship [ʃɪp, skɪp, sxɪp], pull [pʊl], good [ɡou̯t, ɣɑu̯t, ɣuːt], clock [klɔk], sail [sɑi̯l], he [hɛi̯, hɑi̯, hi(j)], storm [stoːrm], wind [vɪˑnt], grass [ɡras, ɣras], hold [hoˑʊl(t)], old [oˑʊl(t)]. The table below shows the relationship between Low German consonants which were unaffected by this chain shift and their equivalents in other West Germanic languages. Contemporary Swedish and Icelandic shown for comparison; Eastern and Western North Germanic languages, respectively. Proto-Germanic High German Northern Low German Dutch English High German West Frisian Swedish Icelandic -k- -ch- maken maken make machen meitsje maka (arch.) k- k- Keerl (Kerl) (fellow) kerel churl Kerl * tsjirl (arch.) karl karl d- t- Dag dag day Tag dei dag dag -t- -ss- eten (ȩten, äten) [Westphalian: iäten] eten eat essen ite äta éta t- z- (/t͡s/) teihn (tein) tien ten zehn tsien tio tíu -tt- -tz-, -z- (/t͡s/) sitten zitten sit sitzen sitte sitta sitja -p -f, -ff Schipp, Schepp, and Schüpp schip ship Schiff skip skepp *** skip p- pf- Peper peper pepper Pfeffer piper peppar pipar -β- -b- Wiew, Wiewer; Wief, Wiewer; Wief, Wiever; Wief, Wieber wijf, wijven ** wife, wives Weib, Weiber ** wiif, wiven viv ** víf Notes: * High German Kerl is a loanword from Low German ** The series Wief–wijf, etc. are cognates, not semantic equivalents. The meanings of some of these words have shifted over time. For example, the correct equivalent term for "wife" in modern Dutch, German and Swedish is vrouw, Frau and fru respectively; using wijf, Weib or viv for a human is considered archaic in Swedish and nowadays derogatory in Dutch and German, comparable to "wicked girl". No cognate to Frau / vrouw / fru has survived in English (compare Old English frōwe "lady"; the English word frow "woman, lady" rather being a borrowing of the Middle Dutch word). *** Pronounced shepp since the 17th century Grammar[edit] This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Besides being unsourced, the article is wrong (or at best incomplete and misleading). Also, as there are different Low German dialects with different grammar, it probably makes more sense to give the dialectal grammar in articles like Northern Low Saxon, Low Prussian dialect, Westphalian language etc. Please help improve this article if you can. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Generally speaking, Low German grammar shows similarities with the grammars of Dutch, Frisian, English, and Scots, but the dialects of Northern Germany share some features (especially lexical and syntactic features) with German dialects. Nouns[edit] Low German declension has only two morphologically marked noun cases, where accusative and dative together constitute an oblique case, and the genitive case has been lost. Example case marking: Boom (tree), Bloom (flower), Land (land)   Masculine Feminine Neuter Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Nominative en Boom, de Boom Bööm, de Bööm ne/'ne Bloom, de Bloom Blomen, de Blomen en Land, dat Land Lannen, de Lannen Oblique en Boom, den Boom Dative den/dän[edit] In most modern dialects, the nominative and oblique cases are primarily distinguished only in the singular of masculine nouns. In some Low German dialects, the genitive case is distinguished as well (e.g. varieties of Mennonite Low German). It is marked in the masculine gender by changing the masculine definite determiner 'de' from de to den/dän. By contrast, German distinguishes four cases: nominative, accusative, genitive, and dative. So, for example, the definite article of the masculine singular has the forms: der (nom.), den (acc.), des (gen.), and dem (dat.) Thus case marking in Low German is simpler than in German. Verbs[edit] In Low German verbs are conjugated for person, number, and tense. Verb conjugation for person is only differentiated in the singular. There are five tenses in Low German: present tense, preterite, perfect, and pluperfect, and in Mennonite Low German the present perfect which signifies a remaining effect from a past finished action. For example, "Ekj sie jekomen", "I am come", means that the speaker came and he is still at the place to which he came as a result of his completed action. Example verb conjugation: slapen, "to sleep"   Present Preterite Perfect Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural 1st Person ik slaap wi slaapt/slapen ik sleep wi slepen ik heff slapen wi hebbt/hebben slapen 2nd Person du slöppst ji slaapt/slapen du sleepst ji slepen du hest slapen ji hebbt/hebben slapen 3rd Person he, se, dat slöppt se slaapt/slapen he, se, dat sleep se slepen he, se, dat hett slapen se hebbt/hebben slapen Unlike Dutch, German, and southern Low German, the northern dialects form the participle without the prefix ge-, like the Scandinavian languages, Frisian and English. Compare to the German past participle geschlafen. This past participle is formed with the auxiliary verbs hebben "to have" and wesen/sien "to be". When the past participle ends with -en or in a few oft-used words like west (been). The reason for the two conjugations shown in the plural is regional: dialects in the central area use -t while the dialects in East Frisia and the dialects in Mecklenburg[example needed] and further east use -en. The -en suffix is of Dutch influence. The -t ending is however more often encountered, even in areas where -en endings were prominent due to the fact that these -t endings are seen as kennzeichnend Niederdeutsch, that is to say a well-known feature of Low German. There are 26 verb affixes. There is also a progressive form of verbs in present, corresponding to the same in the Dutch language. It is formed with wesen (to be), the preposition an (at) and "dat" (the/it).   Low German Dutch English Main form Ik bün an't Maken. Ik ben aan het maken. I am making. Main form 2 Ik do maken.1 - - Alternative form Ik bün an'n Maken.2 Ik ben aan het maken. - Alternative form 2 Ik bün maken.3 Ik ben makende. I am making. 1 Instead of wesen, sien (to be) Saxon uses doon (to do) to make to present continuous. 2 Many see the 'n as an old dative ending of dat which only occurs when being shortened after prepositions. This is actually the most frequently-used form in colloquial Low German. 3 This form is archaic and mostly unknown to Low German speakers. It is the same pattern as in the English example "I am making." The present participle has the same form as the infinitive: maken is either "to make" or "making". Adjectives[edit] The forms of Low German's adjectives are distinct from other closely related languages such as German and English. These forms fall somewhere in between these two languages. As in German, the adjectives in Low German may make a distinction between singular and plural to agree with the nouns that they modify,[42] as well as between the three genders, between the nominative and oblique cases and between indefinite (weak) and definite (strong) forms.[43] However, there is a lot of variation in that respect and some or all of these distinctions may also be absent, so that a single undeclined form of the adjective can occur in all cases, as in English. This is especially common in the neuter.[43] If the adjective is declined, the pattern tends to be as follows: Gender Nominative Oblique Gloss Masculine indefinite singular en starke(n) Kerl en(en) starke(n) Kerl 'a strong man' indefinite plural starke Kerls starke Kerls 'strong men' definite singular de starke Kerl den starken Kerl 'the strong man' definite plural de starken Kerls de starken Kerls 'the strong men' Feminine indefinite singular en(e) smucke Deern en(e) smucke Deern 'a pretty girl' indefinite plural smucke Deerns smucke Deerns 'pretty girls' definite singular de smucke Deern de smucke Deern 'the pretty girl' definite plural de smucken Deerns de smucken Deerns 'the pretty girls' Neuter indefinite singular en lütt((e)t) Land en lütt((e)t) Land 'a small country' indefinite plural lütt Lannen lütt Lannen 'small countries' definite singular dat lütte Land dat lütte Land 'the small country' definite plural de lütten Lannen de lütten Lannen 'the small countries' As mentioned above, alternative undeclined forms such as dat lütt Land, de lütt Lannen, en stark Kerl, de stark Kerl, stark Kerls, de stark Kerls etc. can occur. Personal pronouns[edit] Like German, Low German maintains the historical Germanic distinction between the second person singular and second person plural. In English and German, this distinction would translate to “thou” and “du” referring to one person, and “ye” and “ihr” referring to more than one person. The second person pronouns for each case are given below to further illustrate this distinction.[42] Case Singular Plural Nominative du “thou” ji “ye” Accusative di “thee” jug “you” Dative Genitive din, dinen “thy”, “thine” “your” In the genitive (possessive) case, the pronoun functions in the same way as an adjective and so it may take an ending if needed to match the singular or plural status of the noun it is modifying. So, for example, if “you” possess multiple books, then dinen would be used to express that the singular second person possesses multiple objects: the books. If several people in the second person (“you all”) possessed multiple books, then jug would be used instead.[42] Phonology[edit] Consonants[edit] Labial Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar/ Uvular Glottal Stop voiceless p t (tʃ) k voiced b d ɡ Fricative voiceless f s ʃ (ç) x h voiced v z (ʒ) (ɣ) Nasal m n ŋ Trill r (ʀ) Approximant lateral l plain j A common feature of the Low German speaking dialects, is the retraction of /s z/ to [s̠ z̠].[44][45] The sound [ɣ] can occur as an allophone of /ɡ/ among dialects. /r/ and /x/ can have allophones as [ɾ, ʀ] and [ç]. The sound /j/ can also be realized as fricative or affricate sounds [ʝ~ʑ~ʒ], [dʒ], in word-initial position.[46][47] Vowels[edit] Front Central Back unrounded rounded short long short long short long short long Close ɪ iː ʏ yː ʊ uː Close-mid eː øː ə oː Open-mid ɛ ɛː œ œː (ɐ) ɔ ɔː Open a aː (ɑ) (ɒː) [ɒ] and [ɐ] can occur as allophones of /a/ and /r/.[46] Vowel backness of /a/ to [ɑ] may also occur among dialects.[48] Diphthongs Front Back Close ia, iɛ, iə ua, uɛ, uɔ Close-mid eˑi, ea øˑi oa, oˑu Open-mid ɛɪ œɪ ɔˑi, ɔˑy, ɔʊ Open aˑɪ, aˑi aˑʊ, aˑu [ɑ] can be heard as an allophone of /a/ within diphthongs. Long phonemes /eː/, /øː/, /oː/, occur mostly in the Geest dialects, while in other dialects, they may be realized as diphthongs.[49][47] Writing system[edit] Low German is written using the Latin alphabet. There is no true standard orthography, only several locally more or less accepted orthographic guidelines, those in the Netherlands mostly based on Dutch orthography, and those in Germany mostly based on German orthography. To the latter group belongs the orthography devised by Johannes Sass. It is mostly used by modern official publications and internet sites, especially the Low German Wikipedia. This diversity, a result of centuries of official neglect and suppression, has a very fragmenting and thus weakening effect on the language as a whole, since it has created barriers that do not exist on the spoken level.[50][citation needed] Interregional and international communication is severely hampered by this. Most of these systems aim at representing the phonetic (allophonic) output rather than underlying (phonemic) representations, but trying to conserve many etymological spellings. Furthermore, many writers follow guidelines only roughly. This adds numerous idiosyncratic and often inconsistent ways of spelling to the already existing great orthographic diversity. Notable Low German writers and performers[edit] Heinrich Bandlow Hans-Friedrich Blunck John Brinckmann De fofftig Penns Gorch Fock Friedrich Wilhelm Grimme (Westphalian: Sauerländisch) Klaus Groth (Dithmarsisch) August Hermann Joachim Mähl Johann Meyer (Dithmarsisch) Martha Müller-Grählert Fritz Reuter Willem Schröder Julius Stinde Rudolf Tarnow Augustin Wibbelt (Westphalian: Münsterländisch) Wilhelm Wieben Middle Low German authors: Eggerik Beninga Balthasar Russow Albert Suho Plautdietsch authors: Reuben Epp See also[edit] 1614 Low German Bible Bible translations into German Friar Rush Hamborger Veermaster The Juniper Tree (fairy tale) Meuse-Rhenish Moin Ohnsorg-Theater Masurian dialect Notes[edit] ^ 2.2-5 million in northern Germany and 2.15 million in eastern Netherlands ^ "Low German" is known by the following other names in other languages. It is known in the Low German of Germany as Plattdütsch, Plattdüütsch, Plattdütsk, Plattdüütsk, Plattduitsk, Plattduitsch, Plattdietsch or Neddersassisch or Nedderdüütsch; in the Low Saxon of the Netherlands as Nedersaksisch; in High German as Plattdeutsch, Niedersächsisch or Niederdeutsch (in a stricter sense); and in Dutch as Nederduits; plus, other dialectal variants exist. References[edit] ^ Taaltelling Nedersaksisch, H. Bloemhoff. (2005). p88. ^ STATUS UND GEBRAUCH DES NIEDERDEUTSCHEN 2016, A. Adler, C. Ehlers, R. Goltz, A. Kleene, A. Plewnia (2016) ^ a b The Other Languages of Europe: Demographic, Sociolinguistic, and Educational Perspectives by Guus Extra, Durk Gorter; Multilingual Matters, 2001 - 454; page 10. ^ Saxon, Low Ethnologue. ^ German: § 23 Absatz 1 Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz (Bund). Die Frage, ob unter deutsch rechtlich ausschließlich die hochdeutsche oder auch die niederdeutsche Sprache subsumiert wird, wird juristisch uneinheitlich beantwortet: Während der BGH in einer Entscheidung zu Gebrauchsmustereinreichung beim Deutschen Patent- und Markenamt in plattdeutscher Sprache das Niederdeutsche einer Fremdsprache gleichstellt („Niederdeutsche (plattdeutsche) Anmeldeunterlagen sind im Sinn des § 4a Abs. 1 Satz 1 GebrMG nicht in deutscher Sprache abgefaßt.“ – BGH-Beschluss vom 19. November 2002, Az. X ZB 23/01), ist nach dem Kommentar von Foerster/Friedersen/Rohde zu § 82a des Landesverwaltungsgesetzes Schleswig-Holstein unter Verweis auf Entscheidungen höherer Gerichte zu § 184 des Gerichtsverfassungsgesetzes seit 1927 (OLG Oldenburg, 10. Oktober 1927 – K 48, HRR 1928, 392) unter dem Begriff deutsche Sprache sowohl Hochdeutsch wie auch Niederdeutsch zu verstehen. ^ Unterschiedliche Rechtsauffassungen, ob Niederdeutsch in Deutschland insgesamt Amtssprache ist – siehe dazu: Amtssprache (Deutschland); zumindest aber in Schleswig-Holstein und Mecklenburg-Vorpommern ^ Verein für niederdeutsche Sprachen in Brandenburg ^ Bundesrat für niederdeutsche Sprache, Neuigkeiten aus Brandenburg ^ Maas, Sabine (2014). Twents op sterven na dood? : een sociolinguïstisch onderzoek naar dialectgebruik in Borne. Münster New York: Waxmann. p. 19. ISBN 978-3830980339. ^ Cascante, Manuel M. (8 August 2012). "Los menonitas dejan México". ABC (in Spanish). Retrieved 19 February 2013. Los cien mil miembros de esta comunidad anabaptista, establecida en Chihuahua desde 1922, se plantean emigrar a la república rusa de Tartaristán, que se ofrece a acogerlos ^ Los Menonitas en Bolivia Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine CNN en Español ^ El Comercio: Menonitas cumplen 85 años en Paraguay con prosperidad sin precedentes ^ STATUS UND GEBRAUCH DES NIEDERDEUTSCHEN 2016, A. Adler, C. Ehlers, R. Goltz, A. Kleene, A. Plewnia (2016) ^ Bloemhoff, H. (2005). Taaltelling Nedersaksisch. Een enquête naar het gebruik en de beheersing van het Nedersaksisch in Nederland. p88. Groningen: Sasland. ^ "Gechattet wird auf Plattdeusch". Noz.de. Retrieved 2014-03-14. ^ a b Based on figures cited in STATUS UND GEBRAUCH DES NIEDERDEUTSCHEN 2016, page 15. ^ a b "UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in danger". www.unesco.org. ^ Driessen, Geert (2012). "Ontwikkelingen in het gebruik van Fries, streektalen en dialecten in de periode 1995-2011" (PDF). Radboud University Nijmegen. Retrieved 2017-04-29. ^ Bloemhoff, H., 2005, Taaltelling Nedersaksisch. Een enquête naar het gebruik en de beheersing van het Nedersaksisch in Nederland. Groningen: Sasland ^ "Platdietsch". 2008-01-27. Retrieved 2008-02-29. ^ "O trilinguismo no Colégio Fritz Kliewer de Witmarsum. (Paraná) [The trilingualism the College of Fritz Kliewer Witmarsum (Paraná)]" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Elvine Siemens Dück. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 23 September 2012. ^ (in Portuguese) Claudio Vereza, Espírito Santo's state assemblyman by the Workers' Party | The Pomeranian people in Espírito Santo Archived 21 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ethnologue 19th Edition (2016) ^ U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration - Language Use in the United States: 2007 ^ Cf. the definition of high in the Oxford English Dictionary (Concise Edition): "[…] situated far above ground, sea level, etc; upper, inland, as […] High German". ^ "Mundart/Platt". www.philhist.uni-augsburg.de. Retrieved 6 June 2018. ^ J. Goossens: "Niederdeutsche Sprache. Versuch einer Definition", in: J. Goossens (ed.), Niederdeutsch. Sprache und Literatur, vol. 1, Neumünster 1973. ^ W. Sanders: Sachsensprache — Hansesprache — Plattdeutsch. Sprachgeschichtliche Grundzüge des Niederdeutschen, Göttingen 1982, p. 32, paraphrasing Heinz Kloss: "Abstandsprachen und Ausbausprachen", in: J. Göschel et al. (edd.), Zur Theorie des Dialekts, Wiesbaden 1976, pp. 301–322. ^ Hubertus Menke: "Niederdeutsch: Eigenständige Sprache oder Varietät einer Sprache?", in: Eva Schmitsdorf et al. (edd.), Lingua Germanica. Studien zur deutschen Philologie. Jochen Splett zum 60. Geburtstag, Waxmann, Münster et al. 1998, pp. 171–184, in particular p. 180. ^ Hubertus Menke: "Niederdeutsch: Eigenständige Sprache oder Varietät einer Sprache?", in: Eva Schmitsdorf et al. (edd.), Lingua Germanica. Studien zur deutschen Philologie. Jochen Splett zum 60. Geburtstag, Waxmann, Münster et al. 1998, pp. 171–184, in particular p. 183f. ^ Hammarström, Harald; Forke, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin; Bank, Sebastian, eds. (2020). "Low German". Glottolog 4.3. ^ Cf. Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache – Sprachenpolitik ^ Sprachenchartabericht of the regional government of Schleswig-Holstein for 2016, p. 14 f. ^ Cf. the German Wikipedia article on Niederdeutsche Sprache. ^ Sanders, W. (1982) Sachsensprache, Hansesprache, Plattdeutsch. Sprachgeschichtliche Grundzüge des Niederdeutschen. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Rupprecht. ^ a b c Langer, Nils and Robert Langhanke (2013). "How to Deal with Non-Dominant Languages – Metalingusitic Discourses on Low German in the Nineteenth Century". Linguistik Online. 58 (1). doi:10.13092/lo.58.240. ^ "Low Saxon". Ethnologue. Retrieved 28 September 2017. ^ http://l10n.kde.org/stats/gui/trunk-kde4/nds/[dead link] ^ "Linux op Platt". 1 July 2012. Archived from the original on 1 July 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2018. ^ "Hartlich willkamen bi KDE op Platt". nds.i18n.kde.org. Retrieved 6 June 2018. ^ See John Wells, Accents of English, pages 366-7, Cambridge University Press, 1981 ^ a b c Biddulph, Joseph (2003). Platt and Old Saxon: Plattdeutsch (Low German) in its Modern and Historical Forms. Wales: Cyhoeddwr JOSEPH BIDDULPH Publisher. ^ a b SASS Plattdeutsche Grammatik 2.5.2. Deklination der Adjektive ^ R.E. Keller, German Dialects. Phonology and Morphology, Manchester 1960 ^ Adams (1975:289) harvcoltxt error: no target: CITEREFAdams1975 (help) ^ a b Höder, Steffen (2013). Low German. A profile of a word language. Syllable and word languages; Chapter: Low German: de Gruyter. ^ a b Goltz, Reinhard H.; Walker, Alastair G.H. (1990). North Saxon. The Dialects of Modern German: A Linguistic Survey: Routledge. pp. 31–58. ^ Prehn, Maike (2012). Vowel quantity and the fortis-lenis distinction in North Low Saxon (PDF). Amsterdam: LOT. ^ Lindow, Wolfgang (1998). Niederdeutsche Grammatik. Leer: Schuster. pp. 25–45. ^ Dieter Stellmacher: Niederdeutsche Grammatik - Phonologie und Morphologie. In: Gerhard Cordes & Dieter Möhn: Handbuch zur niederdeutschen Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft. Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag 1983, p.239. Bibliography[edit] Adams, Douglas Q. (1975), "The Distribution of Retracted Sibilants in Medieval Europe", Language, Linguistic Society of America, 51 (2): 282–292, doi:10.2307/412855, JSTOR 412855 External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Low German language. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Low German phrasebook. Low German (Germany) edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Low Saxon (Netherlands) edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Plautdietsch test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article "Plattdeutsch". http://www.plattmaster.de/ http://www.platt-online.de/ http://www.niederdeutschzentrum.de/ http://www.deutsch-plattdeutsch.de/ Online dictionaries[edit] Plattmakers dictionary with more than 10,000 word entries, with translations and interface available in several languages (English too) Dictionary of the Drents dialect (Dutch) Mennonite Low German-English Dictionary Information[edit] Streektaal.net, information in and about various Low German dialects Nu is de Welt platt! International resources in and about Low German Niederdeutsch/Plattdeutsch in Westfalen, by Olaf Bordasch Mönsterlänner Plat, by Klaus-Werner Kahl Plattdeutsch heute Building Blocks of Low Saxon (Low German), an introductory grammar in English and German Organizations[edit] TwentseWwelle (Twente, the Netherlands) IJsselacademie (Overijssel and Veluwe, the Netherlands) Staring Instituut (Achterhoek, the Netherlands) Drentse Taol (Drenthe, the Netherlands) Stichting Stellingwarver Schrieversronte (Friesland, the Netherlands) SONT (General, the Netherlands) Oostfreeske Taal (Eastern Friesland, Germany) Institut für niederdeutsche Sprache e.V. (General, Germany) Diesel - dat oostfreeske Bladdje (Eastern Friesland, Germany) v t e Languages of Germany Official language Standard German Regional/Minority languages Recognized Danish Frisian North Saterland Low German Romani Sorbian Upper Lower Unrecognized Alemannic Bavarian German Sign Language Limburgish Low Rhenish Luxembourgish Ripuarian v t e Germanic languages According to contemporary philology West Germanic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English* dialects Yola Fingallian Old English Middle English Scots Early Scots Middle Scots Frisian East Frisian Ems Saterland Frisian Weser Wangerooge Frisian Wursten Frisian North Frisian Insular Eiderstedt Föhr–Amrum Föhr Amrum Heligolandic Sylt Mainland Bökingharde Mooring Halligen Goesharde Northern Central Southern Karrharde Strand Wiedingharde West Frisian Hindeloopen Schiermonnikoog Westlauwers–Terschellings Mainland West Frisian Clay Frisian Wood Frisian Westereendersk Terschelling Old Frisian Middle Frisian Low German Historical forms Old Saxon Middle Low German West Low German Dutch Low Saxon Stellingwarfs Tweants Gronings Drèents Gelders-Overijssels Achterhooks Sallaans Urkers Veluws Northern Low Saxon East Frisian Low Saxon Schleswigsch Holsteinisch Hamburgisch Ollnborger North Hanoveranian Dithmarsch Emsländisch Westphalian Eastphalian East Low German Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch Mecklenburgish Brandenburgisch East Pomeranian Central Pomeranian West Central Pomeranian Low Prussian Mennonite Low German Low Franconian Standard variants Dutch* Frankish Old Dutch Middle Dutch Afrikaans* West Low Franconian Hollandic West Flemish French Flemish Zeelandic East Flemish Brabantian Surinamese Dutch Jersey Dutch Mohawk Dutch Stadsfries Bildts Yiddish Dutch East Low Franconian Meuse-Rhenish Limburgish Southeast Limburgish South Guelderish Transitional Low Dietsch High German Standard variants German* Namibian German Namibian Black German Brazilian German Unserdeutsch Barossa German Belgranodeutsch Parana Volga German Kiautschou Pidgin German Old High German Middle High German Early New High German Yiddish Eastern Western Litvish Poylish Ukrainish Galitzish Scots Yiddish Alsatian Yiddish Klezmer-loshn Ganovim Balagole Katsoves Lachoudisch Yenish Rotwelsch Lotegorisch Standard German German Standard German Austrian Standard German Swiss Standard German Central German West Central German Central Franconian Ripuarian Colognian Moselle Franconian Luxembourgish Transylvanian Saxon Hunsrückisch Hunsrik Rhine Franconian Lorraine Franconian Palatine Volga German Pennsylvania German Hessian Amana East Central German Thuringian Upper Saxon Ore Mountainian Lusatian-Neumarkish Berlinerisch Silesian German High Prussian Wymysorys Halcnovian Prague German High Franconian South Franconian East Franconian Main Franconian Vogtlandian Upper German Alemannic Low Alemannic Alsatian Coloniero High Alemannic Swiss German Highest Alemannic Walser German Swabian Bavarian Northern Bavarian Central Bavarian Viennese German Southern Bavarian South Tyrolean Cimbrian Mòcheno Hutterite German Langobardic North Germanic and East Germanic North Germanic Historical forms Proto-Norse Old Norse Old West Norse Old East Norse Old Gutnish West Scandinavian Norwegian* Spoken Bergensk Kebabnorsk Sognamål Trøndersk Valdris Vestlandsk Vikværsk Written Bokmål Nynorsk Old Norwegian Middle Norwegian Insular Scandinavian Faroese Icelandic Old Icelandic Middle Icelandic Gronlandsk Norn East Scandinavian Swedish* Åland Estonian Finlandic Gotlandic/Gutnish Jämtlandic Kalix Kiruna Luleå Norrland Ostrobothnian Småländska South Swedish Scanian Stockholm Rinkeby Uppländska Västgötska Westrobothnian Old Swedish Danish* Bornholmsk Gøtudanskt Insular Danish Jutlandic South Jutlandic Perkerdansk Old Danish Middle Danish Dalecarlian Elfdalian East Germanic Gothic Crimean Gothic Burgundian Vandalic Philology Language subgroups North East West Elbe (Irminonic) Weser-Rhine (Istvaeonic) North Sea (Ingvaeonic) Northwest Gotho-Nordic South Reconstructed Proto-Germanic Proto-Germanic grammar Germanic parent language Ancient Belgian language Diachronic features Grimm's law Verner's law Holtzmann's law Sievers's law Kluge's law Germanic substrate hypothesis West Germanic gemination High German consonant shift Germanic a-mutation Germanic umlaut Germanic spirant law Ingvaeonic nasal spirant law Great Vowel Shift Synchronic features Germanic verb Germanic strong verb Germanic weak verb Preterite-present verb Grammatischer Wechsel Indo-European ablaut Italics indicate extinct languages * (asterisks) indicates languages with more than 3 million speakers Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left. Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125