Lummi Xwlemi Total population 6,590 (2000) Regions with significant populations Whatcom County Languages English, Lummi Religion American Indian pantheism, Christianity, other Related ethnic groups other Coast Salish peoples The Lummi (/ˈlʌmi/ LUM-ee; Lummi: Xwlemi [χʷləˈmi]; also known as Lhaq'temish (LOCK‐tuh‐mish), or People of the Sea[1]), governed by the Lummi Nation, are a Native American tribe of the Coast Salish ethnolinguistic group in the Pacific Northwest region of Washington state in the United States. The federally recognized tribe primarily resides on and around the Lummi Indian Reservation ( 48°45′N 122°39′W﻿ / ﻿48.750°N 122.650°W﻿ / 48.750; -122.650) to the west of Bellingham in western Whatcom County, 20 miles (32 km) south of the border with Canada. Contents 1 History 2 Gateway Pacific Terminal 3 Language 4 Reservation population 5 Enrollees 5.1 Age distribution 5.2 Locations 6 Workforce 6.1 Education 6.2 Employment 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links History[edit] The original Lummi spoke the Songish dialect of the Salish language, a cultural feature that persists to the present. Their ancient villages bore the evocative names Hutatchl, Lemaltcha, Statshum and Tomwhiksen. For 12,000 years, the Lummi subsisted near the sea and in mountain areas. They returned seasonally to their longhouses situated at scattered locales on the present reservation in today's western Whatcom County and the San Juan Islands of Washington State. Their protein-rich diet consisted principally of salmon, followed by trout, shellfish, elk, deer, other wildlife , starchy camas bulbs and sun-dried berries.[citation needed] The Lummi, and most of the other northwest coastal tribes included in the Point Elliott Treaty of 1855, were paid a total of $150,000 for their lands and paid an additional $15,000 in relocation costs and expenses. That would equate to over $4.2 million or approximately $840 per person in economic power in 2013 . The reservation has a land area of 54.378 km² (20.996 sq mi), which includes the Lummi Peninsula, and uninhabited Portage Island. The Lummi nation are the original inhabitants of the Puget Sound lowlands. In pre-colonial times, the tribe migrated seasonally among many sites including Point Roberts, Washington, Lummi Peninsula, Portage Island, as well as sites in the San Juan Islands, including Sucia Island. Many tribal members were Christianized in the late nineteenth century by the Catholic Oblate order.[2] The traditional lifestyle of the Lummi, like many Northwest Coast tribes, consisted of collecting shellfish, gathering plants, such as camas and different species of berries and, most importantly, salmon fishing. The Lummi developed a fishing technique known as "reef netting." Reef netting was used for taking large quantities of fish in salt water. It's a practice that the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife acknowledges as the original and best technique for selective fishing[3] Lummi had reef net sets on Orcas Island, San Juan Island, Lummi Island and Fidalgo Island, Portage Island and near Point Roberts and Sandy Point.[4] Following steady increases in the number of individuals and firms fishing in areas traditionally fished by the Lummi nation, the nation fought for and gained limited protection under the law for the right to fish in their traditional manner.[5] From July 30 to August 4, 2007, the Lummi hosted their first potlatch since the 1930s, the Tribal Canoe Journeys Paddle to Lummi event. In a revival of traditional practice, 68 families paddled hand-made canoes to the Lummi Reservation from parts of Washington and British Columbia to celebrate the potlatch with other members.[6] In 2017, the Lummi Nation declared a state of emergency in the aftermath of the 2017 Cypress Island Atlantic salmon pen break and were responsible for recapturing the bulk of the recovered escaped non-native farmed Atlantic salmon.[7] Gateway Pacific Terminal[edit] Main article: Gateway Pacific Terminal The Gateway Pacific Terminal was a proposed coal export terminal at Xwe’chi’eXen (Cherry Point) in Whatcom County, Washington, along the Salish Sea shoreline. The project was objected to by Lummi people due to its potential impact on their treaty fishing rights and their sacred sites, and did not win approval. Language[edit] Main article: Lummi language The Lummi language (Xwlemi Chosen, IPA: [xʷləmi tʃɔsən]) is a dialect of the North Straits Salish language. Reservation population[edit] Lummi woman, ca. 1907–1930, photograph by Edward S. Curtis An estimated 6,590 people live on the Lummi Reservation. Roughly 2,564 are enrolled tribal members, and 665 are either related to or live with an enrolled tribal member. Some 3,361 are neither tribal members nor affiliated with any member of the Lummi Nation. There are approximately 1,864 homes located on the reservation. Approximately 697 of these have an enrolled Lummi living in the home; thus, roughly 1,167 homes on the reservation do not house a tribal member. The 2000 census official record was 4,193 persons residing on the reservation, of whom 1,828 (43.6 percent) identified as whites, and 2,114 (50.4 percent) identified as of solely Native American ancestry. Enrollees[edit] As of April 2010 there are 4,483 enrolled tribal members. 49.6% are female and 50.4% are male. Age distribution[edit] The median age of tribal members is 29. Nearly one-third of the members, some 31.8%, are 18 years or younger. 11.6% are 55 or older. Locations[edit] According to studies conducted by the Lummi Nation either on or near the reservation boundaries, enrolled Lummi tribal members have an average household size of approximately 4.5 persons.[citation needed] Workforce[edit] A recent collaborative study conducted by the Lummi Nation and Northern Economics Inc. found the following information pertaining to the Lummi Nation workforce. Education[edit] Among enrolled Lummis aged 25–64: 15.1% do not have a high school diploma or a GED; 33.8% have either a high school or GED degree; 27.1% have some college experience; 14.9% have a two-year (AA or AS) degree; 7.5% have a bachelor's degree; and 1.6% have a graduate or professional degree. Employment[edit] 28% of the adult population (ages 18–64) is employed. The labor workforce participation rate is 25%. The Lummi unemployment rate of about 75% is estimated to be three times the local average. The median monthly income for employed Lummi tribal members is approximately $1,200.[citation needed] See also[edit] Lummi stick, percussion instrument whose name is borrowed from the tribal name. Northwest Indian College References[edit] Specific ^ "A Sovereign Nation Stands Tall". Intercontinental Cry. Retrieved 2015-12-13. ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Lummi Indians" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. ^ "Fishing & Shellfishing". Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife. January 22, 2017. ^ Microsoft Word - Boldt Decision8.5x11 layout for web.doc Archived 2006-09-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ceely, Seth (2015). "Lummi Fishing Rights and the Law". The Apollonian Revolt. Archived from the original on 19 July 2015. Retrieved 31 July 2015. ^ Lummi hosts largest potlatch in 70 years : ICT [2007/08/13] ^ Rosenbaum, Cary (22 January 2018). "When Atlantic salmon escape in the Pacific, who cleans up? (Salmon on the lam)". High Country News. Retrieved 2018-05-05. General Lummi Reservation, Washington United States Census Bureau Further reading[edit] Gibbs, George (1863). Alphabetical vocabularies of the Clallam and Lummi. Cramoisy Press.Available online through the Washington State Library's Classics in Washington History collection External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lummi. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Official Lummi Indian Business Council website Lummi Nation Communication Department website Documents Reveal Coal Exporter Disturbed Native American Archaeological Site At Cherry Point, KUOW, Nov. 24, 2013 Netwar at Cherry Point: White Power on the Salish Sea, Wrong Kind of Green, Apr. 1, 2016 v t e Coast Salish Peoples Chawathil Cheam Chehalis (WA) Chemainus Clemclemaluts Comiaken Copalis Cowlitz Duwamish Esquimalt Halalt Hoh Homalco Humptulips Katzie Khenipsen Kilpahlas Klahoose Klallam Koksilah Kwa-kwa-a-pilt Kwantlen Kway-quit-lam Nuxalk Sliammon Nanoose Malahat Snuneymuxw Tsawwassen Tsleil-Waututh Shishalh Squamish Musqueam Semiahmoo Matsqui Sumas Scowlitz Sts'Ailes Leq' a: mel Popkum Seabird Island Skwah Skway Shxw'ow'hamel Skawahlook Skowkale Soowahlie Squiala Tzeachten Yakweakwioose T'souk-e Tsartlip Somena Quamichan Penelakut Lamalcha Saanich Lummi Nooksack Lower Skagit Upper Skagit Skokomish (Twana) Muckleshoot Sammamish Samish Sauk-Suiattle Snohomish Snoqualmie Nisqually Puyallup Stillaquamish Suquamish Swinomish Tulalip Quinault Sahewamish Wynoochee Satsop Nehalem (Tillamook) Siletz Quamichan Somena Governments Aitchelitz Band Chawathil First Nation Cheam Indian Band Kwantlen First Nation Katzie First Nation Kwaw-kwaw-a-pilt First Nation Leq' a: mel First Nation Matsqui First Nation Popkum Band Scowlitz First Nation Seabird Island Band Skwah First Nation Skway First Nation Shxw'ow'hamel First Nation Skawahlook First Nation Skowkale First Nation Soowahlie First Nation Squiala First Nation Sumas First Nation Tzeachten First Nation Yakweakwioose First Nation Chehalis First Nation Tsleil-waututh First Nation Musqueam Indian Band Katzie First Nation Kwikwetlem First Nation Semiahmoo First Nation Chemainus First Nation Halalt First Nation Homalco First Nation Klahoose First Nation Malahat First Nation Nanoose First Nation Peters Band Sliammon First Nation Snuneymuxw First Nation Tsawwassen First Nation Yale First Nation Yakweakwioose First Nation Tseycum First Nation Tsleil-Waututh First Nation Squamish Nation Union Bar First Nation Nuxalk Nation T'sou-ke First Nation Esquimalt First Nation Tsawout First Nation Cowichan Tribes Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community of Oregon Confederated Tribes of Siletz Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Cowlitz Indian Tribe Suquamish Tribe Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe Lummi Nation Makah Tribe Muckleshoot Indian Tribe Nisqually Indian Tribe Quinault Indian Nation Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Samish Indian Nation Skokomish Indian Tribe Snoqualmie Indian Tribe Squaxin Island Tribe Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Suquamish Tribe Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Tulalip Tribes Organizations & Institutions NorthWest Indian Fisheries Commission South Puget Intertribal Planning Agency Washington Indian Gaming Association Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs Culture & Society Music Mythology Art Languages Coast Salish languages Comox/Island Comox (†) Sliammon/Mainland Comox Pentlatch Halkomelem Sechelt Squamish Nooksack Saanich Lummi Klallam Lushootseed Whulshootseed Twana Cowlitz Quinault v t e Indian reservations in Washington Chehalis Colville Hoh Jamestown S'Klallam Kalispel Lower Elwha Lummi Makah Muckleshoot Nisqually Nooksack Port Gamble Port Madison Puyallup Quileute Quinault Samish Sauk-Suiattle Shoalwater Bay Skokomish Snoqualmie Spokane Squaxin Island Stillaguamish Swinomish Tulalip Upper Skagit Yakama v t e Municipalities and communities of Whatcom County, Washington, United States County seat: Bellingham Cities Bellingham Blaine Everson Ferndale Lynden Nooksack Sumas CDPs Acme Birch Bay Custer Deming Geneva Glacier Kendall Maple Falls Marietta-Alderwood Peaceful Valley Point Roberts Sudden Valley Indian reservations Lummi Nooksack Unincorporated communities Beach Blue Canyon Cedarville Clipper Diablo Greenwood Laurel Lawrence Lummi Island Maple Beach Mountain View Newhalem Noon Van Wyck Van Zandt Welcome Ghost towns Goshen Park United States portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125