This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Luo River in Luoyang city The Luo River (Chinese: 洛河; pinyin: Luò Hé) is a tributary of the Yellow River in China. It rises in the southeast flank of Mount Hua in Shaanxi province and flows east into Henan province, where it eventually joins the Yellow River at the city of Gongyi. The river's total length is 420 kilometres (260 mi). Although not a major river by most standards, it flows through an area of great archaeological significance in the early history of China. Principal cities or prefectures located on the river include Lushi, Luoning, Yiyang, Luoyang, Yanshi, and Gongyi. The Luo's main tributary is the Yi River, which joins it at Yanshi, after which the river is called the Yiluo River. See also[edit] Lo Shu Square Peiligang culture External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Luo River (Henan). Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Confluence of the Luo and Yellow Rivers Coordinates: 34°50′16″N 113°04′12″E﻿ / ﻿34.8379°N 113.07°E﻿ / 34.8379; 113.07 v t e Major rivers of China Yangtze system Yalong Min Dadu Qingyi (Sichuan) Tuo Jialing Bailong Fu (Sichuan) Qu Wu Hanshui Muma Chi Du Bao Qing Chishui Xiang Xiao Lei Mi Zi Yuan Lishui Miluo Gan Fu (Jiangxi) Xin Qingyi (Anhui) Qinhuai Xitiao Huangpu Suzhou Creek Yellow system Daxia Tao Huangshui Datong Qingshui Wuding Fen Wei Jing Luo (Shaanxi) Luo (Henan) Qin Dawen Xiaoqing Pearl system North East West Yujiang Yong Xun Qian Hongshui Nanpan Beipan Rong Li (Guangxi) Gui Liu Heilongjiang system Songhua 2nd Songhua Nen Mudan Ussuri Argun Kherlen Woken Huifa Huai system Guo Ying Shiguan Quan Hui Hong Hai system Chaobai Yongding Hutuo Ziya Daqing Wenyu Juma Sanggan Fuyang Wei Ju Jiyunhe Liao system Hun Taizi Xar Moron Xinkai Western Liao Eastern Liao Other major rivers Tarim Black Karatash Ili Shule Tumen Yalu Luan Red Minjiang Longjiang Lancang Beilun Nujiang Lion Spring Elephant Spring Yarlung Tsangpo Nyang Subansiri Irtysh Suifen Qiantang Puyang Jiao (Shandong) Dai Si Shu Cao'e Jiao (Zhejiang) Ou Mulan Jin (Fujian) Han (Guangdong) Mei Ting Nandu Wanquan Taping Major canals Grand Canal Lingqu North Jiangsu Main Irrigation Canal This Henan location article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article related to a river in China is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e