Maggy Moulach (also known as Meg Mullach, Maggie Moloch, Maug Moulack, Maug Moulach, Mieg Moulach, Maug Vuluchd, May Moulach, Meg Molloch, Manch Monlach and Hairy Meg) is a character from Scottish folklore said to be a Highland brownie. According to the folklore, she had a son named Brownie-Clod, who was said to be a dobie. A dobie is a somewhat dull-witted, though well-intentioned, variety of brownie. She is described as a two foot tall creature with an impressive head of hair or (and), as said in other lore, with hairy hands; that's why she was sometimes called Hairy Meg. In some later versions of the story, it is said that she reached down chimneys and stole children. She was also capable of shapeshifting into a grasshopper.[1] Contents 1 Legend 1.1 Other legends 2 Moral 3 References 3.1 Bibliography Legend[edit] In the earlier legends, it is said that Meg and her son were living in Tullochgorm castle, which belonged to the Grant family.[1][2] She performed the usual labors of brownie, but also helped the clan chief beat his opponents at chess. She also functioned as a banshee, announcing the deaths of members of this family. Other legends[edit] A folktale mentions a certain Fincastle Mill where none dare go for fear of the brownies said to protect the mill from trespassers. One night, a girl went up to the mill as she did not have enough flour for her wedding cake. Because the miller has already left, she snuck in to grind the flour herself. She put on a pot of water to boil as she began grinding the meal. The dobie who guarded the mill, Brownie-Clod, heard the commotion and found the audacious maiden hard at work. Keeping his distance, he asked for her name and the quick girl replied, "Oh, I'm Mise mi fein" which means "Oh, I am me myself". He again asked for her name, but again she said "Mi fein". As he approached her, she threw boiling water at him. He fled to his mother, Maggy Moulach, who asks who wounded him. Fatally burned by the boiling water, he gasps out "Me fein" (Me Myself) as he was told. Maggy later finds out the trickery of the girl as she regularly brags to her friends of how she outsmarted a brownie. Maggy overhears the girl one day while walking past her window and takes vengeance. She throws a stool with such force that it kills the girl dead on the spot. Another legend of Maggy tells how she found a home near a farm. She is such a good worker that the owner of the farm fires all the farmhands in order to rely solely upon Maggy's work. This enrages her such that she goes on strike and becomes a boggart, an entity similar to a poltergeist. She begins playing tricks on him until the farmer is obliged to hire back all the staff.[2] Moral[edit] The story of Maggy Moulach's vengeance for her son could be seen as a warning against excessive pride. It could also be to remind the reader that there will invariably be someone who loves each of us, no matter our appearance, and will avenge the injuries inflicted. The tale of Maggy Moulach and the farmer could be seen as a warning not to take those who help for granted. References[edit] Faeries - ISBN 0-8109-0901-4 (H.C), Copyright 1978 Rufus Publications, Inc. Published in 1978 by Harry N. Abrams, Inc, New York. Folktales of England, by Katherine Biggs ISBN 0-226-07494-3 Bibliography[edit] Bane, Theresa (2013), Encyclopedia of Fairies in World Folklore and Mythology, McFarland, p. 322, ISBN 978-0786471119 Henderson, Lizanne (2001), Scottish Fairy Believe: A History, Dundum, p. 16, ISBN 978-1862321908 Briggs, Katharine, Mary (2001), An Encyclopedia of Fairies: Hobgoblins, Brownies, Bogies, and Other Supernatural Creatures, Pantheon Books, ISBN 978-0394734675 Monaghan, Patricia (2004), The Encyclopedia of Celtic Mythology and Folklore, Facts On File, New York City, New York: InfoBase Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8160-4524-2 v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Changeling Fairy godmother Fairy-locks Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale Familiar Household deity Hungry grass Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Notable royal fairies Aibell Clíodhna Fairy Queen Finvarra Gwyn ap Nudd Joan the Wad Morgan le Fay Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Oberon Queen of Elphame Sebile Titania Attested fairies A-E Adhene Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clurichaun Coblynau Cyhyraeth Dames blanches Drow Duende Duergar Dullahan Each-uisge Elf Enchanted Moura F-L Fachan Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Hulder Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Korrigan Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Ly Erg M-Z Mare Meg Mullach Melusine Mermaid Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Nain Rouge Nicnevin Nuckelavee Peg Powler Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Radande Redcap Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Tomte Tooth fairy Troll Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Little people Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Canotila Chaneque Curupira Encantado Ishigaq Jogah Menehune Nawao Nimerigar Nûñnë'hï Pukwudgie Saci Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Irshi Jinn Kijimuna Kodama Korpokkur Oni Orang bunian Peri Tengu Tennin Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Mimis Muldjewangk Patupaiarehe Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Celtic Tuatha Dé Danann Germanic Alberich Dwarf Elegast Erlking Hodekin Hinzelmann Imp King Goldemar Weiße Frauen Greek Dryad Hamadryad Kallikantzaros Lampad Naiad Nereid Nymph Oceanid Oread Potamides Romanic Căpcăun Doñas de fuera Iele Sânziană Spiriduș Squasc Vâlvă Vântoase Xana Zână Slavic Bagiennik & Bannik Berehynia Domovoi Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Likho Polevik Psotnik Rusalka Vila Vodyanoy Cross-cultural Goblin Early & late modern Gnome Gremlin See also Category List of beings referred to as fairies v t e Celtic mythology series Creatures in Scottish mythology and folklore Beasts Beithir Gigelorum Birds Boobrie Deities Beira Cailleach Fairies/spirits Aos Sí Baobhan sith Bean nighe Biasd Bheulach Blue men of the Minch Bodach Caoineag Cat sìth Changeling Cù Sìth Each-uisge Fuath Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Kelpie Meg Mullach Nuggle Sea Mither Seonaidh Water bull Giants Fachan Gnomes Pech Goblins/hobgoblins Bauchan Mermaids Ceasg Selkie ^ a b Bane 2013, p. 227. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBane2013 (help) ^ a b Monaghan 2004, p. 322. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMonaghan2004 (help)