Magic depicted in fictional stories "Magic item" redirects here. For the Dungeons & Dragons magic items, see Magic item (Dungeons & Dragons). Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Contemporary fantasy Comedy Creatures Fantastic Fantastique Fantasy of manners History Historical fantasy Lovecraftian horror Magic Magic system Magician Races Religious themes Sources Tropes Worlds Subgenres Bangsian fantasy‎ Dark fantasy‎ Dieselpunk‎ Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairy tales‎ Gaslamp fantasy Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction‎ Grimdark Hard fantasy Heroic fantasy High fantasy‎ Historical fantasy‎ Isekai Kaiju‎ LitRPG Low fantasy Magic realism‎ Magical girl‎ Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Romantic fantasy‎ Science fantasy‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Steampunk‎ Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban fantasy‎ Weird fiction‎ Weird West‎ Wuxia‎ Fandom Harry Potter fandom Tolkien fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e Speculative fiction Alternate history List of alternate history fiction Retrofuturism Sidewise Award Writers Fantasy fiction Anime Fandom Fantasy art Fiction magazines Films Genres History Legendary creatures Literature Quests Artifacts Races Superheroes Television Themes Worlds Writers Science fiction Anime Artists Awards Climate fiction Editors Fandom conventions fanzine Fiction magazines Genres History Organizations Film Television Themes Writers Horror fiction Anime Awards Conventions Fiction magazines Films Genres Podcasts Television Writers Miscellaneous Fictional universe Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of Japanese SF writers The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction The Encyclopedia of Fantasy  Portal v t e Magic in fiction is the endowment of characters or objects in works of fiction with powers that do not naturally occur in the real world. Magic often serves as a plot device and has long been a component of fiction, from the days of Homer and Apuleius down through the tales of the Holy Grail and King Arthur to more contemporary authors. Contents 1 Historical beliefs 2 Function 3 Acquisition 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Historical beliefs[edit] Historically, witches such as the Weird Sisters in William Shakespeare's Macbeth, wizards such as Prospero in The Tempest or characters like Doctor Faustus in Christopher Marlowe's play of the same name were widely considered to be real.[1]:1027 Contemporary authors tend to treat magic as an imaginary idea, opting to build their worlds with a blank slate where the laws of reality do not carry as much weight.[1]:1027 Function[edit] Within a work of fantasy, magic can help to advance the plot, often providing power to heroes or to their opponents. The use of magic frequently manifests itself in a transformation of a character, if not the transformation of the fictional world.[2]:143 For magic to carry out its functions, it often comes at a price equal to its value.[3][need quotation to verify]:143 Fictional magic may or may not include a detailed magic system, but it is not uncommon for authors to omit details or explanations of certain limitations, ostensibly for pacing or other purposes; in these cases, it is possible that magic serves more as a convenience to the author rather than as a device for the character.[citation needed] In nearly any given fantasy magical system, magical ability is limited. Limitations can add conflict to the story and prevent characters from becoming all-powerful with magic, although characters with unlimited power (such as deities or transcendental beings) are not unheard of in fiction.[1]:616 Fantasy writers use a variety of techniques to limit the magic in their stories,[4] such as limiting the number of spells a character has or may cast before needing rest,[4] restricting a character's magic to the use of a specific object,[4][5] limiting magic to the use of certain rare materials,[6] or restricting the magic a character can use through its negative consequences.[4] Some works feature magic that is performed through the use of certain words or incantations to cast spells.[citation needed] While many works use this method without offering an explanation for it, others do offer an explanation.[2]:134[3]:167–168 In some works, such as The Wheel of Time, types of magic are divided by color.[7] Hard magic is a magic system with specific rules and regulations; a soft magic system is usually much more vague and undefined with a mysterious aspect to it. The Magic Circle, 1886 by John William Waterhouse Acquisition[edit] Authors introduce magic into their stories, and to their characters, in varying ways. Although there is great variation in how spontaneously magic occurs, how difficult it is to wield, and how the guidelines to the magic are implemented, there are a handful of methods for introducing magic found in many fictional works. In many[quantify] fantasy works, writers depict magic as an innate talent, equivalent for example to perfect pitch.[1]:616 Magic may also be gained through a pact with a devil or with other spirits, a characteristic common in folklore.[8] In some works, such as fairy tales, magic items either endow the main characters with magical powers or have magical powers themselves. Writers often use them as plot devices or MacGuffins to drive the plot of a story.[9][page needed] Wands and staves often feature in fantasy works in the hands of wizards.[10] Italian fairy tales had put wands into the hands of the powerful fairies by the late Middle Ages.[citation needed] Talismans such as rings or amulets may exert magical influence.[11] Seven-league boots and invisiblity cloaks have also proven popular. See also[edit] Channeling in the works of Robert Jordan The Force, a magic-like concept in the Star Wars universe Hard and soft magic systems Kidō in the Bleach anime and manga series Magic in Terry Pratchett's Discworld series Magic in the Bartimaeus trilogy (Jonathan Stroud's series) Magic in the Earthsea series Magic in the Harry Potter series Magic in the works of J. R. R. Tolkien Magic in video and role-playing games Magic of Dungeons & Dragons Majutsu in the Majutsushi Orphen series Master of the Five Magics in the works of Lyndon Hardy References[edit] ^ a b c d Clute, John; Grant, John; Ashley, Mike; Hartwell, David G.; Westfahl, Gary (1999). The Encyclopedia of Fantasy (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 0312198698. ^ a b Martin, Philip (2002). The Writer's Guide to Fantasy Literature: From Dragon's Lair to Hero's Quest: How to Write Fantasy Stories of Lasting Value (1st ed.). Waukesha, Wisconsin: Writer Books. ISBN 0871161958. ^ a b Attebery, Brian (1980). The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature: From Irving to Le Guin. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0253356652. ^ a b c d "The Limits of Magic". The Victorian Web. Archived from the original on 2004-08-23. Retrieved 2013-10-16. ^ "Comic Relief live chat transcript, March 2001". Accio Quote!. March 2001. Retrieved 2013-10-16. ^ Card, Orson Scott (1990). How to Write Science Fiction and Fantasy (1st ed.). Cincinnati, Ohio: Writer's Digest Books. pp. 47–49. ISBN 0898794161. ^ Bonser, Wilfrid (1 January 1925). "118. The Significance of Colour in Ancient and Mediaeval Magic: With Some Modern Comparisons". Man. 25: 194–198. doi:10.2307/2840849. JSTOR 2840849. ^ Briggs, Katharine (1976). An Encyclopedia of Fairies: Hobgoblins, Brownies, Bogies, and Other Supernatural Creatures (1st ed.). New York: Pantheon Books. p. 279. ISBN 039473467X. ^ Thompson, Stith (1977). The Folktale. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 9780520035379. ^ Frye, Northrop (1971). Anatomy of Criticism; Four Essays (2nd ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 152. ISBN 0691012989. ^ Note Tolkien's legendarium, for example, or The Story of the Amulet. External links[edit] Lawrence Watt-Evans, "Watt-Evans' Laws of Fantasy", Starlog Patricia C. Wrede, "Magic and Magicians", Fantasy Worldbuilding Questions Anders, C.J. (2011) "The Rules of Magic, According to the Greatest Fantasy Sagas of All Time" io9.com (includes 7x51 chart) v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Speculative fiction Science fiction Media Comics Films list Magazines list Television Creators list Authors Editors Studies Awards Definitions History Subgenres Alternate history Apocalyptic/post-apocalyptic Climate fiction Comic/comedy Cyberpunk (derivatives) Dying Earth Feminist Future history Military Space opera Space Western Tech-noir Themes Afrofuturism Aliens AI Frankenstein Parallel universes Planets Time travel Utopia/dystopia Space pirates Terraforming Terraforming in popular culture Subculture Community Gathering list Fantasy Media Anime Art Fantastic Comics Fantasy film Literature Magazines Television Creators Authors Studies High fantasy (Tolkienology) History Sources Subgenres Bangsian Comic Contemporary Dark Dying Earth Fairytale Folklore mythology (based) Gaslamp Hard Heroic High Historical Lost world Low Medieval Romantic Sword and sorcery Urban Tropes Fantasy races Fantasy worlds Legendary creatures Magic (fantasy) Magician (fantasy) Norse mythology Magic item Quest Occult detective Horror Media Comics Films list Magazines Television programs Video games Subgenres Body Goosebumps Lovecraftian Mass hysteria Psychological Splatterpunk Queer Urban legend Tropes Gargoyle Vampires list Werewolves General Authors of color Gender Japanese authors Sexuality Homosexuality Reproduction and pregnancy Women Related Science fantasy Fantastique Magic realism Slipstream Techno-thriller Portal Category v t e Witchcraft and magic Types African witchcraft Witch smeller Asian witchcraft Kulam Australasian witchcraft Makutu European witchcraft Akelarre Benandanti Chaos magic Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva White witch Witch-cult hypothesis Latin American witchcraft Warlock Wicca Witch doctor Practices Animism Black magic Coven Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Flying ointment Goetia Gray magic Jinn Love magic Magic circle Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Poppet Potions Shamanism Black shamanism Yellow shamanism Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Witch ball Witch's ladder Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Broom besom Cloak of invisibility Love charm Magic carpet Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Talisman Fulu Yansheng Coin Wand Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Dayan Drude Elbow witch Huld Kalku Hecate Circe Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Sea witch Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witch of Endor Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Related Witch (word) Witch-hunt accusations against children Witchcraft in Anglo-Saxon England Witchcraft in early modern Britain Witchcraft in Ghana Witchcraft in Italy Witches in fiction