For the musical group, see Magic System. This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline. Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or deleted. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Contemporary fantasy Comedy Creatures Fantastic Fantastique Fantasy of manners History Historical fantasy Lovecraftian horror Magic Magic system Magician Races Religious themes Sources Tropes Worlds Subgenres Bangsian fantasy‎ Dark fantasy‎ Dieselpunk‎ Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairy tales‎ Gaslamp fantasy Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction‎ Grimdark Hard fantasy Heroic fantasy High fantasy‎ Historical fantasy‎ Isekai Kaiju‎ LitRPG Low fantasy Magic realism‎ Magical girl‎ Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Romantic fantasy‎ Science fantasy‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Steampunk‎ Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban fantasy‎ Weird fiction‎ Weird West‎ Wuxia‎ Fandom Harry Potter fandom Tolkien fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e A magic system, which might also be referred to as a magical system, is a set of rules that regulate the magical effects that can be produced in a fictional setting.[1] Rules define all games, but magic systems have grown elaborate in role-playing games and video games because of the storage capacity of supporting literature and software respectively. There are positive feedbacks between the need to balance the game rules and the proliferation of game elements. A common feature of magical systems is either abide by its own environmental or physical law of nature, or use a method of limiting both the quantity and quality of spells that can be cast by a magic user. Contents 1 Magic points 2 Skill-limited 3 Spell slots 4 Hybrid systems 5 Hard and soft magic systems 6 List of specific examples 7 See also 8 References Magic points[edit] Main article: Magic (gaming) A magic point, also known as a mana point, is a unit of measure that indicates either or both the amount of magic that can be utilised by a user, and the amount of energy that they can harness to perform magic. Magic points are often abbreviated to MP, and a magic point system is the most common method used to regulate and thus limit the number of spells that can be cast by a magical individual. Such a system provides magic users a specific amount of MP, and each spell causes a specific number of magic points to be consumed upon being cast. Many systems that use magic points assign a magic user a maximum number of magic points that he can have at any one time, which is different for each magic user. There is almost always a way to restore lost magic points, usually by sleeping or drinking potions. Sometimes, even consuming certain kinds of food items may result in the replenishment of magic points.[2][3][4] A few systems that use magic points do not have a maximum number that may be stored, but instead make it more difficult to recover or gain new magic points. Examples of magic points limited systems include Rolemaster, High Adventure Role Playing, GURPS, and Tunnels & Trolls. Skill-limited[edit] Main article: Statistic (role-playing games) § Skills A skill-limited magic system breaks the spells down into a number of skills. To perform skills usually requires skill checks: a dice roll, modified by character statistics. The more difficult the magical effect, the higher the difficulty of the die roll. Such systems are often limited by an increase in the difficulty of the Skill roll based upon the number of spells in a certain time period that have already been cast. It is common in skill-limited systems for a spellcaster to be able to combine multiple magical skills to perform effects not covered by the skills given. Typically, such combinations are more difficult than the basic uses of the Skills. Examples of skill-limited systems include Talislanta and Ars Magica. Spell slots[edit] A magic system that is limited by a number of spell slots will give a spellcaster a certain number of spells per day that may be cast. These spells may be divided by level, or limited to certain types of spells. When all of a spellcaster's slots are used up, the caster is no longer able to perform magic until steps are taken (usually sleeping and re-studying the spells) to recover the spell slots. This mechanic originated out of the Vancian magic system where "the number of memorized spells is strictly limited by the magician's memory capacity in proportion to the spells' difficulty levels, effectively granting a number of spell slots".[5]:273 Spell-slot systems often employ a rationale that the spell is forgotten when cast,[5]:240 or that the caster has a finite supply of the ingredients required to cast the spell. In the first case, the spellcaster must re-memorize the spell from a source of such, typically a grimoire. In the second case, the caster must hunt up new ingredients and prepare the equipment needed to cast the spell. For example, Dungeons & Dragons simplified Jack Vance's formula "to a number of spell slots scaling with the player character's level".[5]:274 HackMaster also uses a spell-slot system. Hybrid systems[edit] Many magic systems combine features of two or all three of the above. As an example, Mage: The Ascension uses a skill-limited system that may be augmented by spending quintessence to lower the difficulty of a magical skill roll. Rolemaster employs a spell-point system, but includes devices called spell adders, that grant additional spell shots with no associated spell-point cost. Ars Magica uses a skill based system, but a mage can only cast so many spells before becoming too fatigued to continue. High Adventure Role Playing also uses a hybrid system between the magic point system and the skill system, and to some extent the spell slot version, which requires a skill roll based on the strength of the spell effect limiting the total number of spells cast in a day by a magic cost system with the caster having a certain set of magic points available each day. As in Rolemaster there are item that can reduce the magic point cost for spell as well as item like spell adders that allow extra spells to be cast without the expenditure of magic points. Hard and soft magic systems[edit] Main article: Hard and soft magic systems Hard and Soft magic systems are terms coined by author Brandon Sanderson. A "hard magic system" is a magic system that uses well explained rules and limitations. A "soft magic system" is a magic system that uses rules that are not well explained.[6] List of specific examples[edit] Magic of Dungeons & Dragons consists of spells and magic systems used in the settings of the role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons (D&D). Jack Vance's Dying Earth books provided the model for the magic system of Dungeons & Dragons, with its ideas of magic-users memorizing spells, casting them and forgetting them.[7]:383 Tunnels & Trolls introduced a magic system full of silly (and humorous) names like "Take That You Fiend!" and "Too Bad Toxin".[7]:35 Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay had a simplistic magic system and Games Workshop long promised a "Realms of Sorcery" book to correct this problem, but they rejected the complete manuscript they received from Ken Rolston.[7]:49 Hogshead Publishing ultimately published Realms of Sorcery (2001), which finally updated the rushed magic system in the Warhammer rulebook.[7]:305 The magic system of Nephilim was thematic but required complex calculations.[7]:92 Middle-earth Role Playing used a magic system based on Spell Law from Rolemaster.[7]:135 Palladium Fantasy Role-Playing Game featured a revised magic system from The Journey (1982).[7]:157 Beyond the Supernatural debuted Palladium's new Potential Psychic Energy (PPE) magic system as well as a system of ley-line based-geomancy.[7]:159 The second edition of HârnMaster was a simplified version of the game that extracted out the magic systems into Hârnmaster Magic (1997) and Hârnmaster Religion (1998).[7]:183 Changeling: The Dreaming's original magic system used "Cantrip Cards" which were sold in collectible packs.[7]:218 For the magic system of Ars Magica, all magic is based on five techniques and ten forms, and by combining those two elements (e.g., as "Creo Ignem", or Create Fire) a wizard could generate any type of spell.[7]:233 A Magical Medley (1997) included a collection of FUDGE magic systems.[7]:320 Demon City Shinjuku (2000) advanced the magic system of Big Eyes, Small Mouth.[7]:336 The magic system of Sovereign Stone expanded the game's dice-rolling system; magic could take some time to cast, so each turn a magician accumulated points toward a total until the spell finally went off.[7]:352 The Encyclopaedia Arcane series of alternative magic systems began with Demonology: The Dark Road (2001), Mongoose Publishing's first perfect-bound 64-page book.[7]:394 Mongoose's RuneQuest (2006) included a new rune magic system that required characters to quest after physical runes.[7]:399 The Allomancy system from Mistborn by Brandon Sanderson.[8] Street Magic (2006) expanded the magic system of fourth edition Shadowrun.[7]:435 Stormlight. A magic system from the book series The Stormlight Archive by Brandon Sanderson. [9] See also[edit] Science fantasy Hard fantasy References[edit] ^ The Craft of Game Systems: General Guidelines - Gamasutra ^ Meylan, Nicolas (2017). "The Physics of Mana: From Substance to Unit". Mana: A History of a Western Category. Leiden: BRILL. pp. 127–147. ISBN 978-90-04-34870-7. OCLC 982526076. ^ "The History of Mana: How an Austronesian Concept Became a Video Game Mechanic", June 17, 2014, Alex Golub, Assistant Professor of Anthropology, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. ^ Perry, Jim (2009-06-23). RPG Programming with XNA Game Studio 3.0. Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 404. ISBN 978-1449631505. Retrieved 2014-12-09. ^ a b c Howard, Jeff (2014). Game Magic: A Designer's Guide to Magic Systems in Theory and Practice. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis. ISBN 978-1-4665-6787-0. OCLC 878262785. ^ Zummaraga, Alfredo (2007-02-20). "Sanderson's First Law". Brandon Sanderson. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Appelcline, Shannon (2013). Designers & Dungeons. Mongoose Publishing. ISBN 9781907702587. ^ Cahill, Martin (2015-06-17). "Learn About the Many Magic Systems of Brandon Sanderson". Tor.com. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ Cahill, Martin (2015-06-17). "Learn About the Many Magic Systems of Brandon Sanderson". Tor.com. Retrieved 2021-02-15. v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category