Historical region in Italy Magna Graecia Μεγάλη Ελλάς Historical region   Northwestern   Achaean   Doric   Ionian Present status  Italy Magna Graecia (/ˌmæɡnə ˈɡriːsjə, ˈɡriːʃə/, US: /ˌmæɡnə ˈɡreɪʃə/; Latin meaning "Greater Greece", Ancient Greek: Μεγάλη Ἑλλάς, Megálē Hellás, Italian: Magna Grecia) was the name given by the Romans to the coastal areas of Southern Italy in the present-day regions of Campania, Apulia, Basilicata, Calabria and Sicily; these regions were extensively populated by Greek settlers.[1] The settlers who began arriving in the 8th century BC brought with them their Hellenic civilization which left a lasting imprint on Italy such as in the culture of ancient Rome. They also influenced the native peoples, especially the Sicilian Sicels, who became hellenised after they adopted the Greek culture as their own. The term Magna Graecia first appears in Polybius' Histories.[2][3] The Roman poet Ovid notably referred to the south of Italy as such in his poem Fasti. Contents 1 Antiquity 1.1 List of Hellenic Poleis in Italy 1.2 List of Hellenic Poleis in Sicily 2 Middle Ages 3 Modern Italy 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Antiquity[edit] Main article: Colonies in antiquity § Greek colonies Further information: Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul According to Strabo's Geographica, the colonization of Magna Graecia had already begun by the time of the Trojan War and lasted for several centuries.[4] In the 8th and 7th century BC, due to demographic crises (famine, overcrowding, etc.), stasis, a developing need for new commercial outlets and ports, and expulsion from their homeland after wars, Greeks began to settle in southern Italy.[5] Colonies began to be established all over the Mediterranean and Black Seas (with the exception of Northwestern Africa, in the sphere of influence of Carthage), including in Sicily and the southern part of the Italian Peninsula. The Romans called this area Magna Graecia (Latin for "Greater Greece") since it was so densely inhabited by the Greeks. Ancient geographers differed on whether the term included Sicily or merely Apulia, Campania and Calabria, Strabo being the most prominent advocate of the wider definitions.[citation needed] With colonization, Greek culture was exported to Italy in its dialects of the Ancient Greek language, its religious rites and its traditions of the independent polis. An original Hellenic civilization soon developed and later interacted with the native Italic civilisations. The most important cultural transplant was the Chalcidean/Cumaean variety of the Greek alphabet, which was adopted by the Etruscans; the Old Italic alphabet subsequently evolved into the Latin alphabet, which became the most widely used alphabet in the world. These Hellenic colonies became very rich and powerful, and some still stand today such as Neapolis ("New City", now Naples), Syracuse, Akragas (Agrigento), Taras (Taranto), Rhegion (Reggio Calabria), or Kroton (Crotone).[citation needed] The first Greek city to be absorbed into the Roman Republic was Neapolis in 327 BC.[6] The other Greek cities in Italy followed during the Samnite Wars and the Pyrrhic War; Taras was the last to fall in 272. Sicily was conquered by Rome during the First Punic War. Only Syracuse remained independent until 212, because its king Hiero II was a devoted ally of the Romans. His grandson Hieronymus however made an alliance with Hannibal, which prompted the Romans to besiege the city, which fell in 212, despite the machines of Archimedes as Proclus writes in his commentary on Euclid's Elements Archimedes constructed weapons functioning with compressed air, with weights and counterweights as Ctesibius and Hero explain.[7] Greek temples of Paestum, Campania Mosaic from Caulonia, Calabria Temple of Hera in Metaponto, Basilicata The Temple of Concordia, Akragas, Sicily Milo of Croton Archimedes of Syracuse Archytas of Tarentum 5th century BC Greek coins of Tarentum The goddess Nike riding on a two-horse chariot, Apulian patera (tray), 4th century BC. List of Hellenic Poleis in Italy[edit] This is a list of the 22 poleis (city states) in Italy, according to Mogens Herman Hansen.[8] It does not list all the Hellenic settlements, only those organised around a polis structure. Ancient name(s) Location Modern name(s) Foundation date Mother city Founder(s) Herakleia (Lucania) Basilicata (abandoned) 433–432 BC Taras (and Thourioi) Un­known Hipponion Calabria Vibo Valentia late 7th century BC Lokroi Epizephiroi Un­known Hyele, or Elea, Velia (Roman name) Campania (abandoned) c.540–535 BC Phokaia, Massalia Refugees from Alalie Kaulonia Calabria (abandoned) 7th century BC Kroton Typhon of Aigion Kroton Calabria Crotone 709–708 BC Rhypes, Achaia Myscellus Kyme, Cumae (Roman name) Campania (abandoned) c.750–725 BC Chalkis and Eretria Hippokles of Euboian Kyme and Megasthenes of Chalkis Laos Calabria (abandoned) before 510 BC Sybaris Refugees from Sybaris Lokroi (Epizephiroi) Calabria Locri early 7th century BC Lokris Un­known Medma Calabria (abandoned) 7th century BC Lokroi Epizephiroi Un­known Metapontion Basilicata Metaponto c. 630 BC Achaia Leukippos of Achaia Metauros Calabria Gioia Tauro 7th century BC Zankle (or possibly Lokroi Epizephiroi) Un­known Neapolis Campania Naples c. 470 BC Kyme Un­known Pithekoussai Campania Ischia 8th century BC Chalkis and Eretria Un­known Poseidonia, Paestum (Roman name) Campania (abandoned) c. 600 BC Sybaris (and perhaps Troizen) Un­known Pyxous Campania Policastro Bussentino 471–470 BC Rhegion and Messena Mikythos, tyrant of Rhegion and Messena Rhegion Calabria Reggio Calabria 8th century BC Chalkis (with Zankle and Messenian refugees) Antimnestos of Zankle (or perhaps Artimedes of Chalkis) Siris Basilicata (abandoned) c. 660 BC (or c. 700 BC) Kolophon Refugees from Kolophon Sybaris Calabria Sibari 721–720 (or 709–708) BC Achaia and Troizen Is of Helike Taras Apulia Taranto c. 706 BC Sparta Phalanthos and the Partheniai Temesa unknown, but in Calabria (abandoned) no Greek founder (Ausones who became Hellenised) Terina Calabria (abandoned) before 460 BC, perhaps c. 510 BC Kroton Un­known Thourioi Calabria (abandoned) 446 and 444–443 BC Athens and many other cities Lampon and Xenokrates of Athens List of Hellenic Poleis in Sicily[edit] This is a list of the 46 poleis (city states) in Sicily, according to Mogens Herman Hansen.[9] It does not list all the Hellenic settlements, only those organised around a polis structure. Ancient name(s) Location Modern name(s) Foundation date Mother city Founder(s) Abakainon Metropolitan City of Messina (abandoned) no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Adranon Metropolitan City of Catania Adrano c.400 BC Syrakousai Dionysios I Agyrion Province of Enna Agira no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Aitna Metropolitan City of Catania on the site of Katane 476 BC Syrakousai Hieron Akragas Province of Agrigento Agrigento c.580 BC Gela Aristonoos and Pystilos Akrai Province of Syracuse near Palazzolo Acreide 664 BC Syrakousai Un­known Alaisa Metropolitan City of Messina Tusa 403–402 BC Herbita Archonides of Herbita Alontion, Haluntium (Roman name) Metropolitan City of Messina San Marco d’Alunzio no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Apollonia Metropolitan City of Messina Monte Vecchio near San Fratello 405–367 BC Syrakousai Possibly Dionysios I Engyon Province of Enna Troina? no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Euboia Metropolitan City of Catania Licodia Eubea 7th century BC, perhaps late 8th century BC Leontinoi Un­known Galeria Un­known (abandoned) no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Gela Province of Caltanissetta Gela 689–688 BC Rhodes (Lindos), Cretans Antiphemos of Rhodes and Entimos the Cretan Heloron Province of Syracuse (abandoned) Un­known Syrakousai Un­known Henna Province of Enna Enna no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Herakleia Minoa Province of Agrigento Cattolica Eraclea after 628 BC Selinous, Sparta refounded by Euryleon after c.510 BC Herakleia unlocated in Western Sicily (abandoned) c.510 BC Sparta Dorieus Herbessos Province of Enna Montagna di Marzo? no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Herbita Un­known (abandoned) no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Himera Province of Palermo Termini Imerese 648 BC Zankle, exiles from Syrakousai Eukleides, Simos and Sakon Hippana Province of Palermo Monte dei Cavalli no Greek founder (indigenous settlement that became Hellenised) Imachara Metropolitan City of Catania Mendolito no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Kallipolis Un­known (abandoned) late 8th century BC Naxos (Sicily) Un­known Kamarina Province of Ragusa Santa Croce Camerina c.598 BC Syrakousai, Korinth Daskon of Syracuse and Menekolos of Corinth Kasmenai Province of Syracuse (abandoned) 644–643 BC Syrakousai Un­known Katane Metropolitan City of Catania Catania 729 BC Naxos (Sicily) Euarchos Kentoripa Province of Enna Centuripe no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Kephaloidion Province of Palermo Cefalù no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Leontinoi Province of Syracuse Lentini 729 BC Naxos (Sicily) Theokles? Lipara Metropolitan City of Messina Lipari 580–576 BC Knidos, Rhodes Pentathlos, Gorgos, Thestor and Epithersides Longane Metropolitan City of Messina near Rodì Milici no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Megara Hyblaea Province of Syracuse Augusta 728 BC Megara Nisaia Theokles? Morgantina Province of Enna near Aidone no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Mylai Metropolitan City of Messina Milazzo 700 BC? Zankle Un­known Nakone Un­known (abandoned) no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Naxos Metropolitan City of Messina Giardini Naxos 735–734 BC Chalkis, Naxos (Cyclades) Theokles Petra Un­known (abandoned) no Greek founder (indigenous settlement that became Hellenised) Piakos Metropolitan City of Catania Mendolito? no Greek founder (Sicels who became Hellenised) Selinous Province of Trapani Marinella di Selinunte 628–627 BC Megara Hyblaea Pammilos Sileraioi Un­known (abandoned) no Greek founder (indigenous settlement that became Hellenised) Stielanaioi Metropolitan City of Catania? (abandoned) no Greek founder (indigenous settlement that became Hellenised) Syrakousai Province of Syracuse Syracuse 733 BC Korinth Archias of Korinth Tauromenion Metropolitan City of Catania Taormina 392 BC Syrakousai perhaps Dionysios I Tyndaris Metropolitan City of Messina Tindari 396 BC Syrakousai Dionysios I Tyrrhenoi Province of Palermo? Alimena? no Greek founder (indigenous settlement that became Hellenised) Zankle/Messana Metropolitan City of Messina Messina c.730 Chalkis, Kyme Perieres of Kyme and Krataimenes of Chalkis Middle Ages[edit] Part of a series on the History of Greece Neolithic Greece Neolithic Greece Greek Bronze Age Helladic Cycladic Minoan Mycenaean Ancient Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Medieval Greece Byzantine Greece Frankish and Latin states Early modern Greece Venetian Crete Venetian Ionian Islands Ottoman Greece Modern Greece Septinsular Republic War of Independence First Hellenic Republic Kingdom of Greece National Schism Second Hellenic Republic 4th of August Regime Axis occupation (Collaborationist regime, Free Greece) Civil War Military Junta Third Hellenic Republic History by topic Art Constitution Economy Military Names  Greece portal v t e During the Early Middle Ages, following the disastrous Gothic War, new waves of Byzantine Christian Greeks may have come to Southern Italy from Greece and Asia Minor, as Southern Italy remained loosely governed by the Eastern Roman Empire. Although possible, the archaeological evidence shows no trace of new arrivals of Greek peoples, only a division between barbarian newcomers, and Greco-Roman locals. The iconoclast emperor Leo III appropriated lands that had been granted to the Papacy in southern Italy and the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire continued to govern the area in the form of the Catapanate of Italy (965 -1071) through the Middle Ages, well after northern, central and the northern regions of southern Italy fell to the Lombards.[10] At the time of the Normans' late medieval conquest of southern Italy and Sicily (in the late 12th century), the Salento peninsula (the "heel" of Italy), up to one third of Sicily (concentrated in the Val Demone), and much of Calabria and Lucania were still largely Greek speaking. Some regions of southern Italy experienced demographic shifts as Greeks began to migrate northwards in significant numbers from regions further south. One such region was Cilento, which came to have a Greek speaking majority due to said migrations.[11][12][13] At this time the language had evolved into medieval Greek, also known as Byzantine Greek, and its speakers were known as Byzantine Greeks. The resultant fusion of local Byzantine Greek culture with Norman and Arab culture (from the Arab occupation of Sicily) gave rise to Norman-Arab-Byzantine culture on Sicily. A remnant of this influence can be found in the survival of the Greek language in some villages of the above mentioned Salento peninsula (the "heel" of Italy). This living dialact of Greek, known locally as Griko, is found in the Italian regions of Calabria and Apulia. Griko is considered by linguistics to be a descendant of Byzantine Greek, which had been the majority language of Salento through the Middle Ages, combining also some ancient Doric and local romance elements. There is a rich oral tradition and Griko folklore, limited now but once numerous, to around 30,000 people, most of them having abandoned their language in favor of Italian or the local romance dialect. Some scholars, such as Gerhard Rohlfs, argue that the origins of Griko may ultimately be traced to the colonies of Magna Graecia.[14] Modern Italy[edit] Although the last Greek inhabitants of Southern Italy were entirely Latinized during the Middle Ages, pockets of Greek culture and language remained and survived into modernity partly because of continuous migration between southern Italy and the Greek mainland. One example is the Griko people in Apulia, some of whom still maintain their Greek language and customs. Their working practices have been passed down through generations through storytelling and allowing the observation of work.[15] The Italian parliament recognizes the Griko people as an ethnolinguistic minority under the official name of Minoranze linguistiche Grike dell'Etnia Griko-Calabrese e Salentina.[16] Greek nobles started taking refuge in Italy following the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.[17] Greeks returned to the region in the 16th and 17th centuries in reaction to the conquest of the Peloponnese by the Ottoman Empire. Especially after the end of the Siege of Coron (1534), large numbers of Greeks took refuge in the areas of Calabria, Salento and Sicily. Greeks from Coroni, the so-called Coronians, were nobles, who brought with them substantial movable property. They were granted special privileges and tax exemptions.[citation needed] Other Greeks who moved to Italy came from the Mani Peninsula of the Peloponnese. The Maniots (their name originating from the Greek word mania)[18] were known for their proud military traditions and for their bloody vendettas, many of which still continue today.[19] Another group of Maniot Greeks moved to Corsica in the 17th century under the protection of the Republic of Genoa.[20] See also[edit] Ancient Greek dialects Greek coinage of Italy and Sicily Greeks in Italy Italiotes Graia Graïke Graecus Griko people Griko language Hellenic civilization Names of the Greeks References[edit] ^ Henry Fanshawe Tozer (30 October 2014). A History of Ancient Geography. Cambridge University Press. p. 43. ISBN 978-1-108-07875-7. ^ Polybius, ii. 39. ^ A. J. Graham, "The colonial expansion of Greece", in John Boardman et al., Cambridge Ancient History, vol. III, part 3, p. 94. ^ Strabo. "I, Section I". Geographica (in Greek). VI. ^ Luca Cerchiai; Lorena Jannelli; Fausto Longo (2004). The Greek Cities of Magna Graecia and Sicily. Getty Publications. pp. 14–18. ISBN 978-0-89236-751-1. ^ Heitland, William Emerton (1911). A Short History of the Roman Republic. The University Press. pp. 72. Roman Republic Neapolis in 327 BC. ^ Proclus Phil., In primum Euclidis elementorum librum commentarii Page 41, line 7, Πρὸς δὴ ταύταις ἡ μηχανικὴ καλουμένη τῆς περὶ τὰ αἰσθητὰ καὶ τὰ ἔνυλα πραγματείας μέρος ὑπάρχουσα, ὑπὸ δὲ ταύτην ἥ τε ὀργανοποιϊκὴ τῶν κατὰ πόλεμον ἐπιτηδείων ὀργάνων, οἷα δὴ καὶ Ἀρχιμήδης λέγεται κατασκευάσαι τῶν πολεμούντων τὴν Συράκουσαν ἀμυντικὰ ὄργανα, καὶ ἡ θαυματοποιϊκὴ τὰ μὲν διὰ πνῶν φιλοτεχνοῦσα, ὥσπερ καὶ Κτησίβιος καὶ Ἥρων πραγματεύονται, τὰ δὲ διὰ ῥοπῶν, ὧν τῆς μὲν κινήσεως τὴν ἀνισορροπίαν αἰτιατέον, τῆς δὲ στάσεως τὴν ἰσορροπίαν, ὥσπερ καὶ ὁ Τίμαιος διώρισεν, τὰ δὲ διὰ νεύρων καὶ σπάρτων ἐμψύχους ὁλκὰς καὶ κινήσεις ἀπομιμουμένων ^ Hansen & Nielsen (eds.), Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis, pp. 249–320. ^ Hansen & Nielsen (eds.), Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis, pp. 189–248. ^ Brown, T. S. (1979). "The Church of Ravenna and the Imperial Administration in the Seventh Century". The English Historical Review. 94 (370): 5. JSTOR 567155. ^ Loud, G. A. (2007). The Latin Church in Norman Italy. Cambridge University Press. p. 494. ISBN 978-0-521-25551-6. At the end of the twelfth century ... While in Apulia Greeks were in a majority – and indeed present in any numbers at all – only in the Salento peninsula in the extreme south, at the time of the conquest they had an overwhelming preponderance in Lucania and central and southern Calabria, as well as comprising anything up to a third of the population of Sicily, concentrated especially in the north-east of the island, the Val Demone. ^ Oldfield, Paul (2014). Sanctity and Pilgrimage in Medieval Southern Italy, 1000-1200. Cambridge University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-107-00028-5. “However, the Byzantine revival of the tenth century generated a concomitant process Hellenization, while Muslim raids in southern Calabria, and instability in Sicily, may also have displaced Greek Christians further north on the mainland. Consequently, zones in northern Calabria, Lucania and central Apulia which were reintegrated into Byzantine control also experienced demographic shifts, and the increasing establishment of immigrant Greek communities. These zones also acted as springboards for Greek migration further north, into regions such as the Cilento and areas around Salerno, which had never been under Byzantine control. ^ Kleinhenz, Christopher (2004). Medieval Italy: an encyclopedia, Volume 1. Routledge. pp. 444–445. ISBN 978-0-415-93930-0. ISBN 0-415-93930-5" "In Lucania (northern Calabria, Basilicata, and southernmost portion of today's Campania) ... From the late ninth century into the eleventh, Greek-speaking populations and Byzantine temporal power advanced, in stages but by no means always in tandem, out of southern Calabria and the lower Salentine peninsula across Lucania and through much of Apulia as well. By the early eleventh century, Greek settlement had radiated northward and had reached the interior of the Cilento, deep in Salernitan territory. Parts of the central and north-western Salento, recovered early, came to have a Greek majority through immigration, as did parts of Lucania. ^ Rohlfs, Gerhard (1967). "Greek Remnants in Southern Italy". The Classical Journal. 62 (4): 164–9. JSTOR 3295569. ^ Rocco Agrifoglio (29 August 2015). Knowledge Preservation Through Community of Practice: Theoretical Issues and Empirical Evidence. Springer. p. 49. ISBN 978-3-319-22234-9. ^ Lapo Mola; Ferdinando Pennarola; Stefano Za (16 October 2014). From Information to Smart Society: Environment, Politics and Economics. Springer. p. 108. ISBN 978-3-319-09450-2. ^ Nanō Chatzēdakē; Museo Correr (1993). From Candia to Venice: Greek icons in Italy, 15th-16th centuries : Museo Correr, Venice, 17 September-30 October, 1993. Foundation for Hellenic Culture. p. 18. ^ Greece. Lonely Planet. 2008. p. 204. ^ Time. Time Incorporated. 1960. p. 4. ^ Greece. Michelin Tyre. 1991. p. 142. ISBN 978-2-06-701520-3. Sources[edit] Polyxeni Adam-Veleni and Dimitra Tsangari (editors), Greek colonisation: New data, current approaches; Proceedings of the scientific meeting held in Thessaloniki (6 February 2015), Athens, Alpha Bank, 2015. Michael J. Bennett, Aaron J. Paul, Mario Iozzo, & Bruce M. White, Magna Graecia: Greek Art From South Italy and Sicily, Cleveland, OH, Cleveland Museum of Art, 2002. John Boardman, N. G. L. Hammond (editors), The Cambridge Ancient History, vol. III, part 3, The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Sixth Centuries B.C., Cambridge University Press, 1982. Giovanni Casadio & Patricia A. Johnston, Mystic Cults In Magna Graecia, Austin, University of Texas Press, 2009. Lucia Cerchiai, Lorenna Jannelli, & Fausto Longo (editors), The Greek cities of Magna Graecia and Sicily, Photography by Mark E. Smith, Los Angeles, J. Paul Getty Museum, 2004. ISBN 0-89236-751-2 Giovanna Ceserani, Italy's Lost Greece: Magna Graecia and the Making of Modern Archaeology, New York, Oxford University Press, 2012. T. J. Dunbabin, The Western Greeks, 1948. M. Gualtieri, Fourth Century B.C. Magna Graecia: A Case Study, Jonsered, Sweden, P. Åströms, 1993. Mogens Herman Hansen & Thomas Heine Nielsen, An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis, Oxford University Press, 2004. R. Ross Holloway, Art and Coinage In Magna Graecia, Bellinzona, Edizioni arte e moneta, 1978. Margaret Ellen Mayo, The Art of South Italy: Vases From Magna Graecia, Richmond, Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, 1982. Giovanni Pugliese Carratelli, The Greek World: Art and Civilization In Magna Graecia and Sicily, New York: Rizzoli, 1996. ———— (editor), The Western Greeks: Catalog of an exhibition held in the Palazzo Grassi, Venice, March–Dec., 1996, Milan, Bompiani, 1976. William Smith, "Magna Graecia." In Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography, 1854. A. G. Woodhead, The Greeks in the West, 1962. Günther Zuntz, Persephone: Three Essays On Religion and Thought In Magna Graecia, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1971. External links[edit] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Magna Graecia . Library resources about Magna Graecia Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Map. Ancient Coins. David Willey. Italy rediscovers Greek heritage. BBC News. 21 June 2005, 17:19 GMT 18:19 UK. Gaze On The Sea. Salentine Peninsula, Greece and Greater Greece. (in Italian, Greek and English) Oriamu pisulina. Traditional Griko song performed by Ghetonia. Kalinifta. Traditional Griko song performed by amateur local group. Second Interdisciplinary Symposium on the Hellenic Heritage of Southern Italy. Archaeological Institute of America (AIA). June 11, 2015. (Dates: Monday, May 30, 2016 to Thursday, June 2, 2016.) Sergio Tofanelli et al. The Greeks in the West: genetic signatures of the Hellenic colonisation in southern Italy and Sicily. European Journal of Human Genetics, (15 July 2015). v t e Italy articles History Chronology Prehistory Italic peoples Ancient peoples of Italy Pre-Nuragic Sardinia Nuragic peoples Etruscan civilization Nuragic civilization Phoenician/Carthaginian colonies Magna Graecia Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines the Italian city-states the maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Unification Revolutions of 1820 Revolutions of 1830 Revolutions of 1848 Sicilian revolution of 1848 First War of Independence Crimean War Second War of Independence Expedition of the Thousand Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fascist Italy World War II Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Republic Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Great Recession European migrant crisis Coronavirus pandemic By topic Citizenship Currency Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Military Music Railways Geography Geographical region Peninsula Northern Northwest Northeast Central Southern South Insular Climate Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanology Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes National parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Judiciary Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties President (List) Prime Minister (List) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Renamed municipalities Fused municipalities Economy Economic history Regions by GDP Automotive industry Banking Central Bank Companies Energy Government debt Science and technology Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transportation Welfare Society Corruption Crime Organized crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Immigration LGBT rights Public administration Religion Social class Terrorism Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Architecture Aristocracy Art Castles Cinema Cuisine Cultural icons Orders, decorations, and medals Design Fashion Folklore Italophilia Italophobia Inventions and discoveries Languages Italian Regional Dialects Literature Media Monuments Music Mythology National symbols Anthem Cockade Colours Emblem Flag Regions Monument Personification Tree Italians People Philosophy Public holidays Sculpture Sport Traditions World Heritage Sites  Italy portal Category v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean civilization Greek Dark Ages Archaic period Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Syracuse Cyrene Alexandria Antioch Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Epirus (ancient state) Macedonia (ancient kingdom) Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Politics Boule Koinon Proxeny Tagus Tyrant Amphictyonic League Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Apella Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Agesilaus II Agis II Alcibiades Alexander the Great Aratus Archimedes Aspasia Demosthenes Epaminondas Euclid Hipparchus Hippocrates Leonidas Lycurgus Lysander Milo of Croton Miltiades Pausanias Pericles Philip of Macedon Philopoemen Praxiteles Ptolemy Pyrrhus Solon Themistocles Groups Philosophers Playwrights Poets Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Festivals Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Greco-Buddhist art Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology mythological figures Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Greco-Buddhism Greco-Buddhist monasticism Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation South Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Sardinia Olbia Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene (Apollonia) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea north coast Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Eupatoria Gorgippia Hermonassa Kepoi Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Panticapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake Akra Black Sea south coast Dionysopolis Odessos Anchialos Mesambria Apollonia Salmydessus Heraclea Tium Sesamus Cytorus Abonoteichos Sinope Zaliche Amisos Oinòe Polemonion Thèrmae Cotyora Kerasous Tripolis Trapezous Rhizos Athina Bathus Phasis Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Campania Provinces Avellino Benevento Caserta Naples Salerno Places Amalfi Coast Cilento Irpinia Islands Samnium Sorrentine Peninsula Terra di Lavoro Vallo di Diano Cities, towns and villages List of communes History Kingdom of Naples Monarchs Viceroys Two Sicilies Magna Graecia Samnite Wars Italia province Duchy of Naples Duchy of Benevento Principality of Capua Principality of Salerno Duchy of Amalfi Duchy of Sorrento Duchy of Apulia and Calabria Ancient Campania Politics and government Elections in Campania List of Presidents of Campania Culture Demographics Geography Music Flag Coat of arms Categories Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125