Type of Royal Naval warship, from 16th to 19th century This article is about a type of warship. For other uses, see Man of war (disambiguation) and Man o' war (disambiguation). Not to be confused with Man-at-arms. A Dutch man-of-war firing a salute. The Cannon Shot, painting by Willem van de Velde the Younger. The man-of-war (pl. men-of-war; also man-o'-war, or simply man)[1][2] was a Royal Navy expression for a powerful warship or frigate from the 16th to the 19th century. Although the term never acquired a specific meaning, it was usually reserved for a ship armed with cannon and propelled primarily by sails, as opposed to a galley which is propelled primarily by oars. Contents 1 Description 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Description[edit] The man-of-war was developed in Portugal in the early 15th century from earlier roundships with the addition of a second mast to form the carrack. The 16th century saw the carrack evolve into the galleon and then the ship of the line. The evolution of the term has been given thus: Man-of-war. "A phrase applied to a line of battle ship, contrary to the usual rule in the English language by which all ships are feminine. It probably arose in the following manner: 'Men of war' were heavily armed soldiers. A ship full of them would be called a 'man-of-war ship.' In process of time the word 'ship' was discarded as unnecessary and there remained the phrase 'a man-of-war.'" — Talbot in Henry Fredrick Reddall Fact, fancy, and fable, 1892, p. 340 The man-of-war design developed by Sir John Hawkins, had three masts, each with three to four sails. The ship could be up to 60 metres long and could have up to 124 guns: four at the bow, eight at the stern, and 56 in each broadside. All these cannons required three gun decks to hold them, one more than any earlier ship. It had a maximum sailing speed of eight or nine knots. See also[edit] Portuguese man o' war, a jellyfish-like cnidarian so named because of its resemblance to a man-of-war ship at full sail Rating system of the Royal Navy, which classified warships into six "rates", a "first-rate" having the most armament, a "sixth-rate" the least Merchantman, a merchant ship East Indiaman, a ship of any of the East India Companies Man o' War, an American Thoroughbred References[edit] ^ "Man-of-war". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 3 December 2014. ^ "Definition of "man-of-war"". Collins English Dictionary. Retrieved 3 December 2014. External links[edit] Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Nautical References Project Gutenberg: The World of Waters Gallery of photos of men-of-war (Museo delle Navi, Bologna, Italy) v t e Types of sailing vessels and rigs Sailing rigs Bermuda rig Crab claw Fore-and-aft rig Gaff rig Gunter rig Junk rig Lateen rig Ljungström rig Lug rig Mast aft rig Pinisi rig Square rig Tanja rig By sail plan Barque Barquentine Brig Brigantine Catboat Cutter Full-rigged ship Jackass-barque Ketch Mistico Schooner Sloop Snow Yawl Multihull vessels ʻalia Amatasi Baurua Bigiw Camakau Catamaran Drua Guilalo Jukung Kaep Kalia Karakoa Kora kora Lakatoi Lanong Outrigger canoe Pahi Paraw Pentamaran Proa Quadrimaran Takia Tepukei Tipairua Tongiaki Trimaran Ungalawa Va'a-tele Vaka katea Vinta Wa Naval and merchant sailing ships and other vessels (by origin date) Ancient Balangay Boita Borobudur ship Dhow Galley Penteconter Bireme Trireme Quadriremes Tessarakonteres Dromon Junk Javanese Jong Lepa Mtepe Uru Post-classical Balinger Benawa Birlinn Cog Ghali Ghurab Hulk Knarr Koch Kondura Longship Malangbang Shitik Tongkang Zabra 15th c. Carrack Chinese treasure ship Caravel Hoy Lancaran Trabaccolo 16th c. Crommesteven Galiot Galleon Galleass Flyboat Fluyt Full-rigged pinnace Lorcha Man-of-war Patache Speronara Square-rigged caravel (round or de armada) Xebec 17th c. Bermuda sloop Corvette East Indiaman Frigate Galeas Koff Padewakang Pink Polacca Ship of the line 18th c. Bilander Chialoup Clipper (Baltimore Clipper) Gallivat Garay Grab Gundalow Lanong 74-gun Ship of the line Sloop-of-war Toop Trincadour 19th c. Blackwall frigate Down Easter Golekan Iron-hulled sailing ship Janggolan Lambo Leti leti Palari Tamar Windjammer 20th c. Montagu whaler Fishing vessels Bagan Bago Barca-longa Falkuša Felucca Fifie Gableboat Herring buss Jangada Jukung Lugger Masula Mayang Patorani Nordland Sixareen Sgoth Smack Tartane Well smack Yoal Recreational vessels Dinghy Ljungström sailboat Mast aft rig Pocket cruiser Sailing hydrofoil Sailing yacht Sportsboat Trailer sailer Wharrams Windsurfer Yacht Special terms Inflatable Lashed lug Razee Sewn Tall ship Treenailed ULDB Other Floating restaurant Bristol Channel Pilot Cutter Fusta Mersey flat Norfolk punt Norfolk wherry Pausik Pinnace (ship's boat) Pram Scow Thames sailing barge Wherry