This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (January 2017) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In Canadian folklore, the Manipogo is a lake monster said to live in Lake Manitoba, Manitoba, Canada. The creature was dubbed Manipogo in 1960, the name echoing British Columbia's Ogopogo.[1] There is also a Lake Winnipegosis sea monster called Winnepogo, thought possibly to be the same creature as the lakes are connected. The monster is described as being from 4 to 15 meters long.[2] It is described as "A long muddy-brown body with humps that show above the water, and a sheep-like head." There is a provincial park on the west shore of Lake Manitoba named Manipogo Provincial Park. St Laurent, a community on the south east shores of Lake Manitoba, holds a Manipogo festival the first week of March every year.[3] People have claimed to have seen the lake monster since the 1800s.[4] The local native population has legends of serpent-like creatures in Lake Manitoba going back hundreds of years. A group of seventeen witnesses, all reportedly strangers to one another, claimed to have spotted three Manipogos swimming together.[5] In the early 1960s, Professor James A. McLeod of the University of Manitoba investigated the creature by trying to locate its remains. If there is a breeding population in the lake, carcasses and bones should remain after death.[5] McLeod found none. Contents 1 Alleged sightings 2 Television 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Alleged sightings[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) 1909: Hudson's Bay Company fur trader Valentine McKay reports seeing a massive creature in Cedar Lake.[1] 1935: Timber inspector C. F. Ross and a friend saw the creature. On its head was a single horn and its head was small and flat. To them it looked very much like a dinosaur. 1948: C. P. Alric reported that some sort of creature rose six feet out of the lake and gave a "prehistoric type of dinosaur cry". 1957: Louis Belcher and Eddie Nipanik saw a giant serpent-like creature in the lake. 1962: Two fishermen, Richard Vincent and John Konefell, saw a large creature like a serpent or giant snake 60 yards away from their boat. 1960s: Around the 1960s, Mr. and Mrs. Stople saw a "reptile-like beast surfacing about thirty feet from their boat 1989: Sean Smith and family visiting from Minneapolis on a camping trip stayed at Shallow point off highway #6 on Lake Manitoba and saw what he described as 'many humps' in the lake about 80 feet off shore. 1997: Several reports by cross country campers from Quebec staying at Lundar Beach campground saw what appeared to be a large reptile head rise and fall in the water several hundred feet off shore. Swimmers were evacuated from the water; the head only appeared one time. It was dismissed as a floating log, but no log was seen afterwards. 2004: Commercial fisherman Keith Haden, originally from Newfoundland, reported several of his fishing nets on Lake Manitoba near the narrows one day to be torn up by what seemed like an ocean shark or killer whale. The fish that were in the nets were not nibbled on, but actually torn in half, by what seemed like huge bites. 2009: Several residents at Twin Lakes Beach reported seeing several humps a few hundred yards from their lake-front cottages. No photos were taken. 2011: Many sightings of several humps emerging and then submerging seen offshore at locations like Marshy Point, Scotch Bay, and Laurentia Beach by security personal patrolling flooded cottage and home areas. Television[edit] Manipogo was featured on an episode of the television documentary series Northern Mysteries. See also[edit] Turtle Lake Monster Memphre, said to live in Lake Memphremagog, Quebec Seelkee, said to live in the swamps of what is now Chilliwack, in British Columbia References[edit] ^ a b Edwards, Kyle (July 9, 2019). "Why Canadians have a thing for mythical lake monsters - Macleans.ca". www.macleans.ca. Retrieved 11 March 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Bernhardt, Darren (June 3, 2018). "Keep your camera handy: Stories of Manitoba lake monsters told for centuries but proof remains elusive". CBC News. Retrieved 11 March 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Blume, Michael. "Manipogo Festival in St. Laurent Sees Resurgence". PortageOnline.com. ^ "Manipogo Campground Map and Information" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 13, 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) (1.6 MB) ^ a b "Scientist to seek lake monster". Calgary Herald. August 18, 1961. Retrieved 11 March 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Lake Manitoba Narrows website Coordinates: 50°44′6″N 98°26′32″W﻿ / ﻿50.73500°N 98.44222°W﻿ / 50.73500; -98.44222