In heraldry, drapery tied to the helmet above the shield For the rockclimbing move, see Mantel (climbing). Mantling, purpure doubled or Red and white mantling on the coat of arms of the Hungarian Gutkeled clan. In heraldry, mantling or "lambrequin" (its name in French) is drapery tied to the helmet above the shield. In paper heraldry it is a depiction of the protective cloth covering (often of linen[1]) worn by knights from their helmets to stave off the elements, and, secondarily, to decrease the effects of sword-blows against the helmet in battle, from which it is usually shown tattered or cut to shreds; less often it is shown as an intact drape, principally in those cases where clergy use a helmet and mantling (to symbolise that, despite the perhaps contradictory presence of the helmet, they have not been involved in combat), although this is usually the artist's discretion and done for decorative rather than symbolic reasons. Generally, mantling is blazoned mantled x, doubled [lined] y; the cloth has two sides, one of a colour and the other of a metal. The mantling is usually in the main colours of the shield, or else in the livery colours that symbolize the entity bearing the arms, though there are exceptions, with occasional tinctures differing from these, or occasional examples in which the outside of the mantling is per pale of two colours[2] or both the inside and outside are per pale,[3] and even rarer examples of other divisions,[4] and there is a perhaps unique example in which the lining of the mantling is per pale of the two metals[5] or of the entire mantling being of a single tincture.[6] The mantling of the Black Loyalist Heritage Society[7] is a unique example in which the mantling is of two furs (ermines, lined ermine). There is also the unique example of the mantling of Bruce Douglas Bolton, which is tartan on the outside.[8] The Coat of Arms of Canada is mantled white and red, or argent doubled gules; furthermore, the current standard rendering of the Canadian arms has mantling in the shape of maple leaves. The arms of sovereigns are a common exception. The arms of the United Kingdom and those of Emperor Akihito of Japan are both or, lined ermine,[9] such a mantling often being held to be limited to sovereigns. Part of a series on Heraldic achievement External devices in addition to the central coat of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto  Heraldry portal v t e In the early days of the development of the crest, before the torse (wreath), crest coronets and chapeaux were developed, the crest often "continued into the mantling" if this was feasible (the clothes worn by a demi- human figure, or the fur of the animal, for instance, allowing or encouraging this). It still holds true frequently in Germany. There are rare examples where the mantling is blazoned to complement the armiger's coat of arms, mimicking the ordinaries and charges on the escutcheon. When charges occur, they are usually displayed as a semy.[10] See also[edit] Mantle and pavilion (heraldry) References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. ^ Encyclopædia Britannica - Mantling ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-28. Retrieved 2007-03-26.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Shares, National Infocommunications Service Company Limited by. "National and historical symbols of Hungary". www.nemzetijelkepek.hu. Retrieved 15 April 2018. ^ "Sitio oficial de Sutamarchan en Boyaca, Colombia". Archived from the original on 2012-07-14. Retrieved 2007-10-21. ^ "College of Arms: The Arms and Badge of Professor S. W. Haines". Archived from the original on 2010-03-09. Retrieved 2008-01-14. ^ "Russian Heraldry as It is /". Retrieved 2007-11-28. ^ "The Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges of Canada: Arms of the Black Loyalist Heritage Society". ^ "Register of Arms, Flags and Badges". Retrieved 10 November 2018. ^ Michon, Gerard. "Coat-of-arms of Heisi Tenno (Emperor Akihito) as Knight of the Garter". Numericana. Retrieved 15 April 2018. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2007-09-28. Retrieved 2007-03-26.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources