For other uses, see Saint Margaret (disambiguation). "Saint Margaret of Antioch" redirects here. For the painting, see Saint Margaret of Antioch (Zurbarán). Saint Margaret of Antioch Saint Marina the Great Martyr Saint Marina the Great Martyr. An illustration in her hagiography printed in Greece depicting her beating a demon with a hammer. Date on the picture: 1858. Virgin-Martyr and Vanquisher of Demons Born c. 289 Antioch of Pisidia Died c. 304 (aged 15) Feast 20 July (Catholic Church, Anglicanism,[1] Western Rite Orthodoxy) 17 July (Byzantine Christianity) Epip 23 (Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria) (Martyrdom) Hathor 23 (Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria) (Consecration of her Church) Attributes slain dragon (Western depictions) hammer, defeated demon (Eastern Orthodox depictions) Patronage childbirth, pregnant women, dying people, kidney disease, peasants, exiles, falsely accused people; Lowestoft, England; Queens' College, Cambridge; nurses; Sannat and Cospicua, Malta Margaret, known as Margaret of Antioch in the West, and as Saint Marina the Great Martyr (Greek: Ἁγία Μαρίνα) in the East, is celebrated as a saint on 20 July in the Western Rite Orthodoxy, Catholic Church and Anglicanism, on 17 July (Julian calendar) by the Eastern Orthodox Church and on Epip 23 and Hathor 23 in the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria.[2] Said to have been martyred in 304, she was declared apocryphal by Pope Gelasius I in 494[citation needed], but devotion to her revived in the West with the Crusades. She was reputed to have promised very powerful indulgences to those who wrote or read her life, or invoked her intercessions; these no doubt helped the spread of her cultus.[3] Margaret is one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers, and is one of the saints Joan of Arc claimed to have spoken with. Contents 1 Hagiography 2 Veneration 3 Iconography 4 See also 5 References 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Hagiography[edit] According to the version of the story in Golden Legend, she was a native of Antioch and the daughter of a pagan priest named Aedesius. Her mother having died soon after her birth, Margaret was nursed by a Christian woman five or six leagues (6.9–8.3 miles) from Antioch. Having embraced Christianity and consecrated her virginity to God, Margaret was disowned by her father, adopted by her nurse, and lived in the country keeping sheep with her foster mother (in what is now Turkey).[4] Olybrius, Governor of the Roman Diocese of the East, asked to marry her, but with the demand that she renounce Christianity. Upon her refusal, she was cruelly tortured, during which various miraculous incidents occurred. One of these involved being swallowed by Satan in the shape of a dragon, from which she escaped alive when the cross she carried irritated the dragon's innards. Veneration[edit] The Eastern Orthodox Church knows Margaret as Saint Marina, and celebrates her feast day on 17 July. The Greek Marina came from Antioch in Pisidia (as opposed to Antioch of Syria), but this distinction was lost in the West. The story was summarized in the 9th-century martyrology of Rabanus Maurus, even if it was too fantastic for many clergy (it went too far even for Jacobus de Voragine, who remarks that the part where she is eaten by the dragon is to be considered a legend).[5] In 1222, the Council of Oxford added her to the list of feast days, and so her cult acquired great popularity. Many versions of the story were told in 13th-century England, in Anglo-Norman (including one ascribed to Nicholas Bozon), English, and Latin,[6] and more than 250 churches are dedicated to her in England, most famously, St. Margaret's, Westminster, the parish church[7] of the British Houses of Parliament in London. In art, she is usually pictured escaping from, or standing above, a dragon. She was recognised as a saint by the Catholic Church, being listed as such in the Roman Martyrology for 20 July.[8] She was also included from the 12th to the 20th century among the saints to be commemorated wherever the Roman Rite was celebrated,[9] but was then removed from that list because of the entirely fabulous character of the stories told of her.[10] Every year on Epip 23 the Coptic Orthodox church celebrates her martyrdom day,[2] and on Hathor 23 the Coptic church celebrates the dedication of a church to her name. Saint Mary church in Cairo holds a relic believed to be Margaret's right hand, previously moved from the Angel Michael Church (modernly known as Haret Al Gawayna) following its destruction in the 13th century AD. It is displayed to the public and visitors on her feast days.[citation needed] Margaret is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 20 July[11]. Iconography[edit] Saint Margaret and the Dragon, alabaster with traces of gilding, Toulouse (c. 1475). (Metropolitan Museum of Art) Reliquary Bust of Saint Margaret of Antioch. Attributed to Nikolaus Gerhaert (active in Germany, 1462–73). Saint Margaret of Antioch, limestone with paint and gilding, Burgos (c. 1275-1325). (Metropolitan Museum of Art) Saint Margaret as a shepherdess by Francisco de Zurbarán (1631). Saint Margaret of Antioch by Peter Candid (second half of the 16th century). Saint Margaret attracts the attention of the Roman prefect, by Jean Fouquet (from an illuminated manuscript). Saint Margaret as a fresco from 1548 in the 12th century Sulsted Church Margaret the Virgin on a painting in the Novacella Abbey, Neustift, South Tyrol, Italy. Margaret the Virgin in the coat of arms of Vehmaa. See also[edit] Saint Marina the Monk and Saint Pelagia, both of whom are sometimes conflated or confused with Margaret References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ Book of Common Prayer ^ a b "23 أبيب - اليوم الثالث والعشرين من شهر أبيب - السنكسار". St-takla.org. 2014-10-11. Retrieved 2018-05-02.[unreliable source?] ^ "Margaret of Antioch". The Oxford Dictionary of Saints. David Hugh Farmer. Oxford University Press, 2003. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. Accessed 16 June 2007 ^ MacRory, Joseph. "St. Margaret." The Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 1 Mar. 2013 ^ de Voragine, Jacobus (1993). The Golden Legend: Readings on the Saints. 1. Translated by Ryan, William Granger. Princeton UP. pp. 368–70. ^ Jones, Timothy (1994). "Geoffrey of Monmouth, "Fouke le Fitz Waryn," and National Mythology". Studies in Philology. 91 (3): 233–249. JSTOR 4174487. ^ Westminster Abbey. "St. Margaret's, Westminster Parish details". Archived from the original on 2008-03-05. Retrieved 2008-05-03. ^ Martyrologium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 2001 ISBN 88-209-7210-7) ^ See General Roman Calendar as in 1954 ^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1969), p. 130 ^ "The Calendar". The Church of England. Retrieved 2021-03-27. Sources[edit] Acta Sanctorum, July, v. 24–45 Bibliotheca hagiographica. La/ma (Brussels, 1899), n. 5303–53r3 Frances Arnold-Forster, Studies in Church Dedications (London, 1899), i. 131–133 and iii. 19.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Margaret, St". Encyclopædia Britannica. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 700. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Margaret of Antioch. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Saint Margaret and the Dragon links Middle English life of St. Margaret of Antioch, edited with notes by Sherry L. Reames Book of the Passion of Saint Margaret the Virgin, with the Life of Saint Agnes, and Prayers to Jesus Christ and to the Virgin Mary (in English, Latin, and Italian) Catholic Online: Saint Margareth of Antioch The Life of St. Margaret of Antioch v t e The Fourteen Holy Helpers Acacius Barbara Blaise Catherine of Alexandria Christopher Cyriacus Denis Elmo Eustace George Giles Margaret the Virgin Pantaleon Vitus  Catholicism portal  Saints portal v t e Coptic saints Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Prophets Moses Job Samuel David Hosea Amos Micah Joel Obadiah Jonah Nahum Noah Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Isaiah Jeremiah Baruch Ezekiel Daniel John the Baptist Theotokos Mary, Our Lady of Assiut Warraq Zeitoun Seven Archangels Michael Gabriel Raphael Suriel Zedekiel Sarathiel Aniel Apostles Andrew Bartholomew James, son of Alphaeus James, son of Zebedee John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Disciples Apollos Barnabas Mary Magdalene Philemon Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Martyrs 21 martyrs in Libya Abāmūn Abāmūn Abanoub Abaskhiron Alexandrian Martyrs Apollonia Barbara Bashnouna Basilides Catherine Chiaffredo Chrysanthus Colluthus Cyprian Cyrus Sarah Damian Daria Dasya George George Bishop of Assiut Demiana Dorothea Epimachus Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius Felix and Regula Gabriel Abdel El-Metgaly Gallicanus George El Mozahem Gereon Theban Legion Varus Theodora and Didymus Theodore Stratelates Hor, Besoy, and Daydara Otimus Memnon Rais Imbaba Martyrs John Moura John of Senhout Elias and four companions Justina Kosheh martyrs Saint Marina the Martyr Malati Maspero Martyrs Maurice Menas Mohrael Nag Hammadi Philomena Philotheos Potamiana Regula Sidhom Bishay Thecla Theoclia Veronica Wanas Wadamoun Popes Mark I Anianus Avilius Kedron Justus Eumenes Markianos Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Theonas Felix of Rome Peter I Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Timothy II Peter III Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon Simeon I Alexander II Theodore I Michael I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Abraham Zacharias Cyril II Macarius II Matthew I Gabriel VII John XIV Cyril V Macarius III Cyril VI Bishops Abadiu of Antinoe Abraam of Faiyum Alexander of Jerusalem Amun of Scetes Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Epiphanius of Cyprus Eusebius of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Neocaesarea Ignatius of Antioch Jacob of Nisibis James of Jerusalem John of Nikiû John of Jerusalem Karas of California Mikhaeil of Asyut Narcissus of Jerusalem Nicholas of Myra Paphnutius of Scetes Paphnutius of Thebes Polycarp of Smyrna Porphyry of Gaza Psote of Ebsay Serapion of Thmuis Severian of Gabala Yousab el-Abah of Girga Monks and nuns Ababius Abdel Messih El-Makari Abib and Apollo Abraham of Farshut Abraham of Scetes Amun Anthony the Great Awgin Bashnouna Hilarion Isaac of Nineveh Isidore of Pelusium John Climacus John the Dwarf Macarius of Alexandria Macarius of Egypt Marina the Monk Moses the Black Mother Irini Hospitius Nilus of Sinai Pachomius the Great Pambo Parsoma Patapios of Thebes Paul of Thebes Paul of Tammah Paul the Simple Pishoy Poemen Samuel the Confessor Tekle Haymanot Sisoes the Great Theodorus of Tabennese Theodora of Alexandria Anchorites Karas Mary Misael Onuphrius Paphnutius Paul Pijimi Shenouda Thomas Zosimas Other saints Ambrose Clement of Alexandria Didymus the Blind Euphrosyne Habib Girgis Candidus Simon the Tanner Three Holy Children Maximus and Domatius Verena  Christianity portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125