This article is about the vessel in ancient Egyptian mythology. For other mythologies, see Solar chariot. For the novel, see Solar Barque (novel). Solar barge of the sun god Ra in Ancient Egyptian mythology Ra traveling in the Mandjet Barque Ra traveling through the underworld in his barque, from the copy of the Book of Gates in the tomb of Ramses I (KV16) Solar barques were the vessels used by the sun god Ra in ancient Egyptian mythology. During the day, Ra was said to use a vessel called the Mandjet (Ancient Egyptian: mꜥnḏt) or the Boat of Millions of Years (Ancient Egyptian: wjꜣ-n-ḥḥw), and the vessel he used during the night was known as the Mesektet (Ancient Egyptian: msktt). Ra was said to travel through the sky on the barge, providing light to the world.[1] Each twelfth of his journey formed one of the twelve Egyptian hours of the day, each overseen by a protective deity. Ra then rode the barque through the underworld, with each hour of the night considered a gate overseen by twelve more protective deities. Passing through all of these while fending off various destructive monsters, Ra reappeared each day on the eastern horizon. He was said to travel across the sky in the Mandjet Barque through the hours of the day, and then switch to the Mesektet Barque to descend into the underworld for the hours of the night.[2] The progress of Ra upon the Mandjet was sometimes conceived as his daily growth, decline, death, and resurrection and it appears in the symbology of Egyptian mortuary texts. Contents 1 Funerary practices and religion 2 In other media 3 See also 4 References Funerary practices and religion[edit] The reconstructed Khufu ship In folklore, a boat of this kind is used by the sun god. Thus, as the pharaoh was a representation of the sun god on earth, the king would use a similar boat upon his death to travel through the underworld on their journey to the afterlife.[3] One of the most well known examples of this is the Khufu ship, which was built and then buried at Giza along with Khufu and the rest of the items he would take with him to the afterlife.[4] The ship is now preserved in the Giza Solar boat museum. In other media[edit] Ra's ship appears in the 2016 film Gods of Egypt. In the film, the ship appears as a seafaring ship that drags the sun across the sky. See also[edit] Ancient Egyptian royal ships References[edit] ^ "The Sun Boat", The Gods of Ancient Egypt, Tour Egypt, retrieved 7 March 2017. ^ Abubakr, Abdel Moneim. “DIVINE BOATS OF ANCIENT EGYPT.” Archaeology, vol. 8, no. 2, 1955, pp. 96–101. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/41663287. ^ Abubakr, Abdel Moneim. “DIVINE BOATS OF ANCIENT EGYPT.” Archaeology, vol. 8, no. 2, 1955, pp. 96–101. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/41663287. ^ “SAILING THE WINE-DARK MEDITERRANEAN.” Uncorking the Past: The Quest for Wine, Beer, and Other Alcoholic Beverages, by PATRICK E. McGOVERN, 1st ed., University of California Press, 2009, pp. 159–197. v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities Ogdoad Amun Amunet Heh Hauhet Kek Kauket Nu Naunet Ennead Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Triads Theban Triad A Aker Akhty Amesemi Ammit Am-heh Anat Andjety Anhur Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apep Apis Apt Aqen Arensnuphis Ash Assessors Astarte Aten B Babi Banebdjedet Bastet Bat Bata Ba-Pef Bennu Bes Buchis C Cavern deities D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris F Four sons of Horus Duamutef Hapi Imset Qebehsenuef G Gate deities H Ha Hapi Hathor Hatmehit Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Heqet Hermanubis Hesat Horus Harpocrates Heryshaf Hu I Iabet Iah Iat Ihy Imentet Imhotep Iunit Iusaaset K Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Ma'at Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper P Pakhet Petbe Ptah Q Qebui Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rem Renenutet Renpet Repyt Resheph S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sekhmet Seker Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Tatenen Taweret Tayt Ta-Bitjet Thoth Hermes Trismegistus Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Creatures Aani Abtu Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Dedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Atef Cartouche Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetism Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Book  Ancient Egypt portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This Ancient Egyptian religion article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e