Company Todd McFarlane Productions, Inc. Type Private Industry Toys Founded Tempe, Arizona, United States (1994) Founder Todd McFarlane Headquarters Tempe, Arizona, United States Key people Todd McFarlane, CEO Products Spawn, Hellspawn, Sam & Twitch Number of employees 100 (2005) Website mcfarlane.com McFarlane Toys, a subsidiary of Todd McFarlane Productions, is a company founded by comic book creator Todd McFarlane which makes highly detailed model figurines of characters from movies, comics, popular music, video games and various sporting genres. Contents 1 Overview 2 Spawn figures 3 Anime figures 4 Horror figures 4.1 Movie Maniacs 5 Music figures 5.1 KISS 5.2 The Beatles 6 Sports figures 7 Television figures 7.1 The McKenzie Brothers 7.2 The Simpsons 7.3 Star Trek 8 Video game figures 9 Other figures 9.1 DC Multiverse 9.2 McFarlane's Dragons 9.3 McFarlane's Military 9.4 Where the Wild Things Are 10 Controversies 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Overview[edit] In 1994 Todd McFarlane was working with Mattel to produce action figures based on his comic book characters. When the two could not decide on how to make the toys to McFarlane's satisfaction, he reclaimed the toy rights to his characters and started his own toy company. Originally dubbed "Todd's Toys," the name was changed in 1995 following pressure from Mattel, who feared that the new company's name would be confused with that of Barbie's younger brother.[1] Production began with action figures based upon Todd McFarlane's Spawn comic series and has since grown to feature a large number of licensed property lines including The Simpsons and "Movie Maniacs" (which features numerous famous horror icons such as Freddy Krueger, Jason Voorhees, Michael Myers, The Terminator, Leatherface, and The Thing), as well as other characters and lines like basketball, hockey and baseball legends, along with characters from video games such as Soulcalibur, Onimusha, and Metal Gear Solid. Other media such as story book characters from Where the Wild Things Are have been represented.[2] The company has produced original works, giving a grotesque twist to fairy tale stories such as The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, and historical figures. McFarlane has collaborated with artists like Clive Barker (on Tortured Souls) and H.R. Giger to produce other original figures.[1] Spawn figures[edit] The first line of Spawn toys ever produced was released in 1994 and consisted of six figures, the hero Spawn and his medieval counterpart (aptly named Medieval Spawn) with Tremor and the villains Violator, Overt-Kill, and Clown, as well as a Spawn Alley Playset, the Spawnmobile and the Violator Monster Rig. They were notably different from the toys common on shelves at the time because of their level of detail in both sculpting and painting. Other toys utilized only a few colors painted in general areas (a single "flesh tone" for the face, etc.) and were tacked to cardboard backs. McFarlane's figures had individual items such as spikes, teeth, claws, and buttons painted individually and packaged encased by hard plastic which surrounded both the figure and blister card, making them more suitable collectors items. Each toy in the first line came with a regular-sized comic (although with fewer pages than the standard 22), which were individualized to the character.[1] The series would include alternate timeframes and different takes on the classic characters with Series 10, 20[3] and 30[4] showing homage to the core characters of the books. Series 35 was out by July 2008[5] and was called "Robot Wars". It refers to a villainous Mechanoid Army.[6] Anime figures[edit] Throughout the course of the company's history, McFarlane Toys has produced licensed figures based on various Japanese anime and manga properties. Series McFarlane have merchandised include Akira, Tenchi Muyo, Tokyo Ghoul, Attack on Titan[7] and Naruto Shippuden.[8] In 2019, it was announced that the company had also gained the rights to create figures based on One-Punch Man and My Hero Academia.[9] Horror figures[edit] McFarlane had been a long-time fan of the horror genre and decided to produce his own perspective on the classic monsters with the "Todd McFarlane's Monsters Playsets" line in 1997.[10] McFarlane continued the idea of generating new versions of classic stories and characters, releasing a shocking line subtitled "Twisted Land of Oz" in 2003, which featured vicious or sadistic versions of the Wonderful Wizard of Oz characters created by L. Frank Baum.[1] In 2004, the third series, subtitled 6 Faces of Madness, used historical killers and madmen as its theme, generating vividly detailed figurines of the 5th-century conqueror Attila the Hun, American "Wild West" gunslinger Billy the Kid, the "mad monk" Rasputin, the British serial killer Jack the Ripper, the Hungarian "Blood Queen" Elizabeth Bathory, and the real-life inspiration for Dracula, Vlad the Impaler.[1] The fourth series featured Twisted Fairy Tales. The figures were of classic children’s stories, including Peter Pumpkin-Eater, Hansel & Gretel, Little Miss Muffet, Humpty Dumpty, & Red Riding Hood, and incorporated many of the gory elements that consumers had come to expect from McFarlane, but with a sense of ironic humor. Series 5 featured McFarlane's Twisted Christmas. Like the previous series, the figures all are twisted variations of Christmas, including a hunchback and obese Santa Claus who hides a lifeless skull under a gasmask-like headpiece and wears contraptions on his hands similar to the glove of Freddy Krueger.[11] Movie Maniacs[edit] In 1998 McFarlane introduced the Movie Maniacs line of figures. Series One began as a line of horror and science fiction based figures that had been licensed from influential and financially successful horror films such as A Nightmare on Elm Street, The Texas Chainsaw Massacre and Friday the 13th. The second series of figures expanded the character base for the line into the realms of cult and action cinema, with a figure based on the title character to The Crow. Series three would further push the boundaries of character selection into fantasy, with Edward Scissorhands, straight action with Shaft, and back into cult/sci-fi with Escape from L.A.. These conventions would continue, with character selections in future series frequently containing a mix of many, or even all of these various film genres, much to the chagrin of a small section of fans and collectors who, incorrectly, saw the line as being meant to be horror specific.[1] Music figures[edit] McFarlane Toys did not solely limit itself to creating figures based on Todd McFarlane's creations. Rather it branched out into other forms of media, capitalizing on the popularity of famous rock musicians with the release of figures based on the rock legends KISS in 1997. The number of music figures produced by the company continued to grow in number, diversity, and quality in the following years as they acquired the action figure rights to famous properties such as the Beatles, Rob Zombie, Alice Cooper, Ozzy Osbourne, Metallica, Slash, Iron Maiden's mascot Eddie, Jimi Hendrix, Freddie Mercury and Elvis Presley.[1] KISS[edit] Main article: KISS action figures In 1997, action figures were part of an overall marketing deal between McFarlane Toys and the rock band KISS, with both toys and comic books based on their album Psycho Circus.[12] Release of new KISS products from McFarlane continues to the present day. The Beatles[edit] The second musical property that McFarlane released was based on the Beatles, featuring figures of Paul McCartney, John Lennon, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr as they appeared in their 1968 animated film Yellow Submarine, as well as their appearance in the 1965 ABC cartoon show also titled The Beatles.[12] Despite three figure series based on cartoon versions of the band (two incarnations of the Yellow Submarine figures in 1996 and 2004), no figures of the real-life band members have been created by McFarlane Toys.[1] Sports figures[edit] McFarlane Toys reflects Todd McFarlane's love of sports in its creations of popular figures from all five major North American sports (baseball, football, basketball, hockey and stock car racing). The company has official licensing rights to the major professional leagues of all of these sports, and began this line, officially known as McFarlane Sports Picks, in 2001.[12] Television figures[edit] In January 2007, McFarlane Toys announced plans for a line of 24 action figures.[1] Other series figures have included Lost and The Walking Dead.[13][14] In 2015, McFarlane toys launched a line of construction sets based on HBO's popular Game of Thrones TV series,[15] followed by a line of 6" action figures to be released in 2019.[16] The company also produces action figures based on the Netflix series Stranger Things.[17] The McKenzie Brothers[edit] Released in September 2000, the figures were based on the characters of SCTV and Strange Brew fame, Bob and Doug McKenzie. Originally portrayed by Rick Moranis and Dave Thomas, respectively. The figures were sold separately and each came with half of the diorama from the Great White North set. Each had a sound chip with famous lines from the film and various extras to complete the scene.[18] The Simpsons[edit] In 2005, McFarlane acquired the rights held by rival manufacturer Playmates Toys to produce figures based on the popular Fox TV series The Simpsons.[12] Star Trek[edit] In 2017, McFarlane Toys inked a deal to produce action figures and role play items based on the popular Star Trek franchise.[19] Controversy ensued when the company's Star Trek Discovery phaser toy was cancelled just months before its scheduled release date. In a statement, McFarlane Toys said that the product was cancelled due to disagreements regarding the safety regulations around toy guns in the United States.[20] The first action figures were released in early 2019, with James T. Kirk and Jean-Luc Picard serving as the inaugural entries in the line while the next figures Michael Burnham and Spock is in production. Video game figures[edit] McFarlane Toys has produced a number of products based on video games, including Metal Gear Solid, Soulcalibur II (The Xbox version of which featured McFarlane's own Spawn as a guest character), Halo, Five Nights at Freddy's, Call of Duty, Destiny, Cuphead, Borderlands and Assassin's Creed. In 2018, McFarlane Toys launched a series of Fortnite action figures, which differed greatly from the company's previous figures (which were often statue-like and had very limited movement) by including at least 18 points of articulation each.[21] The toys proved very popular, and Todd McFarlane later announced that the increased articulation scheme would become standard in the company's product from then on, including their upcoming line of Mortal Kombat 11 figures.[22] Other figures[edit] DC Multiverse[edit] At the tail end of 2018, news broke that Mattel had lost the rights to create figures based on the characters of the DC Universe to Spin Master Studios after 15 years of producing DC merchandise.[23] In February 2019, it was announced that McFarlane Toys had secured the rights to create 6"-12" collector figures based on the various comic books, movies, cartoons, live-action TV shows and video games featuring DC's characters. Dubbed DC Multiverse, the line will be aimed at adult collectors, in contrast to the all-ages oriented DC toys produced by Spin Master.[24] In a subsequent interview with IGN, Todd McFarlane confirmed that the new figures will target the same collectors who bought other 6" superhero toy lines, such as Mattel's DC Universe Classics or Hasbro's Marvel Legends.[25] He also revealed that the figures will use the new articulation system first seen in the company's Fortnite toys, meaning that they will all include between 18 and 24 points of articulation.[26] McFarlane's Dragons[edit] McFarlane's Dragons are a line of action figures which were launched in 2005 under the "Horror, Fantasy and Sci-Fi Action Figures" section of McFarlane Toys. These figures were released biannually.[1] This set features several highly detailed six inch dragon action figures and a slightly larger and more expansive "boxed set" figure. For the first five series, the figures were broken into these clans: Eternal Dragon Clan, Fire Dragon Clan, Komodo Dragon Clan, Sorcerer's Dragon Clan, Water Dragon Clan, and Berserker Clan. Series Six includes new clans: Fossil Dragon Clan, Hunter Dragon Clan, Ice Dragon Clan, Scavenger Dragon Clan, and Warrior Dragon Clan. In addition to these highly detailed dragons, McFarlane released a part of the dragon's history with each dragon set; some had a piece of the story with each dragon, and some had whole chunks of the story in one boxed set.[27] McFarlane's Military[edit] The company launched a "toy soldier" range in 2005 with McFarlane's Military. The figures did not depict actual people so much as it did their professions, named simply by their job descriptions, such as "Army Ranger" or "Navy SEAL." All were of stern-looking males in full military gear, with highly detailed weapons and accessories modeled after the exact materials each soldier would be carrying in real life.[1] Where the Wild Things Are[edit] In 2000, McFarlane Toys produced figures based on Maurice Sendak's classic children's book Where the Wild Things Are. Figures include Max, Goatboy (packaged together), Moishe, Emil, Bernard, Aaron and Tzippy. Each character was sculpted with the same crosshatch style from Sendak's original illustrations. Controversies[edit] A number of McFarlane's figures have attracted criticism and led to boycotts for the subject matter they depict, such as Death Row Marv, which depicts the central character from the graphic novel Sin City in the electric chair, which includes a toggle switch that allows the user to "execute" the character, who shakes and speaks as if being electrocuted when the switch is flipped.[28] Others, such as the company's Austin Powers action figure, were criticized for risque language in their sound chips and packaging.[29] See also[edit] NECA Funko SOTA Hot Toys Mezco Toyz Sideshow Collectibles References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Scott, Sharon M. (2010). Toys and American Culture: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 58, 201–203. ISBN 978-0-313-35111-2. ^ "McFarlane Toys". Playthings  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). December 1, 2000. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. ^ Szadkowski, Joseph (2001). "Film, TV, Comic Characters Ready to Hit Store Shelves". The Washington Times – via Questia Online Library (subscription required). Washington, DC. Spawn Series 20 looks back at classic characters in Mr. McFarlane's 8-year-old sequential-art universe and pays tribute to its most popular characters – Domina, Overtkill, Violator and Spawn ^ Benitez, Tina (October 1, 2006). "Spawn at 30". Playthings – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. ^ "SPAWN SERIES 35: ROBOT WARS". Archived from the original on 29 July 2008. SPAWN enters the machine age with Series 35: Robot Wars. The historic 35th line of SPAWN action figures makes the leap to the year 3047, when a heroic team of robot warriors fights to defend Earth from the unstoppable force of the villainous Mechanoid Army. ^ McMillian, Graeme (23 August 2008). "Our New Front In The War On Hell: Giant Robots". Todd McFarlane's Spawn is about to go through his most extreme transformation yet - into a giant robot. As part of October's new Robot Wars line of toys, McFarlane is taking his once-popular hellbound superhero in a more mecha direction. The new line sets up a brand-new setting for the character .. Mechanoid Army? 3047? ^ "TOY FAIR 2016: McFarlane Explains Why Spawn Still Drives His Toy Line, New Licenses". CBR. February 16, 2016. ^ "ICv2 Interview: Todd McFarlane on his Anime/Manga Line". icv2.com. ^ "McFarlane Toys Previews 'My Hero Academia', 'One-Punch Man', and 'Naruto' Figures". Anime. ^ Szadkowski, Joseph (June 6, 1998). "A Specter, a Monster and a Tank". The Washington Times – via Questia Online Library. ^ Motihar, Jhilmil (August 25, 2008). "Customer care ; These entrepreneurs are giving the city's retail landscape an adventurous twist". India Today  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. ^ a b c d Natale, Tony (January 27, 2005). "Tempe-based McFarlane Toys to develop action figures based on film". The Tribune – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Mesa, AZ. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. ^ Schneider, Michael (May 23, 2006). "Go figure: losties turn up as toys". Daily Variety – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Hollywood, CA. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. ^ Szadkowski, Joseph (November 1, 2012). "Ghoulish 'Walking Dead,' Phantom Figures". The Washington Times  – via Questia Online Library (subscription required). Washington, DC. ^ "Game of Thrones Holiday Gifts: McFarlane Construction Sets". November 27, 2015. ^ "McFarlane Toys Gets Game of Thrones Action Figure License". The Toyark - News. October 2, 2018. ^ Squires, John (February 16, 2018). "McFarlane Shows Off New "Stranger Things" Figures Including Punk Eleven". ^ Szadkowski, Joseph (February 26, 2000). "Stars Come out to Plug Their Wares at Toy Fair". The Washington Times  – via Questia Online Library (subscription required). Washington, DC. ^ Staff, TrekMovie com. "McFarlane Toys Inks Deal For Star Trek, Including 'Discovery' [UPDATED]". TrekMovie.com. ^ Staff, TrekCore (June 8, 2018). "McFarlane Toys Explains DISCOVERY Phaser Cancellations • TrekCore.com". ^ "First Wave of Fortnite Figures from McFarlane Toys Revealed - IGN" – via www.ign.com. ^ "Toy Fair 2019 - McFarlane Toys Video Game Figures". The Toyark - News. February 17, 2019. ^ "Mattel Stocks Plummet in Wake of Losing DC License to Spin Master - The Beat". Comicsbeat.com. 2018-12-31. Retrieved 2019-12-31. ^ "McFarlane Toys Gets DC Comics License". The Toyark - News. February 12, 2019. ^ "Todd McFarlane Teases the Future of DC Toys and Collectibles - IGN" – via www.ign.com. ^ "Todd McFarlane Confirms His DC Comics Figures Will Include Movies and TV". DC. ^ Szadkowski, Joseph (April 2, 2005). "Justice League Heroes, Fire-Breathing Berserker". The Washington Times  – via Questia Online Library (subscription required). Washington, DC. ^ Turner, Allan (August 31, 2000). "Toy Action Figure With Electric Chair Draws Criticism". Knight Ridder Tribune Business News  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Washington, DC. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. ^ Hyman, Julie (June 23, 1999). "Atlanta Mother Wants `Risque' Austin Powers Dolls Out of Toy Store". Knight Ridder Tribune Business News  – via HighBeam Research (subscription required). Washington, DC. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. External links[edit] No URL found. Please specify a URL here or add one to Wikidata. Stashmatic.com Movie Maniacs collection tracker (with images) Four Horsemen Toy Designs' website – former McFarlane Toys employees McFarlanePedia McFarlane Encyclopedia v t e Superhero toy lines DC Batman Batman action figures Batman: Total Justice Batman Unlimited DC Comics Super Hero Collection DC Direct DC Minimates DC Multiverse DC Superheroes DC Super Hero Girls DC Universe DC Universe All-Stars DC Universe Classics Justice League Unlimited Lego Batman Movie Masters Super Powers Collection Marvel The Classic Marvel Figurine Collection Hulk Classics Iron Man: The Armored Avenger Marvel Legends Marvel Legends Showdown Marvel Minimates Marvel Select Marvel Super Hero Squad Marvel Universe Mega Morphs Secret Wars Spider-Man Spider-Man and Friends Spider-Man Classics Thor: The Mighty Avenger X-Men Classics Other Captain Action The Centurions Masters of the Universe Power Rangers Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles ThunderCats Toxic Crusaders Transformers Manufacturers Bandai Namco (Bandai) Coleco Diamond Select Toys Funko Galoob Hasbro Jakks Pacific Just Play Kellytoy Kenner Products Little Tikes LJN Lego Marvel Toys Mattel McFarlane Toys Mego Melissa & Doug MGA Entertainment Moose Toys National Entertainment Collectibles Association Palisades Toys Playmates Toys Remco Safari Ltd Schleich Spin Master Thinkway Toys Takara Tomy Toy Biz Toy Max Designers Art Asylum Four Horsemen Studios News 2007 Chinese export recalls Toy Biz, Inc. v. United States v t e Todd McFarlane DC/Marvel Artemis Crock Chroma Doctor Mid-Nite Eddie Brock Hourman (Rick Tyler) Icicle L.E.G.I.O.N. Garryn Bek Life Foundation Mekanique Mercy Mister Bones Ogress Spider-Man The Amazing Spider-Man Spider-Man "Torment" Strata The Incredible Hulk Tigress Venom Wildcat (Yolanda Montez) Image Comics Angela Billy Kincaid Celestine Cogliostro Curse Freak Haunt The Heap Hellspawn Jason Wynn Jessica Priest Malebolgia Mammon Man of Miracles Nyx Overt-Kill Phlebiac Brothers Redeemer Sam and Twitch Satan Spawn List of Spawn characters List of Spawn villains Terry Fitzgerald Tiffany Tremor Urizen Violator Wanda Blake Zera Other McFarlane Toys Necrid v t e Spawn Todd McFarlane Characters Protagonists Spawn Nyx Man of Miracles Jim Downing Heaven Angela Tiffany Zera Celestine Redeemer Disciple God Bootsy Godsend Mike The Messenger Gabreille Rafael Hell Violator Malebolgia Cogliostro Mammon Billy Kincaid Hellspawn Phlebiac Brothers Satan Ab and Zab Hel Bingo Thamuz Hellion Other characters Curse Freak Sam and Twitch Chapel Haunt Jason Wynn Jessica Priest Overt-Kill Tremor Terry Fitzgerald Wanda Blake The Heap Cyan Fitzgerald Andy Frank Cy-gor Tony Twist Bobby Marc Rosen Bludd Sara Johntson Helen Williams Max Williams Susan Mathews Christopher Welland Sulture Urizen Soul Crusher King Spider Decay Spin-offs Angela Curse of the Spawn Hellspawn Sam and Twitch Shadows of Spawn The Adventures of Spawn Spawn: Godslayer Violator Media Film and TV Spawn (1997) Todd McFarlane's Spawn (1997–1999) Spawn (TBA) Video games Todd McFarlane's Spawn: The Video Game (1995) Spawn: The Eternal (1997) Spawn (1999) Spawn: In the Demon's Hand (2000) Soulcalibur II (2003) Spawn: Armageddon (2003) Mortal Kombat 11 (2019) Writers and artists Todd McFarlane Brian Holguin David Hine Greg Capullo Angel Medina Philip Tan Brian Haberlin Related articles Neil Gaiman Alan Moore Image Comics Image Universe McFarlane Toys Necroplasm Spawn/WildC.A.T.S. Spawn/Batman Batman-Spawn: War Devil The Dark Saga Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125