This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series on Anime and manga Anime History Voice acting Companies Original video animation Original net animation Fansub Fandub Lists Longest series Longest franchises Manga History Publishers International market Mangaka Doujinshi Alternative Gekiga Yonkoma Iconography Scanlation Lists Best-selling series Longest series Demographic groups Children Shōnen Shōjo Seinen Josei Genres Bara Cooking Harem Isekai Magical girl Mecha Ryona Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri People Mitsuru Adachi Fujio Akatsuka George Akiyama Hideaki Anno Hideo Azuma Clamp Osamu Dezaki Tetsuo Hara Mamoru Hosoda Yukinobu Hoshino Ryoichi Ikegami Kunihiko Ikuhara Ken Ishikawa Shotaro Ishinomori Ikki Kajiwara Tomoharu Katsumata Yoshiaki Kawajiri Shōji Kawamori Kitazawa Rakuten Kazuo Koike Satoshi Kon Masami Kurumada Kōichi Mashimo Katsuji Matsumoto Leiji Matsumoto Hayao Miyazaki Shigeru Mizuki Hideko Mizuno Shinji Mizushima Daijiro Morohoshi Tadao Nagahama Go Nagai Shinji Nagashima Daisuke Nishio Eiichiro Oda Kyoko Okazaki Mamoru Oshii Rintaro Takao Saito Hiroshi Sasagawa Junichi Sato Sanpei Shirato Masamune Shirow Gisaburō Sugii Isao Takahata Osamu Tezuka Akira Toriyama Year 24 Group Tatsuo Yoshida Tsutomu Nihei Fandom Conventions Clubs Cosplay Anime music video Otaku Yaoi fandom General Glossary Ecchi Hentai Lolicon Moe Anime-influenced animation 2.5D musical  Anime and manga portal v t e Anime and manga that feature fighting robots Mecha anime and manga, known in Japan as robot anime (ロボットアニメ, robotto anime) and robot manga (ロボット漫画, robotto manga), are anime and manga that feature robots (mecha) in battle. The genre is broken down into two subcategories; "super robot", featuring super-sized, implausible robots, and "real robot", where robots are governed by realistic physics and technological limitations. Mecha series cover a wide variety of genres, from action to comedy to drama, and the genre has expanded into other media, such as video game adaptations. Mecha has also contributed to the popularity of scale model robots. Contents 1 History 2 Subgenres 2.1 Super robot 2.2 Real robot 3 Types 3.1 Piloted 3.2 Sentient 3.3 Remote controlled 3.4 Transforming 3.5 Wearable 4 Model robot 5 See also 6 References 7 External links History[edit] The 1940 short manga Electric Octopus (デンキダコ, Denki Dako) featured a powered, piloted, mechanical octopus.[1] The 1943 Yokoyama Ryūichi's propaganda manga The Science Warrior Appears in New York (科学戦士ニューヨークに出現す, Kagaku Senshi New York ni Shutsugensu) featured a sword-wielding, steam-powered, giant humanoid mecha.[2] The first series in the mecha genre was Mitsuteru Yokoyama's 1956 manga Tetsujin 28-go (which was later animated in 1963 and also released abroad as Gigantor).[3] He was inspired to become a manga creator by Osamu Tezuka, and began serializing the manga in Shonen, an iconic boy's magazine, in 1956.[3] In this series, the robot, which was made as a last-ditch effort to win World War II by the Japanese military, was remote-controlled by the protagonist Shotaro Kaneda, a twelve-year-old detective and "whiz kid".[3] The story turned out to have immense mass appeal, and inspired generations of imitators.[3] In 1972, Go Nagai, another of Japan's greatest manga creators, defined the super robot genre with Mazinger Z, which was directly inspired by the former series.[3] He had the revolutionary idea to create a mecha that people could control like a car, while waiting to cross a busy street.[3] The concept became "explosively popular", making the manga and anime into a success.[3] The series also was the genesis for different tropes of the genre, such as the idea of a robot as a "dynamic entity" that could join with other machines or humans to become unstoppable.[3] Anime critic Fred Patten wrote that almost all mecha anime plots, such as monster of the week shows, were actually metaphors for re-fighting World War II, and defending Japan and its culture from Western encroachment.[3] By 1977, a large number of super robot anime had been created, including Brave Raideen and Danguard Ace.[3] The market for super robot toys also grew, spawning metal die-cast toys such as the Chogokin series in Japan and the Shogun Warriors in the U.S., that were (and still are) very popular with children and collectors.[3] The super robot genre became heavily commercialized and stagnant, creating an opening for innovation, which was seized upon by Yoshiyuki Tomino in 1979 with the creation of Mobile Suit Gundam, a complex "space saga" that was called the "Star Wars of Japan" and birthed the real robot genre, which featured more realistic, gritty technology.[3] Tomino did not like the formulaic storylines and overt advertising of the super robot shows he had worked on, and wanted to create a movie where robots were used as tools.[3] While the response to Gundam was lukewarm at first, efforts by dedicated fans led to it becoming a success.[3] It created a massive market for mecha model robots, and became an industry that earned Bandai ¥42.8 billion in 2004.[3] Many real robot series and other media were later created, such as Full Metal Panic! and the video game series Armored Core.[3] 1990 saw the release of Patlabor, a breakthrough animated movie directed by Mamoru Oshii that popularized the mecha genre and aesthetic in the West.[4] Neon Genesis Evangelion, created by Hideaki Anno in 1995, was a major influence on the super robot genre, arriving when the real robot genre was dominant on television.[3] A deconstruction of classic mecha anime tropes, it recast the "saintly" inventor/father as a sinister figure, and the enthusiastic teenage protagonist as a "vacillating" introvert.[5] Due to its unusual psychological themes, the show became a massive success,[3] and further caused Japanese anime culture to spread widely and rapidly around the world.[6] The mecha anime genre (as well as Japanese kaiju films) received a Western homage with the 2013 film Pacific Rim directed by Guillermo del Toro.[7] Similarly the genre was inspirational for the 1998 first-person shooter Shogo: Mobile Armor Division developed by Monolith Productions.[8] Subgenres[edit] Super robot[edit] Some of the first mecha featured in manga and anime were 'super robots' (スーパーロボット sūpā robotto).[3] The super robot genre features superhero-like giant robots that are often one-of-a-kind and the product of an ancient civilization, aliens or a mad genius. These robots are usually piloted by Japanese teenagers via voice command or neural uplink, and are often powered by mystical or exotic energy sources.[3] Their abilities are described as "quasi-magical".[9] Real robot[edit] "Real robot" redirects here. For robots in reality, see Robot. For the UK published magazine named Real Robot in Japan, see Real Robots. The later real robot (リアルロボット riaru robotto) genre features robots that do not have mythical superpowers, but rather use largely conventional, albeit futuristic weapons and power sources, and are often mass-produced on a large scale for use in wars.[3] The real robot genre also tends to feature more complex characters with moral conflicts and personal problems.[10] The genre is therefore aimed primarily at young adults instead of children.[11] The genre has been compared to hard science fictions by its fanbase, and is strongly associated with sales of popular toy models such as Gunpla. One of the "founding fathers" of real robot design was Kunio Okawara, who started out working on Gundam and continued on to other real robot series such as Armored Trooper Votoms.[9] Mobile Suit Gundam (1979) is largely considered the first series to introduce the real robot concept and, along with The Super Dimension Fortress Macross (1982), would form the basis of what people would later call real robot anime.[12] In an interview with Yoshiyuki Tomino and other production crew members in the April 1989 issue of Newtype, about his views on the first Gundam anime that was not directed by him, he commented on the realism of the show, in which he sees the sponsors, Sunrise, as imaginary enemies of Gundam, since they did not accept a certain level of realism.[13] Armored Trooper Votoms is viewed by Famitsu magazine as the peak of real-robot anime.[14] The concepts behind "real robots" that set it apart from previous robot anime are such as: The robot is used as an industrial machine with arm-like manipulators and is manufactured by military and commercial enterprises of various nations.[15] The concept of industrial production and commercial manufacturing processes appeared for the first time in the history of robot shows, introducing manufacturing language like "mass-production" (MP), "prototype" and "test-type".[15] While classic super robots typically use special attacks activated by voice commands, real robots more commonly use manually operated scaled-up/advanced versions of infantry weapons, such as lasers/particle beams, firearms, melee weapons (swords, axes, etc) and shields. Real robots use mostly ranged weapons that require ammunition supply.[16] Real robots require periodic maintenance and are often prone to malfunction and break down, like real machines.[15] Types[edit] This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (May 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Piloted[edit] This ubiquitous subgenre features mecha piloted internally as vehicles. The first series to feature such mecha was Go Nagai's Mazinger Z. In a 2009 interview, Go Nagai claimed the idea came to mind when he was stuck in a traffic jam and wished his car could sprout arms and legs to walk over the cars in front.[17] Other examples include Mobile Suit Gundam (1979), The Super Dimension Fortress Macross (1982), and Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann (2007). There are series that have piloted mecha that are also in the sentient category, usually because of an AI system to assist and care for the pilot, as featured in Blue Comet SPT Layzner (1985) and Gargantia on the Verdurous Planet (2013),[18] or because the mecha is also an organic creature, as featured in Neon Genesis Evangelion (1995) or Attack on Titan (2013). Sentient[edit] These are mecha that have the ability to be self-aware, think, and sometimes feel emotion. The source of sentience varies from aliens, such as the titular characters of American-produced and Japanese-animated series, The Transformers (1984), to artificial intelligence, such as the robots of Brave Police J-Decker (1994) to magic, such as Da-Garn of The Brave Fighter of Legend Da-Garn (1992). The first series that featured a sentient giant robot, also the first mecha anime in color, was Astroganger (1972).[19] Remote controlled[edit] These are mecha that are controlled externally. The first mecha anime, Tetsujin 28-go (1966), and Giant Robo (1967) are famous examples. Transforming[edit] A transforming mech can transform between a standard vehicle (such as a fighter plane or transport truck) and a fighting mecha robot. The concept of transforming mecha was pioneered by Japanese mecha designer Shōji Kawamori in the early 1980s, when he created the Diaclone toy line in 1980 and then the Macross anime franchise in 1982. In North America, the Macross franchise was adapted into the Robotech franchise in 1985, and then the Diaclone toy line was adapted into the Transformers franchise in 1986. Some of Kawamori's most iconic transforming mecha designs include the VF-1 Valkyrie from the Macross and Robotech franchises, and Optimus Prime (called Convoy in Japan) from the Transformers and Diaclone franchises. The concept later became more popular in the mid-1980s, with Macross: Do You Remember Love? (1984) and Zeta Gundam (1985) in Japan, and with Robotech (1985 adaptation of Macross) and Transformers (1986 adaptation of Diaclone) in the West.[20][21] Wearable[edit] This refers to mecha that are powered exoskeletons rather than piloted as vehicles, such as in Genesis Climber MOSPEADA (1983), Bubblegum Crisis (1987) and Active Raid (2016); merge with the mecha, such as in The King of Braves GaoGaiGar (1997); combine with the robots, such as in Transformers: Super-God Masterforce (1988); or become mechanical themselves, such as in Brave Command Dagwon (1996) and Fire Robo (2016). Model robot[edit] Main article: Model robot Assembling and painting mecha scale model kits is a popular pastime among mecha enthusiasts. Like other models such as cars or airplanes, more advanced kits require much more intricate assembly. Lego mecha construction can present unique engineering challenges; the balancing act between a high range of motion, good structural stability, and aesthetic appeal can be difficult to manage. In 2006, the Lego Group released their own somewhat manga-inspired mecha line with the Lego Exo-Force series. See also[edit] List of mecha anime References[edit] ^ 井上晴樹 (August 2007). 日本ロボット戦争記 1939~1945. ISBN 9784757160149. Retrieved 2018-04-01. ^ 井上晴樹 (August 2007). The Anime Encyclopedia, 3rd Revised Edition: A Century of Japanese Animation. ISBN 9784757160149. Retrieved 2019-09-08. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Hornyak, Timothy N. (2006). "Chapter 4". Loving the Machine: the Art and Science of Japanese Robots (1st ed.). Tokyo: Kodansha International. pp. 57–70. ISBN 4770030126. OCLC 63472559. ^ Hanson, Matt (2005). Building sci-fi moviescapes : the science behind the fiction. East Sussex, England: Rotovision. p. 38. ISBN 0240807723. OCLC 60800154. ^ Super/heroes : from Hercules to Superman. Haslem, Wendy., Ndalianis, Angela, 1960–, Mackie, C. J. (Christopher J.), 1954–. Washington, DC: New Academia Pub. 2007. p. 113. ISBN 978-0977790845. OCLC 123026083.CS1 maint: others (link) ^ "TV Tokyo's Iwata Discusses Anime's 'Road to Survival' (Updated)". Anime News Network. Retrieved 2017-09-21. ^ Axinto, Jemarc (24 April 2014). "Pacific Rim: In-depth study of the influence of Anime". The Artifice. Retrieved 14 November 2014. ^ Sabbagh, Michel (December 17, 2015). "Effort Upon Effort: Japanese Influences in Western First-Person Shooters" (PDF). Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015. ^ a b 1971–, Clements, Jonathan (2015-02-09). The anime encyclopedia : a century of Japanese animation. McCarthy, Helen, 1951– (3rd revised ed.). Berkeley, California. ISBN 978-1611729092. OCLC 904144859.CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) ^ Tomino, Yoshiyuki (2012). Mobile Suit Gundam: Awakening, Escalation, Confrontation. Schodt, Frederik L., 1950– (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-1611720051. OCLC 772711844. ^ Denison, Rayna (2015). "Chapter 5". Anime: a Critical Introduction. London. ISBN 978-1472576767. OCLC 879600213. ^ 10 commandments of Real robot, Gundam Sentinel introduction, Gundam workshop, Format ACG ^ Newtype magazine, April, 1989 ^ famitsu news リアルロボットアニメの最高峰がスクリーンで蘇える！ 『装甲騎兵ボトムズ ペールゼン・ファイルズ 劇場版』 Peak of Real Robot anime on screen, Votoms movie. ^ a b c Robot Watch SF seminar, 29 April 2007, Interview of Ryōsuke Takahashi The side of Real Robot (SFセミナー「高橋良輔インタビュー リアルロボットの向こう側」レポート) ^ Hatena keyword Hatena ^ "永井 豪 | R25". 30オトコの本音に向き合う、ビジネスマン向けサイト | R25. Retrieved 2016-10-25. ^ Barder, Ollie. "How A Blue Comet Influenced The Last 30 Years Of Japanese Pop-Culture And Beyond". Forbes. Retrieved 2016-10-25. ^ Daigo Otaki - Encirobot.com. "Astroganga – Pagina Principale". Encirobot.com. Retrieved 2014-06-30. ^ Barder, Ollie (December 10, 2015). "Shoji Kawamori, The Creator Hollywood Copies But Never Credits". Forbes. Retrieved 16 April 2020. ^ Knott, Kylie (27 February 2019). "He created Macross and designed Transformers toys: Japanese anime legend Shoji Kawamori". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 16 April 2020. External links[edit] Gears Online Brickshelf Lego mecha galleries Mecha Anime HQ: Extensive coverage on Gundams and other mecha. v t e Mecha Mecha anime and manga List of mecha anime Model robot Gundam model v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie v t e Animation industry in Japan History of anime Companies/studios Active 3Hz A.C.G.T A.P.P.P. AIC Ajia-do Animation Works Aniplex A-1 Pictures CloverWorks Arvo Animation Asahi Broadcasting Corporation DLE Silver Link Asahi Production Asatsu-DK Eiken Gonzo NAS Ashi Productions Asread AXsiZ Bandai Namco Holdings Bandai Namco Arts Actas Sunrise Bandai Namco Pictures Happinet Bibury Animation Studios Bones Brain's Base Bridge C-Station C2C CoMix Wave Films Creators in Pack CyberAgent Cygames CygamesPictures Dentsu Digital Frontier GEMBA Diomedéa Doga Kobo Egg Firm Eight Bit Emon Ekachi Epilka EMT Squared Encourage Films Ezo'la Feel Felix Film Fuji TV Blue Lynx David Production Frontier Works G&G Direction Gaina Gainax Gallop Gathering Geek Pictures Geek Toys Genco GoHands Graphinica Yumeta Company Grizzly Hoods Entertainment IG Port Production I.G Signal.MD Wit Studio J.C.Staff Kadokawa Corporation Dwango ENGI Khara Kinema Citrus Kyoto Animation Lapin Track Lesprit Magic Bus Maho Film MAPPA Marvelous Millepensee Movic NAZ Nexus Nippon Animation Nippon TV Madhouse Tatsunoko Production Nomad NUT Odessa Entertainment Oh! Production Okuruto Noboru OLM Orange Passione P.A.Works Pierrot Studio Signpost Pine Jam Platinum Vision Polygon Pictures Project No.9 Robot Communications Satelight Science SARU Sega Sammy Holdings TMS Entertainment Marza Animation Planet Seven Shaft Shirogumi Shuka Sola Digital Arts Square Enix Visual Works Studio 4°C Studio A-Cat Studio Bind Studio Chizu Studio Comet Studio Deen Studio Ghibli Studio Gokumi Studio Hibari Larx Entertainment Lerche Studio Nue Studio Ponoc Studio Puyukai Studio VOLN SynergySP Tezuka Productions TNK Tokyo Broadcasting System Seven Arcs Toei Company Toei Animation Troyca TV Asahi Shin-Ei Animation Twin Engine Geno Studio Lay-duce Revoroot Studio Colorido Typhoon Graphics Ufotable Ultra Super Pictures Liden Films Sanzigen Trigger White Fox Yokohama Animation Laboratory Zero-G Zexcs Inactive Artland Bee Train Production Chaos Project Daume Imagin Knack Productions Mook Animation Mushi Production Ordet Remic Defunct Arms Artmic Bandai Visual Connect Group TAC Hal Film Maker J2 Communications Jetlag Productions Kitayama Eiga Seisakujo Kitty Films (Mitaka Studio) Kokusai Eiga-sha Manglobe Palm Studio Production IMS Radix Ace Entertainment Spectrum Animation Studio Fantasia Tear Studio Topcraft Triangle Staff Tsuchida Production Walt Disney Animation Japan Xebec Yaoyorozu Industry associations The Association of Japanese Animations Japanese Animation Creators Association Awards Animation Kobe Awards Animax Anison Grand Prix Anime Grand Prix Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year Japan Media Arts Awards Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film Newtype Anime Award Ōfuji Noburō Award Seiyu Awards Sugoi Japan Award Tokyo Anime Award Types Original net animation (ONA) Original video animation (OVA) Television Late night UHF Genres Bara Cooking Ecchi Futanari Girls with guns Harem Hentai Tentacle erotica Isekai Lolicon Kaitō Magical girl Mecha Ryona Shotacon Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri Anime programming blocks Animeism Noitamina +Ultra Related topics Animage Animedia Katsudō Shashin Kinema Junpo Manga Newtype Portal