This article is about the mythological figure. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). "Meleagros" redirects here. For the genus of beetle, see Meleagros (beetle). Ancient Greek mythical character Bust of Meleager Greek mythology Deities Primordial Titans Olympians Nymphs Sea-deities Earth-deities Heroes and heroism Heracles / Hercules Labors Achilles Hector Trojan War Odysseus Odyssey Jason Argonauts Golden Fleece Perseus Medusa Gorgon Oedipus Sphinx Orpheus Orphism Theseus Minotaur Bellerophon Pegasus Chimera Daedalus Labyrinth Atalanta Hippomenes Golden apple Cadmus Thebes Aeneas Aeneid Triptolemus Eleusinian Mysteries Pelops Ancient Olympic Games Pirithous Centauromachy Amphitryon Teumessian fox Narcissus Narcissism Meleager Calydonian boar hunt Otrera Amazons Related Satyrs Centaurs Dragons Demogorgon Religion in Ancient Greece Mycenaean gods  Ancient Greece portal  Myths portal v t e In Greek mythology, Meleager (/ˌmɛliˈeɪɡər/,[1] Greek: Μελέαγρος, translit. Meléagros) was a hero venerated in his temenos at Calydon in Aetolia. He was already famed as the host of the Calydonian boar hunt in the epic tradition that was reworked by Homer.[2] Meleager is also mentioned as one of the Argonauts. Contents 1 Biography 2 Mythology 2.1 Calydonian boar hunt 2.2 Afterlife 3 Influences 4 Family tree 5 Gallery 6 Notes 7 Sources 8 External links Biography[edit] Meleager was a Calydonian prince as the son of Althaea and the vintner King Oeneus or according to some, of the god Ares.[3][4] He was the brother of Deianeira, Toxeus, Clymenus, Periphas, Agelaus (or Ageleus), Thyreus (or Phereus or Pheres), Gorge, Eurymede and Melanippe.[5][6] Meleager was the father of Parthenopeus by Atalanta but he married Cleopatra, daughter of Idas and Marpessa.[7] They had a daughter, Polydora, who became the bride of Protesilaus, who left her bed on their wedding-night to join the expedition to Troy. Mythology[edit] Calydonian boar hunt[edit] When Meleager was born, the Moirai (the Fates) predicted he would only live until a piece of wood, then burning in the family hearth, was consumed by fire. Overhearing them, Althaea immediately doused and hid it.[8] Oeneus sent Meleager to gather up heroes from all over Greece[9] to hunt the Calydonian Boar that had been terrorizing the area and rooting up the vines, as Oeneus had omitted Artemis at a festival in which he honored the other gods. In addition to the heroes he required, he chose Atalanta, a fierce huntress, whom he loved.[10] According to one account of the hunt, when Hylaeus and Rhaecus, two centaurs, tried to rape Atalanta, Meleager killed them. Then Atalanta wounded the boar and Meleager killed it. He awarded her the hide since she had drawn the first drop of blood. Meleager's uncles Toxeus, the "archer",[11] and Plexippus grew enraged that the prize was given to a woman. Meleager killed them in the following argument. He also killed Iphicles and Eurypylus for insulting Atalanta. When Althaea found out that Meleager had killed her brother and one of her sons, Althaea placed the piece of wood that she had stolen from the Fates (the one that the Fates predicted, once engulfed with fire, would kill Meleager) upon the fire, thus fulfilling the prophecy and killing Meleager, her own son. The women who mourned his death were turned into guineafowl (meleagrides). Afterlife[edit] In the underworld, his is the only shade that does not flee Heracles, who has come after Cerberus. In Bacchylides' Ode V, Meleager is still in his shining armor, so formidable, in Bacchylides' account, that Heracles reaches for his bow to defend himself. Heracles is moved to tears by Meleager's account; Meleager has left his sister[12] Deianira unwedded in his father's house, and entreats Heracles to take her as bride;[13] here Bacchylides breaks off his account of the meeting, without noting that in this way Heracles in the underworld chooses a disastrous wife. Influences[edit] Among the Romans, the heroes assembled by Meleager for the Calydonian hunt provided a theme of multiple nudes in striking action, to be portrayed frieze-like on sarcophagi. Meleager's story has similarities with the Scandinavian Norna-Gests þáttr. Family tree[edit] Dorus Aetolus Pronoe Amythaon Xanthippe Pleuron Calydon Aeolia Sterope Stratonice Laophonte Agenor Epicaste Cleoboea Protogeneia Ares Euryte Porthaon Demonice Thestius Eurythemis Oxylus Oeneus Althaea Toxeus Evippus Plexippus Eurypylus Leda Periphas Toxeus Deianira Gorge Perimede Phoenix Oecles Hypermnestra Clymenus Melanippe Thoas Astypalaea Poseidon Polyboea Iphianeira Amphiaraus Mothone Agelaus Ancaeus Eurypylus Clytie Thyreus Eurymede Heracles Chalciope Meleager Thessalus Gallery[edit] Meleager in art Meleager et Atalanta, after Giulio Romano Statue of Meleager modeled after Skopas Meleager sarcophagus Meleager and Atalanta (17th century) by Jacob Jordaens Volterra, Italy. Etruscan cinerary urn; Hunt of Maleager, Volterra. Brooklyn Museum Archives, Goodyear Archival Collection Meleager, Scopas' influence. Brooklyn Museum Archives, Goodyear Archival Collection Meleager and Atalanta Setting Out to Hunt the Calydonian Boar, tapestry, Walters Art Museum Meleager plate Meleager plate (detail) Renaissance sculpture of Meleager by Pier Jacopo Alari Bonacolsi, who was known by his contemporaries as L'Antico. V&A Museum. Notes[edit] ^ Wells, John C. (2009). "Meleager". Longman Pronunciation Dictionary. London: Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Homer, Iliad IX, 529-99. ^ Hyginus. Fabulae 14.3, 171 ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 1.8.2 ^ Antoninus Liberalis, Metamorphoses 2 ^ Hesiod, Ehoiai fr. 98 as cited in Berlin Papyri, No. 9777 ^ Kerenyi 1959: Genealogical table F, p. 372. ^ Hyginus, Fabula 171; pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 1.8.2. ^ pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 1.8.2. ^ Euripides, Frg. 520, noted by Karl Kerenyi, The Heroes of the Greeks, 1959:119 note 673. ^ There were two further brothers, Thyreus, the "porter", and Klymenos, the "famous"—though Meleager is by far the most renowned of the four—and two sisters, Gorge and Deianira (Kerenyi 1959:199 and Genealogical table G, p. 375). ^ O or perhaps his half-sister, if Dionysus is the real father of Deianira, as pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 1.8.1, would have it; Oineos himself, "to judge by his name a double of the wine-god", Kerenyi observes (Kerenyi 1959:199). ^ Scholia on Iliad 21.194, noted by Kerenyi 1959:180 note 103. Sources[edit] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Meleager . Bacchylides Fr 5.93 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica I, 190–201. Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca I, viii, 1–3. Ovid, Metamorphoses VIII, 269–525. External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125