Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e In Greek mythology, Metope /mɪˈtoʊpiː/ (Ancient Greek: Μετώπη) may refer to the following individuals: Metope, a river nymph, the daughter of the river Ladon.[1] Her waters were near the town of Stymphalus in the Peloponnesus.[2] She married the river god Asopus by whom she had several (either 12 or 20) daughters, including Aegina, Salamis, Sinope, Euboea, Tanagra, Thespia, Thebe, Corcyra, Ismene, and Harpina; and possibly sons, including Pelagon and Ismenus.[3] The question of the exact parentage of these children of Asopus is very vague. Metope, consort of the river god Sangarius. Some say these were the possible parents of Hecuba.[4] She may be identical or different from the above Metope. Metope, daughter of King Echetus of Epirus. She had an intrigue with a lover and as a punishment her father mutilated the lover and blinded Metope by piercing her eyes with bronze needles. He then incarcerated her in a tower and gave her grains of bronze, promising that she would regain her sight when she had ground these grains into flour.[5][6] Eustathius and the scholia on this passage call the daughter and her lover Amphissa and Aechmodicus respectively.[7][8] Notes[edit] ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 3.12.6 ^ Pindar, Olympian Odes 6.83 ^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca historica 4.72.1 ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 3.12.4 ^ Homer, Odyssey 18.85, 18.116 & 21.307 ^ Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica 4.1093 ^ George W. Mooney, Commentary on Apollonius: Argonautica 4.1093 ^ Eustathius, Commentaries on Homer, p. 1839 References[edit] Diodorus Siculus, The Library of History translated by Charles Henry Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8. Online version at Bill Thayer's Web Site Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2. Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pindar, Odes translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Pindar, The Odes of Pindar including the Principal Fragments with an Introduction and an English Translation by Sir John Sandys, Litt.D., FBA. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1937. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pseudo-Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. This article includes a list of Greek mythological figures with the same or similar names. If an internal link for a specific Greek mythology article referred you to this page, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended Greek mythology article, if one exists.