Military science fiction examples Artist's impression of a military science fiction vehicle. Standalone novels "Starship Troopers" by Robert A. Heinlein "The War of the Worlds" by H. G. Wells "New Model Army" by Adam Roberts Novel series Carrera by Tom Kratman Clone by Steven L. Kent CoDominium by Jerry Pournelle The Council Wars by John Ringo Death's Head by David Gunn Dread Empire's Fall by Walter Jon Williams Empire of Man by David Weber and John Ringo The Forever War by Joe Haldeman Galactic Marines by Ian Douglas The General by S.M. Stirling Hammer's Slammers collection by David Drake The Helmsman Saga by Bill Baldwin Honorverse by David Weber Jason Wander by Robert Buettner Legacy of the Aldenata by John Ringo The Lost Fleet by Jack Campbell Man-Kzin Wars by Larry Niven, et al RCN by David Drake Safehold by David Weber Star Carrier by Ian Douglas Starfire by David Weber, Steve White StarFist by David Sherman and Dan Cragg The Sten Chronicles by Allan Cole and Chris Bunch Valor Confederation by Tanya Huff Vatta's War by Elizabeth Moon Worldwar series by Harry Turtledove Machineries of Empire by Yoon Ha Lee Games Battle Tech from FASA Command & Conquer series from Westwood Studios/Electronic Arts Gears of War from Epic Games Halo series from Bungie Mass Effect series from BioWare StarCraft series from Blizzard Entertainment Warhammer 40,000 from Games Workshop Comics, manga, animation, and anime Armored Trooper Votoms series Gundam series Macross series Mazinger Space Battleship Yamato Star Wars: Clone Wars comics from Dark Horse Star Wars: Clone Wars animated series (2003) Star Wars: The Clone Wars animated series (2008) Terminator Salvation: The Machinima Series animated series (2009) Television and Film Aliens Gene Roddenberry's Andromeda Battle: Los Angeles Battlestar Galactica The Expanse Predator Stargate SG-1 Stargate Universe List of military science fiction works and authors Military science fiction is a subgenre of science fiction that features the use of science fiction technology, mainly weapons, for military purposes and usually principal characters that are members of a military organization involved in military activity, usually during a war; occurring sometimes in outer space or on a different planet or planets. It exists in literature, comics, film, and video games. A detailed description of the conflict, the tactics and weapons used for it, and the role of a military service and the individual members of that military organization forms the basis for a typical work of military science fiction. The stories often use features of actual past or current Earth conflicts, with countries being replaced by planets or galaxies of similar characteristics, battleships replaced by space battleships and certain events changed so that the author can extrapolate what might have occurred. Contents 1 Characteristics 2 History 3 Viewpoints 4 See also 5 References Characteristics[edit] Traditional military values of bravery, sacrifice, sense of duty, and camaraderie are emphasized, and the action is usually described from the point of view of a soldier.[1] Typically, the technology is more advanced than that of the present and described in detail. In some stories, however, technology is fairly static, and weapons that would be familiar to present-day soldiers are used, but other aspects of society have changed. For example, women may be accepted as equal partners for combat roles. In many military science fiction stories, technological advances are often basic to plot developments. Some works draw heavy parallels to human history and the fact that scientific breakthroughs or new doctrine can severely change the outcome of battles and the way war is fought. Many works explore how progress or changes to the aforementioned affect military doctrine and also how the protagonists and antagonists reflect on and adapt to these changes. Military science fiction is also part of the "military and popular culture" subject field. [2] Several subsets of military science fiction overlap with space opera, concentrating on large-scale space battles with futuristic weapons. At one extreme, the genre is used to speculate about future wars involving space travel, or the effects of such a war on humans; at the other, it consists of the use of military fiction plots with some superficial science fiction trappings. The term "military space opera" is occasionally used to denote this subgenre, as used for example by critic Sylvia Kelso when describing Lois McMaster Bujold's Vorkosigan Saga.[3] Another example of military space opera would be the Battlestar Galactica franchise and Robert A. Heinlein's 1959 novel Starship Troopers. The key distinction of military science fiction from space opera is that the principal characters in a space opera are not military personnel, but civilians or paramilitary. Military science fiction also does not necessarily always include an outer space or multi-planetary setting like space opera.[4] History[edit] Precursors for military science fiction can be found in "future war" stories dating back at least to George Chesney's story "The Battle of Dorking" (1871).[5] Other works of fiction followed, including H.G. Wells's "The Land Ironclads". Eventually, as science fiction became an established and separate genre, military science fiction established itself as a subgenre. One such work is H. Beam Piper's Uller Uprising (1952) (based on the events of the Sepoy Mutiny). Robert A. Heinlein's Starship Troopers (1959) is another work of military SF, along with Gordon Dickson's Dorsai (1960), and these are thought to be mostly responsible for popularizing this subgenre's popularity among young readers of the time.[citation needed] The Vietnam War resulted in veterans with combat experience deciding to write science fiction, including Joe Haldeman and David Drake. Throughout the 1970s, works such as Haldeman's The Forever War and Drake's Hammer's Slammers helped increase the popularity of the genre.[5] Short stories also were popular, collected in books like Combat SF, edited by Gordon R. Dickson. This anthology includes one of the first Hammer's Slammers stories as well as one of the BOLO stories by Keith Laumer and one of the Berserker stories by Fred Saberhagen. This anthology seems to have been the first time SF-stories specifically dealing with war as a subject were collected and marketed as such.[citation needed] The series of anthologies with the group title There Will be War edited by Pournelle and John F. Carr (nine volumes from 1983 through 1990) helped keep the category active, and encouraged new writers to add to it.[citation needed] A special twist was introduced in Harry Turtledove's Worldwar series depicting an alternate history in which WWII is disrupted by extraterrestrials invading Earth in 1942, forcing humans to stop fighting each other and unite against this common enemy. Turtledove depicts the tactics and strategy of this new course of the war in great detail, showing how American, British, Soviet and German soldiers and Jewish guerrillas (some of them historical figures) deal with this extraordinary new situation, as well as providing a not unsympathetic detailed point of view of individual invader warriors. In the war situation posited by Turtledove, the invaders have superior arms, but the gap is not too wide for the humans to bridge. For example, the invaders have more advanced tanks, but the German Wehrmacht's tank crews facing them - a major theme in the series - are more skilled and far more experienced. Viewpoints[edit] A number of authors have presented stories with political messages of varying types as major or minor themes of their works. David Drake has often written of the horrors and futility of war. He has said, in the afterwords of several of his Hammer's Slammers books (1979 and later),[citation needed] that one of his reasons for writing is to educate those people who have not experienced war, but who might have to make the decision to start or endorse a war (as policy makers or as voters) about what war is really like, and what the powers and limits of the military as an instrument of policy are. David Weber has said that: For me, military science-fiction is science-fiction which is written about a military situation with a fundamental understanding of how military lifestyles and characters differ from civilian lifestyles and characters. It is science-fiction which attempts to realistically portray the military within a science-fiction context. It is not 'bug shoots'. It is about human beings, and members of other species, caught up in warfare and carnage. It isn't an excuse for simplistic solutions to problems.[6] See also[edit] List of military science fiction works and authors Space warfare in fiction Weapons in science fiction War novel References[edit] ^ Waterson, Rick (2008-11-14). "Welcome to Windycon 35!". Windycon Program Book. Palatine, Ill.: ISFiC. 35: 1. ^ Ender M.G., Reed B.J., Absalon J.P. (2020) Popular Culture and the Military. In: Sookermany A. (eds) Handbook of Military Sciences. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02866-4_36-1 https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007/978-3-030-02866-4_36-1 ^ David G. Hartwell, Kathryn Cramer, The Space Opera Renaissance, Tor Books, ISBN 0-7653-0617-4. Introduction, p. 251 ^ "23 Best Military Science Fiction Books - The Best Sci Fi Books". 14 March 2015. ^ a b "Defining the Genre: Military Science Fiction". Fandomania. 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-11. ^ "Interview by Stephen Hunt". Archived from the original on 2009-01-24. v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Hard Soft History Timeline The Golden Age New Wave Subgenres Anthropological Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Christian Climate fiction Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Gothic Isekai Libertarian Mecha anime and manga Military Parallel worlds Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Scientific romance Social Space opera Space Western Superhero Tech noir Techno-thriller Tokusatsu kaiju Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Steampunk Dieselpunk Biopunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines Internet Speculative Fiction Database Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary/art/audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Illustrators of the Future Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers of the Future Zajdel Media Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Film Film history Films India Japanese anime tokusatsu Television TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese anime live-action U.S. Themes Applied Astroengineering AI takeover Artificial intelligence Cloaking device Holography Invisibility Maritime Megastructure Dyson sphere Matrioshka brain Stellar engine Space stations and habitats Mind uploading Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Prosthetics Robots Self-replicating machines Simulated consciousness Simulated reality Space warfare Tachyons Terraforming Technomancy Time viewer Formal Fermi paradox Grandfather paradox Time travel Life Biological warfare Energy being Evolution Extraterrestrials List Genetic engineering Gender Group mind Parasites Sex and sexuality Superhabitable planet Symbiosis Physical v t e Spacetime and spatial anomalies in fiction Spacetime phenomena Black holes Hyperspace Time travel Technologies Faster-than-light Ansible Boom tube Hyperspace Hyperdrive Inertialess Slipstream Space folding Teleportation Warp drive Wormhole Portable hole Stargate Ultrawave Universe Earth Heim theory Force field Multiverse Parallel universes Planets Stars and planetary systems General relativity Faster-than-light communication Wormholes Social Ancient astronauts Alien invasion Alien language Black Cyborgs Evil corporation Feminist First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Libertarian Message from space Political ideas Religious ideas Sci horror Transhumanism Uplifting World government Xenoarchaeology Related topics Alternate history Afrofuturism Fantasy Fictional technology Future Future history Horror Magic realism Rubber science Science and technology studies Science fantasy Speculative fiction Spy-Fi Supernatural Weird Techno-thriller Technology and society Utopian and dystopian fiction Category Portal v t e Fictional military Military science fiction Weapons Doomsday devices Firearms Military robots Military aircraft Rayguns Ships Swords Military Space warfare in fiction Groups British regiments Other Dictators v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie