This article is about the Forgotten Realms character. For the capital of Belarus, see Minsk. Minsc Baldur's Gate character Minsc as he appears in Baldur's Gate II First appearance Baldur's Gate Voiced by Jim Cummings[1] In-universe information Class Ranger Alignment Neutral Good (Baldur's Gate), Chaotic Good (Baldur's Gate II) Home Rashemen Minsc /ˈmɪnsk/ is a fictional character in the Baldur's Gate series of Dungeons & Dragons role-playing video games developed by BioWare. He originated from the pen-and-paper Dungeons & Dragons sessions held by the lead designer of Baldur's Gate, James Ohlen, and was expanded upon by the game's lead writer, Lukas Kristjanson. His video game debut was in Baldur's Gate as a companion character who can join the player's party. He also appears in the sequel, Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn, the expansion, Baldur's Gate II: Throne of Bhaal, and the 2015 game Baldur's Gate: Siege of Dragonspear, as well as in promotions relating to the titles. Minsc is voiced by Jim Cummings in his video game appearances.[1] In the storyline, Minsc is a ranger, originally tasked with serving as a bodyguard to the witch Dynaheir as part of a "dajemma" (rite of passage). When Dynaheir is captured by gnolls, Minsc asks the player to help free her, after which both characters are available to assist the player. Eventually, the player's party is captured and when Dynaheir is killed by the mage Jon Irenicus, Minsc teams with the player in the pursuit of justice. A berserker, he has a strong desire to uphold good and be heroic, though with an extreme fervor that causes those around him to regard him as possibly insane. His animal companion is a miniature giant space hamster named Boo, with whom he often consults. Since his introduction, Minsc has been regarded as one of the best and most popular elements of the Baldur's Gate games because of his demeanor and attachment to Boo, according to reviewers from IGN, GameSpot, and Eurogamer. Other reviewers from publications such as CVG have regarded him as one of the greatest aspects of PC gaming, while game developers have noted a preference for him. The web comic Megatokyo added Boo as a character in their publication, while Largo (for whom Boo serves in the comic as his long-suffering conscience) took on aspects of Minsc. His absence from subsequent gaming titles has also been lamented by sources such as UGO.com. Contents 1 Conception and creation 2 Appearances 2.1 Baldur's Gate video game series 2.2 Baldur's Gate novelization 2.3 Neverwinter MMO 2.4 Megatokyo 2.5 Battle for Baldur's Gate - Dungeon Mayhem Expansion Pack 2.6 References in other media 3 Promotion 4 Reception 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Conception and creation[edit] Minsc character sheet Minsc and Boo originated in pen and paper Dungeons & Dragons sessions held by the lead designer of Baldur's Gate, James Ohlen.[2] Played by Cameron Tofer, associate producer and lead programmer of MDK2, Minsc was conceived as an unstable comic relief ranger who carried around a pet hamster named Boo in the Dark Sun campaign setting. The lead writer for Baldur's Gate, Lukas Kristjanson, expanded upon the character and created dialogue intended to make Minsc funny and memorable to the general audience.[3] During development, some of the character's lines were rewritten based on the voice actor's readings.[4] As this progressed, the writers noted they were able to interject dialogue more freely for Minsc into the script in a tone suitable for the character.[5] In a 2001 interview, BioWare co-founder Ray Muzyka has stated that among the titles the company has completed, Minsc was his favorite character.[6] Minsc classifies Boo a "miniature giant space hamster", a creature first mentioned in the Dungeons & Dragons Spelljammer campaign setting which describes them as giant hamsters bred to paddle wheels for flying ships, which can alternatively be bred in miniature form, looking like a normal hamster.[7] Senior designer David Gaider noted that regardless of what Boo was called, Boo had no powers or abilities beyond those of a regular hamster.[8] He also noted that Boo was handled differently from other creatures that served as familiars that would fight alongside their owners, because of the frailty of hamsters and the impact Boo's dying would have on Minsc in the game.[9] In an open discussion with BioWare developers, scriptwriter Drew Karpyshyn described Boo's role in the game as "[providing] wisdom and moral support to Minsc".[10] Appearances[edit] Baldur's Gate video game series[edit] In Baldur's Gate, Minsc is a bald, purple-tattooed ranger from the Forgotten Realms country of Rashemen. Originally a berserker on his "dajemma",[11] a rite of passage to gain entrance to the Ice Dragon Berserker Lodge,[12] he makes an oath to guard the witch Dynaheir,[11] but runs into trouble when he and Dynaheir are ambushed by gnolls, who capture Dynaheir at their stronghold. He orders the player to halt so that Boo may judge them, and requests that the player help him. Following Dynaheir's rescue, the player is given an option to add Minsc and Dynaheir to the party that will eventually fight the main antagonist Sarevok. At the beginning of Shadows of Amn, the player's party is captured and imprisoned by the mage Jon Irenicus, who seeks to tap into the player's power for his own goals. Dynaheir has been slain, so Minsc offers his services to avenge her. In Throne of Bhaal, Minsc is a character that can be summoned to assist the player. In the game's epilogue, it is revealed that Minsc has returned to Rashemen and has gained access to the Ice Dragon Berserker Lodge, having become a renowned hero due to his experiences with the player. He forms his own adventuring company, the Justice Fist, where he continues to fight evil. In his later years, he journeys across the Realms and disappears.[12] Baldur's Gate novelization[edit] Minsc is a supporting character in the 2000 novelization of Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn by Philip Athans. He is depicted as a well-built man with long red hair, a patchy orange beard, and a jagged scar along the right side of his head. He is no longer a warrior, and is physically smaller than the novel's protagonist, Abdel. In contrast, Boo is unchanged, and is still referred to by Minsc as his miniature giant space hamster. Held prisoner alongside Abdel at the start of the novel, Minsc is set free and accompanies Abdel until they reach an inn, where he decides to work. Abdel repeatedly shows discomfort for his presence, using Minsc's employment as an excuse to leave him behind and steal his sword, though he later returns for his help in securing travel aboard a ship. After Abdel returns to kill his employers, Minsc realizes the inn will close permanently; he and Boo leave to find another place to work.[13] Neverwinter MMO[edit] In February 2015 it was announced that Minsc and Boo will appear in Elemental Evil, a module to the 2013 massively multiplayer online role-playing game Neverwinter. The module was released on March 17, 2015.[14] Megatokyo[edit] Main article: List of Megatokyo characters § Boo Boo appears in the webcomic Megatokyo, where he wears strapped-on wings and serves as Largo's conscience, although he is often misunderstood as he only squeaks. Largo adapts Minsc's personality, including his catchphrase, saying "Go for the beer, Boo!"[15] In number 121, Boo leaves Largo but is unable to get his old job back at BioWare.[16] BioWare's Ray Muzyka praised Boo's appearance in the comic, describing it as an "anime-style" depiction of a favorite character.[6] For a limited time Boo plush toys modeled after his appearance in the comic were sold by the artists through the website, though production was initially delayed due to manufacturing errors.[17] Battle for Baldur's Gate - Dungeon Mayhem Expansion Pack[edit] In September 2019 Dungeon Mayhem, a Dungeons & Dragons inspired card game, released its first expansion pack entitled Battle for Baldur's Gate. The box contains two character card sets, with one featuring Jaheira and the other with Minsc and Boo.[18] References in other media[edit] Though they do not return in other Baldur's Gate titles, Minsc and Boo have also been referenced by non-BioWare games and media. In Dragon Age: Origins, the loading screen sometimes displays the advice "If all else fails, go for the eyes".[citation needed] In Dragon Age Legends, random NPC's use "Go for the eyes!" as a battle cry.[citation needed] In Neverwinter Nights 2: Mask of the Betrayer, an "Astral Rodent totem" can be found, with the words "For M" carved on it. In Mass Effect 2, a "space hamster" is available for purchase. It gives the player a "knowing smile" when observed. One of the game's non-playable characters, Tali, shouts "Go for the optics!" to her combat drone.[citation needed] In Mass Effect 3 Citadel DLC, Commander Shepard finds their hamster being thrown out by one of their foes, and tells the hamster "Sit tight, little guy. If anyone gives you trouble, go for the eyes!"[citation needed] In Guild Wars Nightfall, "Go for the eyes!" is the name of a shout command skill used by the Paragon class.[19][note 1] In July 2014 a comic Dungeons & Dragons: Legends of Baldur’s Gate was announced for October 2014 release. It's set generations after Throne of Bhaal and features Minsc as the main character. It's written by Jim Zub and pencilled by Max Dunbar. It's part of the Dungeons & Dragons 40th anniversary celebrations.[20] On March 8, 2015 at PAX East in Boston, Massachusetts, Minsc was used as an NPC "intern" of the player characters in the "Acquisitions, Incorporated" celebrity Dungeons & Dragons session, to the apparent delight of players Jerry Holkins and Patrick Rothfuss.[21] In March, 2015, Wizkids provided a limited edition promotional card and die of Minsc and Boo as part of their Dungeons & Dragons Dice Masters set Battle for Faerûn.[22] In July 2017, Wizkids released their seventh D&D Icons of the Realms miniature sets, which features a miniature of Minsc (with Boo sitting on his shoulders) as a Medium-sized and of 'Rare' rarity rating piece of the set.[23] In the 2017 game Torment: Tides of Numenera, the player can, under certain circumstances obtain a rodentlike creature named Bao which grants one fighting bonuses at the expense of intelligence, along with an ability to blind enemies.[24] Promotion[edit] In an interview with GameSpy, Lukas Kristjanson acted as Minsc as he gave details about his character background.[25] When asked about the possibility of Minsc and Boo making cameo appearances later BioWare titles, Baldur's Gate II: Throne of Bhaal lead developer Kevin Martens stated "Well, Minsc is popular. You like Minsc. We like Minsc. Neverwinter is so far away. That is all that I have to say."[10] Reception[edit] Dan Tudge, project lead for Dragon Age: Origins, noted that prior to working for BioWare he would rush home after work to use the character.[26] UGO.com described Minsc as "a beloved game personality",[27] and lamented the absence of similar characters in later BioWare titles.[28] IGN named Minsc's return in Baldur's Gate II as an aspect of the game they looked forward to, stating "How can you live without Minsc?!"[29] Computer Games Magazine called him the favorite character of many players of the original Baldur's Gate, citing his strengths and "appealing personality" as reasons for his popularity.[30] Calling him "everyone's favorite lovable oaf",[31] they praised his early presence in the game's sequel.[32] Minsc placed seventh in a "Reader's Choice" edition of GameSpot's "Ten Best Sidekicks", which noted that the character's demeanor and attachment to Boo as reasons for his appeal.[33] Eurogamer named Minsc the best male supporting character in video games for 2001, noting him as additionally one of the most popular characters of the original Baldur's Gate.[34] CVG listed him as one of their two-hundred reasons to "Love PC Gaming", quoting one of his battle cries ("Go for the eyes, Boo!") for their reasoning.[35] He was listed by MSN Entertainment as one of the "Gaming's unsung heroes", saying he "provides great comic relief and is a fondly remembered man."[36] GameDaily named him one of the Most Lovable Lummoxes in video gaming, stating "Every good party of adventurers in a CRPG needs a tank...In Baldur's Gate, the human ranger Minsc is that tank, and a valuable asset to the player's quest."[37] Dakota Grabowski of GameZone listed Minsc as the top BioWare created teammate, commenting "His voice-acting was hands-down one of the best attributes of the Baldur's Gate series" and that "BioWare will never surpass their creation of Minsc (and Boo!).".[38] Kimberley Wallace of Game Informer considered him to be one of the best BioWare characters, saying "If you played Baldur's Gate, one character stood out from the pack. ... Strangely enough, this is what makes you love him all the more."[39] In 2011, Empire ranked him and Boo as the 11th greatest video game character, adding that "Few names bring a wistful smile to the faces of aging PC gamers like that of Minsc and his trusty hamster companion".[40] GamesTM named Minsc one of BioWare's 8 most memorable companion characters.[41] Andy Kelly from PC Gamer named Minsc as his personal favourite BioWare companion, commenting "Minsc is not as rich or nuanced as many of BioWare's more recent creations, but he makes up for it with sheer personality".[42] In a 2017 article, PC Gamer staff included Minsc in their definitive list of the best RPG squad mates around.[43] Notes[edit] ^ The Guild Wars wiki entry for "Go for the eyes!" credits the 1981 film Clash of the Titans where Perseus tells flying owl Bubo to "Go for the eye!" References[edit] ^ a b Gale Research Company (2001). Contemporary Theatre, Film, and Television. University of Michigan: Gale Research Co. p. 100. ISBN 0-7876-5108-7. ^ Andrew Whelan (October 16, 2019). "'BALDUR'S GATE' 20 YEARS LATER: BEAMDOG DESCRIBE CLASSIC RPG'S JOURNEY, FROM HIGH SCHOOL TO NINTENDO SWITCH". Newsweek. Retrieved March 7, 2020. ^ Staff (December 24, 1999). "Developer Journal: Baldur's Gate II pt. 3". IGN. Retrieved January 10, 2009. ^ Staff (April 7, 2000). "Developer Journal: Baldur's Gate II, pt. 9". IGN. Retrieved January 10, 2009. ^ Lafferty, Michael (July 3, 2001). "GZ Interview BioWare on BGII: Throne of Bhall". GameZone. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008. Retrieved January 12, 2009. ^ a b Staff (August 9, 2001). "An Interview with Ray Muzyka". Player of Games. Archived from the original on September 3, 2007. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ Terra, John; Davis, Scott E.; Ewell, Newton (1991). Monstrous Compendium: Spelljammer Appendix. TSR, Inc. pp. 83–84. ISBN 1-56076-071-0. ^ "Black Isle Studios Forum Updates". Sorcerer's Place. Archived from the original on November 22, 2008. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ "On the BG2 Boards". GameSpy. Archived from the original on June 30, 2009. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ a b Staff (June 27, 2001). "Baldur's Gate II: Throne of Bhall Edited Chat Log". IGN. Archived from the original on July 26, 2008. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ a b Baldur's Gate II manual, 2000, p.33. ^ a b BioWare (21 June 2001). Baldur's Gate II: Throne of Bhaal (PC). Interplay. Level/area: Epilogue. With the saga of the Bhaalspawn closed, Minsc fulfilled a long promised oath. He returned to Rashemen, hoping to regale the Icedragon Berserker Lodge with the tales of his deeds, and earn a place within its hallowed halls. His words were not needed. Every tavern in Faerun had a bard singing of the valiant ranger, and he was welcomed as a hero. Eventually he formed his own adventuring company, the Justice Fist, striking fear in the hearts and faces of evil until, in his advancing age, he again set out across the Realms... and disappeared. And what of Boo? Well, what is Minsc without Boo? The two would never be separated, and some say they are together still, up amongst the stars where hamsters are giants and men become legends. ^ Athans, Philip (2000). Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-1569-2. ^ Ford, Suzie (February 18, 2015). "Neverwinter : Minsc & Boo Return - Elemental Evil Release Announced". mmorpg.com. Retrieved February 18, 2015. ^ "MegaTokyo - [90] go for the beer, boo!". Megatokyo. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ "MegaTokyo - [121] E3 Special: how many times..." MegaTokyo. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ Staff (December 12, 2005). "Boo booboo". MegaTokyo. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ "Battle for Baldur's Gate | Dungeons & Dragons". dnd.wizards.com. Retrieved 2020-11-28. ^ ""Go for the Eyes!"". Guild Wars Wiki (GWW). 2012-06-06. Retrieved 2014-03-21. ^ Meer, Alec (18 July 2014). "Official Baldur's Gate Comic Goes For Your Eyes". Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Retrieved 18 July 2014. ^ "Acquisitions Incorporated 2015 PAX East". March 8, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 8, 2015. ^ "Dice Masters: Battle for Faerun". DiceMastersDB. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 24 September 2015. ^ "Icons of the Realms: Tomb of Annihilation". Wizkids. Retrieved 27 July 2017. ^ Bao, official Numenera wiki. ^ Kristjanson, Lukas. "Interview: Minsc". GameSpy. Archived from the original on November 14, 2007. Retrieved January 10, 2009. ^ Staff (December 23, 2008). "Baldur's Gate Memories". IGN. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved January 10, 2009. ^ Harper, Kareem. "Heavenly Sword Review". UGO.com. UGO Networks. Archived from the original on December 12, 2007. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ Swiderski, Adam. "Neverwinter Nights 2 review". UGO.com. UGO Networks. Archived from the original on February 11, 2007. Retrieved January 30, 2009. ^ Staff (August 21, 2000). "Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn Preview". IGN. Retrieved January 10, 2009. ^ Ryan Hunt, David (17 October 2000). "Baldur's Gate II: A brief guide to crucial NPCs". Computer Games Magazine. ^ D'Aprile, Jason (1 September 2000). "Another Look at Baldur's Gate II". Computer Games Magazine. ^ Yans, Cindy (16 March 2000). "Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn Preview". Computer Games Magazine. ^ "Reader's Choice: Ten Best Sidekicks". GameSpot. Archived from the original on 2000-06-20. ^ Staff (March 26, 2001). "Gaming Globes 2001: The Results". Eurogamer. Retrieved January 11, 2009. ^ Staff (May 2, 2009). "200 Reasons to Love PC Gaming". CVG. Archived from the original on May 5, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2009. ^ "Gaming's unsung heroes". MSN Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 8, 2008. Retrieved May 5, 2014. ^ "Ten of Video Games' Most Lovable Lummoxes". GameDaily. AOL. Retrieved January 28, 2009.[dead link] ^ Dakota Grabowski (2010-01-08). "Top Ten BioWare-created Squadmates". Archived from the original on 2014-05-19. Retrieved 2014-05-18. ^ Kimberley Wallace (August 15, 2013). "The Best BioWare Characters". Game Informer. Retrieved May 16, 2014. ^ Dyer, James; McComb, David; Plumb, Alastair; Scarborough, David (May 26, 2010). "The 50 Greatest Video Game Characters - 13. Cloud Strife". Empire. Retrieved August 2, 2013. ^ "BioWare's 8 most memorable companions". Gamestm. June 23, 2015. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved October 26, 2013. ^ Andy Kelly (November 7, 2018). "The best and worst BioWare companions". PC Gamer. Retrieved March 6, 2020. ^ "The RPG dream teams". PC Gamer. June 9, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2020. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: Minsc MegaTokyo Boo plush toy v t e Baldur's Gate Dungeons & Dragons Forgotten Realms Main series Baldur's Gate Tales of the Sword Coast Enhanced Edition Siege of Dragonspear Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn Throne of Bhaal Enhanced Edition Baldur's Gate III Dark Alliance series Dark Alliance Dark Alliance II Dungeons & Dragons: Dark Alliance Universe Drizzt Do'Urden Minsc Wulfgar Developers and publishers BioWare Black Isle Studios Interplay Entertainment Snowblind Studios Beamdog Larian Studios Related Baldur's Gate III: The Black Hound Descent into Avernus Dragon Age: Origins James Ohlen Book Category v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond