This article is about the church ornament. For the weapon, see Misericorde (weapon). Misericord from church Saint-Prix in Noizay (Indre-et-Loire/France), depicting an angel With the seat lifted (left), the misericord provides a ledge to support the user A misericord (sometimes named mercy seat, like the biblical object) is a small wooden structure formed on the underside of a folding seat in a church which, when the seat is folded up, is intended to act as a shelf to support a person in a partially standing position during long periods of prayer.[1] Contents 1 Origins 2 History 3 Misericord (room) 4 Present day 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Origins[edit] Prayers in the early medieval church at the daily divine offices (i.e. Matins, Lauds, Prime, Terce, Sext, None, Vespers, and Compline) were said standing with uplifted hands. The old or infirm could use crutches or, as time went on, a misericordia (literally "pity of the heart" to create an act of mercy). For these times of required standing, seating was constructed so that the seats could be turned up. However, the undersides sometimes had a small shelf, a misericord, allowing the user to lean against it, slightly reducing their discomfort. Like most other medieval woodwork in churches, they were usually skilfully carved and often show detailed scenes, despite being hidden underneath the seats, especially in the choir stalls of the choir around the altar. History[edit] Surviving misericords in English churches date from the start of the 13th century right up until the 21st century, although after the beginning of the 17th century they are viewed as modern copies with little or no historical importance. Remnant's 1969 catalogue dismisses everything after that date as "modern", rarely even affording it a description, but there are many wonderful carvings from the Victorian era, and even the modern day. The earliest set of misericords can be found in the choir stalls of Exeter Cathedral and date from the middle of the 13th century. The vast majority of English misericords date from the 14th and 15th centuries and are curiously most often depictions of secular or pagan images and scenes, entirely at odds with the Christian iconography and aesthetic that surround them. Many stalls with misericords were once part of monastic or collegiate churches, but under the Reformation many were either destroyed or broken up to be dispersed amongst parish churches. Those that survived were further depleted by 17th-century iconoclasts and Victorian reformers. One set at Chester was destroyed by Dean Howson because he deemed it improper, although 43 of the original medieval scenes remain. The woodcarvers came from Lincoln in the late 14th century and moved on to Westminster Hall when they had finished the choir, three years later. It is said[by whom?] that it was the apprentices who were allowed to carve the seats, while the masters did the more impressive works. Misericord (room)[edit] A distinct (but related) use of the word is to denote a room in a medieval Benedictine monastery where some part of the community would eat on any given day. The Rule of Saint Benedict included strict rules on the food allowed for monks in the refectory: for example, it provided for a complete ban on the meat of four-legged animals except for the sick. In a late medieval monastery, a schedule would send half of all monks to dine in the refectory, and the other half to the misericord, where the Rule of Saint Benedict was not in effect and they could indulge in meat. At Westminster Abbey, the misericord was constructed sometime between 1230 and 1270.[2] Present day[edit] Misericords are found to this day on kathismata, the choir stalls used by Eastern Orthodox monastics. These tend to be much simpler than their Western counterparts, usually being a simple strip of rounded wood with little or no ornamentation. Their use is very common in the Greek Orthodox Church, though Russian Orthodox monasteries tend not to have individual choir stalls, but simple benches for the brethren to sit on. Orthodox Christians stand throughout the long divine services, rather than sit or kneel, though some seating is provided for the elderly and infirm. Whereas Greek monks will tend to lean in their stalls during the services, Russian monks usually stand upright. See also[edit] Mourner's bench References[edit] ^ "Inside the church: What do you need to know?". BBC iWonder. BBC. Retrieved 2016-07-18. ^ Living and dying in England, 1100–1540: the monastic experience, Barbara F. Harvey, 1993, pp. 38–41 Remnant, G. L. (1969). Misericords in Great Britain; with an essay on their iconography by Mary D. Anderson. (re-issue 1998). Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-817164-1 Further reading[edit] Elaine C. Block, Corpus of Medieval Misericords in France: XIII – XVI century. (2003) ISBN 2-503-51239-9 Elaine C. Block, Corpus of Medieval Misericords Iberia: Portugal – Spain XIII-XVI. (2004) ISBN 2-503-51499-5 Elaine C. Block, Corpus of Medieval Misericords: Belgium (B) – Netherlands (NL). (2010) ISBN 978-2-503-51600-4 Elaine C. Block, Misericords in the Rhineland. (1996) ISBN 1-883300-06-1 Michael Camille, Image on the Edge: The Margins of Medieval Art. (1992) ISBN 978-0-674-443624 Gordon Emery, Curious Chester (1999) ISBN 1-872265-94-4 Gordon Emery, Chester Inside Out (1998) ISBN 1-872265-92-8 Gordon Emery, The Chester Guide (2003) ISBN 1-872265-89-8 Christa Grössinger, The World Upside Down: English misericords. (1997) ISBN 1-872501-98-2 Paul Hardwick, English Medieval Misericords: the margins of meaning. (2011) ISBN 1-84383-659-9 Dorothy and Henry Kraus, The Gothic Choirstalls of Spain. (1986) ISBN 0-7102-0294-6 Dorothy and Henry Kraus, The Hidden World of Misericords. (1975) ISBN 0-8076-0804-1 Fernando López-Ríos Fernández, Arte y medicina en las misericordias de los coros españoles (1991) ISBN 84-7846-064-0 External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Misericords. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) A Handbook of Medieval Misericords Misericords of the world – Photos, descriptions and histories of thousands of misericords. v t e Mass of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church Forms Pre-Tridentine Mass Tridentine Mass Extraordinary Form Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary Form) Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Types Low Mass Missa Cantata Solemn Mass Pontifical High Mass Papal Mass sine populo Votive Mass Ritual Masses Blue Mass Chapter and Conventual Mass Coronation Mass Gold Mass Nuptial Mass Red Mass Rose Mass Requiem Mass Month's mind White Mass Order of Mass Pre-Mass Vesting prayers Asperges me Vidi aquam in Eastertide Processional hymn Liturgy of the Word Sign of the Cross Psalm 43 Entrance Antiphon Penitential Act Confiteor / Kyrie Gloria Dominus vobiscum Collect Oremus Responsorial Psalm or Gradual Epistle Alleluia Tract / sequence Gospel Homily Credo Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed or Apostles' Creed Universal Prayer Liturgy of the Eucharist Offertory Orate fratres / prayer over the gifts Preface Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna Eucharistic Prayer/Canon of the Mass oblation / epiclesis / Words of Institution / elevation / anamnesis texts and rubrics Roman Canon history Memorial Acclamation Lord's Prayer embolism / doxology Pax Sign of peace Agnus Dei Dona nobis pacem Fraction Holy Communion Communion antiphon Ablutions Postcommunion Dismissal Ite, missa est / Benedicamus Domino Last Gospel Post-Mass Leonine Prayers Recessional hymn Participants Acolyte Altar server female Bishop Boat boy Cantor Choir Crucifer Deacon Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion Laity Eucharistic Congress Lector Porter Priest Subdeacon Usher Altar Altar crucifix Altar rails Ambo Antependium Candles Altar candle Altar candlestick Paschal candle Sanctuary lamp Triple candlestick Chalice veil Communion bench Corporal Credence table Kneeler Lavabo Misericord Pall Piscina Purificator Rood Tabernacle Liturgical objects Altar bell Ashes Aspergillum Censer Chalice Ciborium Collection basket Communion-plate Cruet Evangeliary Fistula Flabellum Funghellino Holy water Incense use Manuterge Paten Processional cross Pyx Sacramental bread wafer Sacramental wine (or must) Thurible Liturgical books Ceremonial of Bishops Roman Gradual Graduale Simplex Roman Missal Sacramentary and Lectionary Tonary Vestments Alb Amice Chasuble Dalmatic Episcopal sandals Humeral veil Pallium Pontifical Stole Surplice Tunicle Vimpa Liturgical year Calendars Tridentine Calendar General Roman Calendar of 1954 General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII General Roman Calendar of 1960 General Roman Calendar (current) Periods Advent Christmastide Ordinary Time Septuagesima Lent Passiontide Holy Week Paschal Triduum Eastertide Ascensiontide Eucharistic discipline Abstemius Concelebration Church etiquette Closed communion Canon 844 Canon 915 Communion and the developmentally disabled Communion under both kinds Eucharistic fast First Communion Frequent Communion Genuflection Headcover Host desecration Infant communion Intinction Reserved sacrament Sacramental bread and wine (or must) Spiritual Communion Thanksgiving after Communion Anima Christi Viaticum Eucharistic theology Body and Blood of Christ Corpus Christi (feast) Epiousios Grace ex opere operato In persona Christi Historical roots of Catholic Eucharistic theology Koinonia Liturgical colours Mirae caritatis Mysterium fidei (encyclical) Origin of the Eucharist Last Supper Passion of Jesus and its salvific nature Priesthood of Melchizedek Real presence Transubstantiation Year of the Eucharist Regulations and concepts Accentus Ad orientem and versus populum Calendar of saints Canon law Code of Rubrics Commemoration Ecclesiastical Latin General Instruction of the Roman Missal Holy day of obligation Intercession of saints Ordinary and Propers Pro multis Sunday Lord's Day Vernacular Related Agape feast Anaphora of the Apostolic Tradition Anglican Use Ambrosian rite Catholic theology Christian liturgy Catholic Christian prayer effects of prayer Congregation for Divine Worship Council of Trent Ecclesia de Eucharistia Eucharistic adoration and benediction Dominicae Cenae / Holy Hour Eucharistic miracle Fermentum Fourth Council of the Lateran Gelineau psalmody Gregorian chant History of the Roman Canon Lex orandi, lex credendi Latin Mass Liturgical Movement Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII Mediator Dei Missale Romanum (apostolic constitution) Music Pope Paul VI Sacraments of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Sacrosanctum concilium Summorum Pontificum Stercoranism Tra le sollecitudini