Miskatonic University is a fictional university located in Arkham, a fictional town in Essex County, Massachusetts. It is named after the Miskatonic River (also fictional). After first appearing in H. P. Lovecraft's 1922 story "Herbert West–Reanimator", the school appeared in numerous Cthulhu Mythos stories by Lovecraft and other writers. The story "The Dunwich Horror" implies that Miskatonic University is a highly prestigious university, on par with Harvard University, and that Harvard and Miskatonic are the two most popular schools for the children of the Massachusetts "Old Gentry". The university also appears in role-playing games and board games based on the mythos. Contents 1 Origin 2 Campus 3 Faculty 3.1 Lovecraft's work 3.2 Other authors' work 4 Reference guides 5 Notes 6 References Origin[edit] The Housatonic River in Housatonic, Massachusetts Lovecraft concocted the word Miskatonic from a mixture of root words from the Algonquian languages.[1][2] Place-names based on the Algonquian languages are common throughout New England. Anthony Pearsall believes that Lovecraft based the name on the Housatonic River[3] which extends from the Long Island Sound through the Berkshires of Western Massachusetts and western Connecticut. Daniel Harms suggests that Miskatonic is derived from the Misqat, a tribe descended from the Native Americans of Massachusetts.[4] Campus[edit] Miskatonic University is modeled on the northeastern Ivy League universities of Lovecraft's day, perhaps Brown University of his hometown Providence which Lovecraft himself wished to attend.[5] In Lovecraft's stories, the university's student body is implied to be all-male, much like northeastern universities of Lovecraft's time. The only female student mentioned is Asenath Waite, of Lovecraft's "The Thing on the Doorstep" (1937).[6] To represent Miskatonic University in their film adaptation of The Whisperer in Darkness in 2009, the H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society chose Mount Holyoke College.[7] The film uses Pasadena City College for interior scenes of the school.[8] Alan Moore's 2015-17 comic Providence used Saint Anselm College as the "real" Miskatonic University. Miskatonic University is famous for its collection of occult books. The library holds one of the very few genuine copies of the Necronomicon.[9] Other tomes include Unaussprechlichen Kulten by Friedrich von Junzt and the fragmentary Book of Eibon. Miskatonic's medical school features in "Herbert West—Reanimator". Interpretations by other authors and fans differ as to whether mystical and Mythos studies at the University are covert or overt. In the first interpretation, which follows Lovecraftian literary traditions, Miskatonic University is an apparently ordinary school whose occult undercurrent only occasionally breaks the surface. In the second, more common in comedic and RPG works (and in Miskatonic University paraphernalia), Mythos and strange elements are overtly displayed and form part of its campus identity. Faculty[edit] Lovecraft's work[edit] The following table lists the professors of Miskatonic University and their respective departments from Lovecraft's stories.[10] Faculty (early 20th century) Name Department Appearances Dr. Henry Armitage Chief Librarian "The Dunwich Horror" Professor Ferdinand C. Ashley Ancient History The Shadow Out of Time Professor Atwood Physics At the Mountains of Madness Professor Dexter Zoology The Whisperer in Darkness Professor William Dyer Geology At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow Out of Time Professor Ellery Chemistry "The Dreams in the Witch House" Professor Tyler M. Freeborn Anthropology The Shadow Out of Time Dr. Allen Halsey Dean of the Medical School "Herbert West–Reanimator" Professor Lake Biology At the Mountains of Madness Dr. Francis Morgan Archaeology "The Dunwich Horror" Professor Frank H. Pabodie Engineering At the Mountains of Madness Professor Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee Political Economy The Shadow Out of Time Professor Wingate Peaslee Psychology The Shadow Out of Time Professor Warren Rice Languages "The Dunwich Horror" Professor Upham Mathematics "The Dreams in the Witch House" "Old" Waldron College doctor "The Dreams in the Witch House" Albert N. Wilmarth English and Folklore At the Mountains of Madness The Whisperer in Darkness Other authors' work[edit] Name Department Appearances Tony Alwyn Assistant Librarian "Beyond the Threshold" Dr. Andrew Armitage Unstated The Drum, the Doll, and the Zombie Dr. Dan Cain Hospital Bride of Re-Animator Randolph Carter Unstated "The New Traveller's Almanac" Code Name: S.T.E.A.M. Professor Alice Derleth Occult Sciences "The Collect Call of Cathulhu" Dr. T.W. Erwin Mathematics "The Revolution's Fine" in The Avengers vol. 1, #83[11][12] R. Gabor University Press The Fountains of Paradise chapter 11. Dr. Graves Hospital Bride of Re-Animator Dr. Carl Hill Medical School Re-Animator Professor Madison Haringa Ancient languages The Damned Highway Ms. Doris Horus Librarian (as of June 26, 1969) The Illuminatus! Trilogy Professor Ted Klein Unstated "The Collect Call of Cathulhu" Prof. Kynikos Unstated Gigabit Network Economics and Paradigm Shifts. IETF. doi:10.17487/RFC1216. RFC 1216. Professor Lake Ocean biology The Last Lovecraft: Relic of Cthulhu Professor Seneca Lapham Anthropology The Lurker at the Threshold Dr. Cyrus Llanfer Chief Librarian (following Armitage) "The Return of Hastur" Professor Joshua N. Marsh Anthropology The Illuminatus! Trilogy Professor Dominique 'Mo' O'Brien Philosophy The Atrocity Archives The Jennifer Morgue The Fuller Memorandum Ward Phillips (I) First President (late 17th century) The Lurker at the Threshold Ward Phillips (II) Chief Librarian (early 19th century) The Lurker at the Threshold Professor Amos Piper Anthropology "The Shadow Out of Space" Professor Laban Shrewsbury Anthropology and philosophy The Trail of Cthulhu Professor William Wallace Spates Zoology Merkabah Rider: Once Upon A Time In The Weird West Keith Brian Swerdlov Archaeology Alan Mendelsohn, the Boy from Mars Ebenezer Tillinghast Geology "The Smoker from the Shadows" Dr. Henry West Necrobiology Splatterhouse (2010 video game) Nathaniel Pickman Wingate Physics Kamillions Professor Brightmeer Chemistry Call of Cthulhu: The Wasted Land Horatio Kharon Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated (based on The Man from Another Place) Harlan Ellison Subnuclear Sciences Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated series finale "Come Undone" Dave DiMaio Unstated Trap Door (Home Repair is Homicide (10th book)) Wilmarth Acker Anthropology Meddling Kids Bill Newkirk Unstated "Mhuld'enda of the Deep" Conrad Usry Department of Physics, Chair "Conrad Usry's Estate" Professor Clinton Dempsey Department of Psychology "Conrad Usry's Estate" Reference guides[edit] Chaosium Press published several guides to the 1920s Miskatonic University. The first was a lengthy section in 'Arkham Unveiled' (1990) by Keith Herber with others and put a full university setting around existing H. P. Lovecraftian Mythos references. The second was Miskatonic University (1995), a full-length book by Sandy Antunes. Subtitled 'Where Science Meets the Mythos', this edition tried to merge and reconcile the Chaosium setting of 'Arkham Unveiled', the original Mythos sources, and historical 'period' details derived especially from 1920s Boston University, while also adding new items to the setting. A copy of this out-of-print book is in Boston University's special collections archive, and Chaosium granted rights in 1997 to the Miskatonic University[13] website to reuse some of this material for their website. The third was a new edition of 'Miskatonic University' (2005) by 'Sam Johnson & friends' published in late 2005. This edition reworked the previous book and added more mystical and mythos game elements. Joan Stanley published a small book, Ex Libris Miskatonici: A Catalogue of Selected Items from the Special Collections in the Miskatonic University Library, which is a researched historical fiction reference for canonical Mythos book references regarding MU. Work was started at Chaosium on a sourcebook Arkham 1990 including a modern-day Miskatonic University, but that has not (as of 2006) yet been published. Mottos for MU have ranged from "Ex Ignorantia Ad Sapientiam; Ex Luce Ad Tenebras" (Out Of Ignorance Into Wisdom; Out Of Light Into Darkness) to "Un Sacrificium Parvis ob Adagnitio" (A Small Sacrifice for Knowledge), and their mascot has been stated as everything from the Badger to the Fighting Cephalopods (as in, "Go ′Pods!"). Notes[edit] ^ Lovecraft, Selected Letters III, p. 432. ^ Harms, Daniel (2008). The Cthulhu mythos encyclopedia (3rd ed.). Lake Orion, MI: Elder Signs Press. p. 181. ISBN 978-1-934501-05-4. ^ Pearsall, "Miskatonic River (Valley)", The Lovecraft Lexicon, p. 281. ^ Harms, "Miskatonic River", The Cthulhiana Encyclopedia, p. 194. ^ Ross Wells. 2002. EXploZion! iUniverse. p. 15 ^ Pearsall, "Miskatonic University", The Lovecraft Lexicon, p. 281. ^ "Lights, Action, Horror at MHC". MHC News & Events. 2009. Archived from the original on 2011-06-07. Retrieved 2010-02-23. ^ The Whisperer in Darkness. Dir. Sean Branney. 2011. DVD. Fungi, LLC, 2012. Special Features disc. "The Whisperer Behind the Scenes." ^ Lovecraft, Howard P (1980). A History of The Necronomicon. West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press. ISBN 978-0-318-04715-7. Archived from the original on June 3, 2008 – via Mythos Tomes. ^ A History of The Necronomicon. ISBN 0-318-04715-2., pp. 281–2. (List of professors.) ^ Avengers #83 reviewed on the Bronzeagebabies website. ^ T.W. Erwin's profile at The Appendix to the Handbook of the Marvel Universe ^ "Miskatonic University". website. 1997. Retrieved 2010-02-23. References[edit] Pearsall, Anthony B. (2005). The Lovecraft Lexicon (1st ed.). Tempe, AZ: New Falcon Pub. ISBN 978-1-56184-129-5. v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category