This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Mondo films are a subgenre of exploitation films and documentary films. Many mondo films are made in a way to resemble a pseudo-documentary and usually depicting sensational topics, scenes, or situations. Common traits of mondo films include portrayals of foreign cultures (which have drawn accusations of ethnocentrism or racism),[1] an emphasis on taboo subjects such as death and sex, and staged sequences presented as genuine documentary footage. Over time, the films have placed increasing emphasis on footage of the dead and dying (both real and fake). [2] The genre is also noted for the graphic footage of death and deceased people often shown in many such films, leading to the popular nickname of "death film". The term mondo is derived from the Italian word for "world". The term shockumentary is also used to describe the genre. Mondo films began to soar in popularity in the 1960s with the release of Mondo Cane (1962), Women of the World (1963) and Africa Addio (1966). The genre arguably reached its peak with Faces of Death in 1978, a film that inspired a myriad of imitators, such as the Traces of Death series, Banned from Television, Death Scenes and The Faces of Gore series. Contents 1 History 2 Films 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links History[edit] Although earlier films such as Alessandro Blasetti's Europa di notte (Europe By Night, 1959) and Luigi Vanzi's Il mondo di notte (World By Night, 1961) may be considered examples of the genre,[3] the origins of the mondo documentary are generally traced to the 1962 Italian film Mondo Cane (A Dog's World—a mild Italian profanity) by Paolo Cavara, Gualtiero Jacopetti and Franco Prosperi which was a commercial success.[4][5][6] Documentary films imitating Mondo Cane in the 1960s often included the term "mondo" in their titles, even if they were in English; examples include Mondo Bizarro, Mondo Daytona, Mondo Mod, Mondo Infame and Mondo Hollywood.[7] Films outside the genre followed suit: Mondo Trasho, Mondo Weirdo: A Trip to Paranoia Paradise, Mondo Keyhole[8] and Mondo Brutale (a German release of Wes Craven's The Last House on the Left[9]) title themselves mondo, although none are mondo documentaries. Later in the decade, this naming convention began to fall out of favour and fewer mondo films identified themselves as such in their titles.[7] Filmmakers wanted to top each other in shock value to attract audiences. Cruelty to animals, accidents, tribal-initiation rites and surgeries are features of a typical mondo. Much of the action is staged, although the filmmakers may claim their goal is to document "reality". Subjects of mondo films include sex (Mondo Sex and Mondo Sexualis USA); celebrities (Mondo Elvis and Mondo Lugosi); youth culture (Mondo Teeno) and the gay subculture (Mondo Rocco). Russ Meyer's film Mondo Topless was one of the few "documentaries" restricted to the old midnight movie circuit in the pre-VCR era; it explored strip clubs in 1960s San Francisco at a time when strip clubs were a novelty in the United States, restricted to centers of port-city decadence (such as San Francisco). Other examples of this genre include Mondo New York by Harvey Keith, Mondo di Notte by Gianni Proia and Mondo Balordo by Roberto Bianchi Montero. The 1980s saw a resurgence of mondo movies focusing almost exclusively on (onscreen) death, instead of world cultures. The Faces of Death series is a notable example of this type of mondo (or "death") movie. The producers used fake footage (passed off as real), but some of the footage was legitimate (including scenes of autopsies, suicides and accidents). The rare 1985 film Mondo Senza Veli (World Without Veils or Mondo Fresh) was purported by viewers to feature at its end the brutal execution of a young Arab rapist by public rectal impalement. This episode was, however, believed to have been a staged execution by some viewers. Mondo films in the 21st century feature gore, exemplified by the Faces of Gore and Traces of Death series. There is less fake footage, and many use news footage of accidents from East Asia.[citation needed] A number of films have parodied the genre. Examples include Ricardo Fratelli's Mondo Ford, Mr. Mike's Mondo Video by Saturday Night Live's Michael O'Donoghue, and Is There Sex After Death? by Jeanne and Alan Abel. Mondo Beyondo spoofed the films' approach to titling but was a parody of satellite television.[10] The Italian cannibal film is arguably an offshoot of the mondo film.[8] Films[edit] The original mondo film series was the Mondo Cane series by Gualtiero Jacopetti, Paolo Cavara, and Franco Prosperi. When this type of film proved successful, many imitators followed. Jacopetti and Prosperi Title Year Country Director and screenplay Music Uncut run time Notes Mondo Cane 1962 Italy Gualtiero Jacopetti Paolo Cavara Franco E. Prosperi Riz Ortolani 108 minutes R-rated run time 85 minutes La donna nel mondo 1963 Riz Ortolani Nino Oliviero 107 minutes a.k.a. Women of the World Mondo Cane 2 1963 Gualtiero Jacopetti Franco Prosperi Nino Oliviero 95 minutes R-rated run time 76 minutes; a.k.a.Mondo Pazzo Africa Addio 1966 Riz Ortolani 139 minutes Unrated English version 128 minutes; R-rated version 80 minutes Addio Zio Tom 1971 136 minutes Unrated English version 123 minutes; a.k.a.Goodbye Uncle Tom The pair's Mondo candido (1975) is not a "Mondo" film; the title was imposed on them by the studio, who wished to cash in on their earlier successes. The film is a retelling of Voltaire's novel, Candide. In the late 1980s Stelvio Massi (a.k.a. Max Steele) made two spinoffs of the original Mondo Cane series, known as Mondo Cane 3 and Mondo Cane 4 on video. Max Steele Title Year Country Director and cinematography Screenplay Uncut run time Notes Mondo Cane Oggi 1986 Italy Stelvio Massi Stelvio Massi 78 minutes AKA Mondo Cane 3 Mondo Cane 2000, l'Incredibile 1988 G. Crisanti 73 minutes AKA Mondo Cane 4 In 1969, brothers Angelo and Alfredo Castiglioni began to make a series of their own mondo films until the early 1980s. They made five films in all, tying Jacopetti and Prosperi as the most prolific mondo film producers. Each film examines brutal and bizarre behavior on the African continent. Their films are considered some of the most graphic Mondo films ever made.[citation needed] Castiglioni Brothers Title Year Country Directors Music Notes Africa Segreta 1969 Italy Angelo Castiglioni Alfredo Castiglioni Angelo Francesco Lavagnino AKA Secret Africa; uncut run time 103 min Africa Ama 1971 AKA Africa Uncensored Magia Nuda 1975 Ciro Dammicco (credited as Zacar) AKA Mondo Magic Addio Ultimo Uomo 1978 Franco Godi AKA The Last Savage Africa Dolce e Selvaggia 1982 AKA Shocking Africa Antonio Climati, cinematographer to Prosperi and Jacopetti in many mondo films, joined Mario Morra in 1974 to produce their own string of mondo films, known as the Savage Trilogy. Prosperi also produced the films. Climati and Morra were known for staging scenes. Savage Trilogy Title Year Country Director and Screenplay Music Notes Ultime grida dalla savana 1975 Italy Antonio Climati Mario Morra Carlo Savina AKA Savage Man Savage Beast; uncut run time 94 min Savana violenta 1976 Guido De Angelis Maurizio De Angelis AKA This Violent World Dolce e selvaggio 1983 Daniele Patucchi AKA Sweet and Savage The 1978 Faces of Death popularized a Mondo style known as "death films", which depicted humans or animals dying in graphic ways. John Alan Schwartz Title Year Director Screenplay Notes The Faces of Death Series 1978–1996 John Alan Schwartz John Alan Schwartz Six parts The Worst of Faces of Death 1987 Compilation of first three Faces of Death films Faces of Death: Fact or Fiction? 1999 John Alan Schwartz James B. Schwartz Documentary about Faces of Death Uwe Schier bought the rights to the Mondo Cane and Faces of Death films and released his own entries in both series, consisting largely of footage lifted from other mondo films. Faces of Death 5 draws heavily on Death Scenes; Faces of Death 6 consists almost entirely of Days of Fury and Mondo Cane IV (not to be confused with Mondo Cane 2000, l'Incredibile, Schier's Mondo Cane IV is in fact the fifth film in the series) lifts from other films (including Death Scenes and Death Faces IV).[11] In 1993, Hurricane Pictures edited a mix of scenes featured in Addio ultimo uomo and Shocking Africa, labeling it the "fifth chapter" of the saga (Teil V in German). Uwe Schier Title Year Country Notes Mondo Cane IV 1992 Germany Mondo Cane teil V 1993 AKA Mondo Cane 5; producers Uwe Schier and Gian Carlo Rossi[citation needed] Faces of Death 5 1995 Faces of Death 6 1996 Several imitators followed the Faces of Death series; many used (or were composed entirely of) footage from other mondo films. Faces of Death imitators Title Year Director Screenplay Music Notes Banned from Television 1998 Joe Francis APM Music Three parts; released in the US by Mantra Films. Banned in the UK by the BBFC Banned! In America 1998–2003 Nomo Ichi Delta 9 Six parts; released in the US by Brain Damage Films. The Traces of Death Series 1993–2000 Damon Fox J. R. Bookwalter Five parts The Faces of Gore Series 1999–2000 Todd Tjersland Three parts The Best of Faces of Gore 2000 Compilation video Other films Title Year Country Director Screenplay Music Notes Mondo Nudo 1963 Italy Francesco De Feo Gian Carlo Fusco Giuseppe Marotta Teo Usuelli AKA Naked World I Tabu 1963 Romolo Marcellini Ugo Guerra AKA Taboos of the World Il Pelo nel Mondo 1964 Antonio Margheriti Marco Vicario Antonio Margheriti Marco Vicario Bruno Nicolai Nino Oliviero AKA Go Go Go World and Weird, Wicked World Kwaheri: Vanishing Africa 1964 United States Thor L. Brooks Byron Chudnow Michael Vittes Byron Ross I Malamondo 1964 Italy Paolo Cavara Guido Castaldo Paolo Cavara Ugo Gregoretti Francesco Torti Ennio Morricone Le Schiave Esistono Ancora 1964 Maleno Malenotti Roberto Malenotti Folco Quilici Baccio Bandini Gianfranco Calderoni Roberto Malenotti Teo Usuelli AKA Slave Trade in the World Today Ecco 1964 Gianni Proia R.W Cresse Riz Ortolani AKA This Shocking World Mondo Balordo 1964 Roberto Bianchi Montero Guido Castaldo Francesco Torti Coriolano Gori Nino Rosso English version narrated by Boris Karloff L'amore primitivo 1964 Luigi Scattini Massimo Pupillo Luigi Scattini Lallo Gori AKA Primitive Love Mondo Topless 1966 United States Russ Meyer The Aladdins Mondo Freudo 1966 Lee Frost Rodney Lee Bermingham The Duvals Chuck Morgan Bill Wild Mondo Bizarro 1966 Lee Frost Lawrence Von Lattman Macabro 1966 Italy Romolo Marcellini Giancarlo Del Re Our Incredible World 1966 United Kingdom Edward Stewart Abraham AKA The Mystery and the Pleasure Mondo Hollywood 1967 United States Robert Carl Cohen Mike Curb Sweden: Heaven and Hell 1968 Italy Luigi Scattini Piero Umiliani L'altra faccia del peccato 1969 Marcello Avallone Giacinto Ciaccio Massimo D'Avak Peppino De Luca AKA The Queer, the Erotic Mille peccati... nessuna virtù Sergio Martino Peppino De Luca AKA Mondo Sex Inghilterra nuda Vittorio De Sisti Pino De Martino Ettore Mattia Piero Piccioni AKA Naked England America così nuda, così violenta 1970 Sergio Martino Luciano Martino Bruno Nicolai AKA Naked and Violent Shocking Asia 1974 West Germany Rolf Olsen Rolf Olsen Ingeborg Stein Steinbach Erwin Halletz Uncut run time 94 min. Notti Porno nel Mondo 1977 Italy Bruno Mattei Gianni Marchetti AKA Mondo Erotica This Is America 1977 United States Romano Vanderbes Emmanuel Vardi AKA Crazy Ridiculous American People (UK), Jabberwalk Brutes and Savages 1978 Arthur Davis Jenny Craven Riz Ortolani Mr. Mike's Mondo Video 1979 Michael O'Donoghue Mitch Glazer Paul Shaffer This Is America Part 2 1980 Romano Vanderbes Bill Milling Emmanuel Vardi Days of Fury 1980 Fred Warshofsky AKA Doomsday Cannibal Holocaust 1980 Italy Ruggero Deodato Gianfranco Clerici Riz Ortolani Des Morts 1981 France/Belgium Jean-Pol Ferbus Dominique Garny Thierry Zéno Alain Pierre AKA Of the Dead; uncut run time 105 min. Great White Death 1981 Canada/United States Jean-Patrick Lebel Jean Sauvageau AKA Sharks! Pirates of the Deep The Killing of America 1982 United States Sheldon Renan Leonard Schrader Chieko Schrader Leonard Schrader W. Michael Lewis Mark Lindsay AKA Violence U.S.A. in Japan; uncut run time 90 min. Shocking Asia II: The Last Taboos 1985 West Germany Rolf Olsen Erwin Halletz True Gore 1987 United States M. Dixon Causey Monte Cazazza The Atom Smashers Mondo New York 1988 Harvey Keith Harvey Keith David Silver Luis Perico Ortiz Uncut run time 83 min. Death Scenes 1989 Nick Bougas Nick Bougas F.B. Vincinzo Richard Gibson Empire of Madness 1989 M. Dixon Causey AKA True Gore II Death Scenes 2 1992 Nick Bougas Nick Bougas Tom Lavagnino Mondo Ford 2001 Scott Calonico Ricardo Fratelli Uncut run time 7 min. Man VS Man 2004 Italy Davide Lingua Giuseppe Vercellotti Murder Collection V.1 2009 United States Fred Vogel Don Moore Fred Vogel Shelby Vogel Jerami Cruise Mondo Sexxxx: The Terry Kobrah Story 2011 Logan Myers Mondo Delirium 2011 Italy Flavio Sciolè Uncut run time 170 min. Made in Italy 2012 Jephta Mondomanila 2012 Philippines Khavn Most Disturbed Person On Planet Earth 2013 United States Thomas Extreme Cinemagore Most Disturbed Person On Planet Earth 2 2014 Thomas Extreme Cinemagore Mondo CANEvese 2016 Italy Davide Lingua Pasquale Vigilante At the shadow of the tower 2017 Davide Lingua Luigi D'Alessandro Fabio Tosa Heart of Africa 2018 Davide Lingua Pasquale Vigilante Most Disturbed Person On Planet Earth 3 2019 United States Thomas Extreme Cinemagore See also[edit] Shocking Asia Snuff film References[edit] ^ Kerekes & Slater, p. 108. ^ Mondo New York (1988) The New York Times ^ Kerekes & Slater, p. 102. ^ Mondo Cane (1962) The New York Times ^ Revisiting a Cinematic Smackdown, and Other Avant-Garde Pleasures The New York Times, October 1, 2009 ^ Mondo Cane Variety Reviews, December 31, 1961 ^ a b Kerekes & Slater, p. 107. ^ a b Kerekes & Slater, p. 109. ^ Kerekes & Slater, p. 315. ^ Kerekes & Slater, p. 155. ^ Kerekes & Slater, pp. 156-158. Bibliography[edit] RE/Search No. 10: Incredibly Strange Films: A Guide to Deviant Films. RE/Search Publications 1986, ISBN 0-940642-09-3 Brottman, Mikita: Mondo Horror. Carnivalizing the Taboo. In: Prince, Stephen (ed.) 2004: The horror film. S. 167-188. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 0813533635. Goodall, Mark 2006: Sweet & Savage. The World Through the Shockumentary Film Lens. London: Headpress. ISBN 978-1900486491. (the standard work on the mondo and cannibal genre) Goodall, Mark 2006: Shockumentary Evidence. The perverse politics of the Mondo film. In: Dennison, Stephanie (Hg.) 2006: Remapping world cinema. Identity, culture and politics in film. S. 118-128. London: Wallflower. ISBN 978-1904764625. Kerekes, David; Slater, David 2006: Killing for culture. Death film from Shockumentaries to snuff. Manchester: Headpress. ISBN 1900486636. Stefano Loparco, 'Gualtiero Jacopetti - Graffi sul mondo'. The first complete biography dedicated to the co-director of 'Mondo cane'. Il Foglio Letterario, 2014 - ISBN 9788876064760 Shipka, Danny 2011: Perverse titillation. The exploitation cinema of Italy, Spain and France, 1960-1980. Jefferson: Mcfarland. ISBN 978-0786448883. External links[edit] Vomit Bag Video Mondo / Death The Internet Mondo Movie Database (ImMDB) v t e Exploitation film Blaxploitation Bruceploitation Cannibal Eurospy Euro War / Macaroni Combat Giallo Hippie Martial arts Mexploitation Mockbuster Mondo Nazi exploitation Nunsploitation Outlaw biker Ozploitation Poliziotteschi Pornochanchada Rape and revenge Rumberas film Sexploitation Slasher Spaghetti Western Splatter Sword-and-sandal Turksploitation Vansploitation Women in prison v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie v t e Italian film genres and movements 1900s-1940s Italian futurism Italian neorealism Calligrafismo Telefoni Bianchi Cinecittà Italy portal 1950s-1980s Cannibal films Cannibal boom Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Eurospy / Spaghetti Spy Giallo Hollywood on the Tiber Macaroni Combat / Euro War / Spaghetti War Mondo films Musicarello Nunsploitation Peplum / Sword-and-Sandal Poliziotteschi Sadiconazista Sceneggiata Spaghetti Western Zapata Western Women in prison