This article is about a 1986 film. For the monster said to reside in household closets, see Bogeyman. This article is missing information about the film's production, theatrical release and reception. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (April 2018) Monster in the Closet DVD cover for 'Monster in the Closet' Directed by Bob Dahlin Produced by Peter L. Bergquist Michel Billot Terrence Corey David Levy Robert Rock Written by Bob Dahlin Starring Donald Grant Denise DuBarry Claude Akins Howard Duff Henry Gibson Donald Moffat Paul Dooley John Carradine Frank Ashmore Paul Walker Jesse White Stella Stevens Music by Barrie Guard Cinematography Ronald W. MacLeish Edited by Mark Conte Raja Gosnell Stephanie Palewski Jacque Elaine Toberen Distributed by Troma Entertainment Release date October 31, 1986 (1986-10-31) Running time 89 minutes Country United States Language English Monster in the Closet is a 1986 horror comedy with a veteran cast, including Howard Duff and John Carradine, as well as Stacy Ferguson (later a vocalist with the group The Black Eyed Peas) and Paul Walker in early roles. The film was distributed by Troma Entertainment. In the GotchaMovies article "Final Destinations and Killer Condoms", Monster in the Closet was selected as the 8th greatest moment in teen slasher history.[1] The film was directed and written by Bob Dahlin.[2] Contents 1 Plot summary 2 Cast 3 Release 3.1 Home media 4 References 5 External links Plot summary[edit] After a series of murders in San Francisco that all take place inside closets, a reporter and his scientist friend decide to uncover the mystery and save California.[3] Cast[edit] Donald Grant as Richard Clark Denise DuBarry as Professor Diane Bennett Paul Walker as "Professor" Bennett Stella Stevens as Margo Kevin Peter Hall as Monster Claude Akins as Sheriff Sam Ketchem Howard Duff as Father Finnegan Henry Gibson as Dr. Pennyworth Donald Moffat as General Franklin D. Turnbull Paul Dooley as Roy John Carradine as Old Joe Shempter Jesse White as Ben Frank Ashmore as Scoop Stacy Ferguson as Lucy Clare Torao as Television Newscaster (credited as Clare Nono) Release[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2018) Home media[edit] Monster in the Closet was released on VHS by Troma Team Video in 1995.[4] It was released for the first time on DVD by Troma on November 10, 1998. It was last released by Hollywood DVD on December 18, 2003.[5] References[edit] ^ Brett Fletcher (August 19, 2009). "Final Destinations and Killer Condoms". Gotcha Movies. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Monster in the Closet". TCM database. Turner Classic Movies. Retrieved February 25, 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "VideoHound's Golden Movie Retriever 2003", page 514. Gale Group, Inc., 2004 ^ "Monster in the Closet". VHS Collector.com. Pine Hollow Video. Retrieved 10 April 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Monster in the Closet (1986) - Bob Dahlin". Allmovie.com. AllMovie. Retrieved 10 April 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Monster in the Closet at AllMovie Monster in the Closet at IMDb Monster in the Closet at Rotten Tomatoes Monster in the Closet at the TCM Movie Database Monster in the Closet – at the Troma Entertainment movie database This article about a comedy horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e