Monster Manual Cover of the original Monster Manual Author Gary Gygax Genre Role-playing game Publisher TSR Publication date December 1977 Media type Print (Hardback) Pages 112 ISBN 0-935696-00-8 (4th printing) Dewey Decimal 794 LC Class GV1469.D8G93 1979 The Monster Manual (MM) is the primary bestiary sourcebook for monsters in the Dungeons & Dragons (D&D) fantasy role-playing game, first published in 1977 by TSR. It includes monsters derived from mythology and folklore, as well as creatures created specifically for D&D. It describes each with game-specific statistics (such as the monster's level or number of hit dice), and a brief description of its habits and habitats. Most of the entries also have an image of the creature. Along with the Player's Handbook and Dungeon Master's Guide, it is one of the three "core rulebooks" in most editions of the D&D game. Several editions of the Monster Manual have been released for each edition of D&D. It was the first hardcover book of the D&D series. Due to the level of detail and illustration included, it was cited as a pivotal example of a new style of wargame books. Future editions would draw on various sources and act as a compendium of published monsters. Contents 1 History of the Monster Manuals 1.1 Early Dungeons & Dragons 1.2 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1.2.1 Original Monster Manual 1.2.1.1 Reviews 1.2.2 Fiend Folio 1.2.3 Monster Manual II 1.3 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd Edition 1.4 Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition 1.5 Dungeons & Dragons version 3.5 1.5.1 Monster Manual III 1.5.2 Monster Manual IV 1.5.3 Special Edition Monster Manual 1.5.4 Monster Manual V 1.6 Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition 1.7 Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition 1.7.1 Reception 1.7.2 Reviews 2 References 3 External links History of the Monster Manuals[edit] Early Dungeons & Dragons[edit] The first D&D boxed set did not have a separate Monster Manual but provided listings for monsters in Book 2: Monsters and Treasure, one of the included booklets. After the series was separated into basic and advanced games, the basic game continued to be published in level-based boxes. Monsters of the appropriate level were included in the rulebooks for the various basic game sets (the Basic, Expert, Companion, Master, and Immortal sets). These monsters were later collected in the Rules Cyclopedia, which replaced higher-level the boxed sets, and the Creature Catalogue. Advanced Dungeons & Dragons[edit] Original Monster Manual[edit] The first publication bearing the title Monster Manual was written by Gary Gygax and published in 1977 as a 108-page book.[1] It was the first hardcover book for any D&D game,[2][3] and the first of the core manuals published for the new Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D) version of the game.[1][4] The Monster Manual was a supplement to the game, intended to describe the standard monsters used in AD&D.[1] The book was a compendium of more than 350 monsters. Some monsters were new—others were compiled and revised from older sources such as Monsters and Treasure, Greyhawk, Blackmoor, Eldritch Wizardry, The Strategic Review and Dragon magazine.[2] Each monster was listed alphabetically with a comprehensive description and full statistics and was, in many cases, supported by an illustration.[2] The cover of the original printing was illustrated by David C. Sutherland III. A softcover version of the Monster Manual was printed in the United Kingdom by Games Workshop in 1978.[1] When the book was reprinted in 1985 it featured new cover art by Jeff Easley.[1] The book remained little changed throughout its fifteen printings up to 1989. Minor changes during the print run included a cover art change to match a new logo and house style and some minor corrections introduced in the 1978 printings. The first edition Monster Manual notably included topless portrayals of some of its female monsters, including the succubus, Type V demons, lamia, and sylph. The first edition was also the first appearance of the mimic. The 1st edition Monster Manual was reproduced as a premium reprint on July 17, 2012.[5] Monster Manual was also reviewed by Don Turnbull who felt that "this manual deserves a place on every D&D enthusiast's bookshelf", and praised the explanatory text, stating that it "amplifies, where necessary, [the game statistics] and the result is the most comprehensive listing of D&D monsters you will find, presented in a clarity which is unfortunately all too rare in other sources."[2] Turnbull noted some minor printing errors and felt that some of the drawings were not as good as others, but felt that the book's quality "is as high as one can reasonably expect in such a complex matter".[2] Turnbull concluded by saying "I can do no more than heap high praise on the Monster Manual. If every DM and every player didn't buy it, I would be very surprised. It is without doubt the best thing that TSR have produced so far."[2] Lawrence Schick, author of Heroic Worlds, commented that "As nothing is easier to design than new monsters, it has spawned a host of imitations."[1] Reviews[edit] Casus Belli #45 (June 1988) Fiend Folio[edit] Main article: Fiend Folio Fiend Folio was published by TSR, Inc. Fiend Folio was primarily made up of monsters described in the "Fiend Factory" feature of White Dwarf and from various D&D modules, while some were original creations. It introduced several popular monsters to the D&D game including drow, githyanki, githzerai, slaad, and death knights. It also featured monsters that were widely ridiculed, such as the flumph, one of the few non-evil creatures presented in the volume. Monster Manual II[edit] Main article: Monster Manual II Monster Manual II was a 160-page hardcover book published in 1983, also credited solely to Gygax.[1] The book was a supplement describing over 250 monsters, most with illustrations. Many of the monsters were drawn from scenario modules.[1] The book included random encounter tables for dungeon and wilderness settings built from the Monster Manual, Fiend Folio, and Monster Manual II.[1] Some of its contents were taken from various AD&D adventure modules, in particular quite a number from S4: Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth, and a dozen new devils that had been first published in the pages of Dragon magazine. Like the Fiend Folio before it, the monsters in Monster Manual II listed the experience point value for each monster within the entry. The Monster Manual II along with the First Edition Unearthed Arcana book featured quite a number of monsters, races, and places from Gary Gygax's home Greyhawk campaign world. Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd Edition[edit] The Monstrous Compendium superseded the Monster Manual with the release of AD&D 2nd edition.[1] The Compendium was a binder of looseleaf sheets, rather than a hardback book. The first two volumes contained the core monsters of the game. These were followed by many appendices that contained extra monsters for particular campaign settings. The format was intended to help Dungeon Masters (DM) keep handy only the monster statistics needed for a particular game session, as well as to greatly expand the information about each monster, as each was given at least one full page. It would also mean they would only need to purchase core volumes and appendix volumes for the campaigns they wanted, rather than getting a mix of monsters in books. However, the binder format ultimately proved impractical for two main reasons. First, looseleaf pages were not as durable as the hardcover format. As it was a frequently used game aid this was a serious concern. Second, TSR routinely printed different monsters on each side of a sheet, making it impossible to keep monsters in strict alphabetical order. In 1993, the Monstrous Manual was released,[3] compiling all monsters from the first two volumes of the Monstrous Compendium plus many monsters from other sources into a 384-page hardcover book edited by Doug Stewart. More Monstrous Compendium appendices were released as a supplements to the Monstrous Manual in the form of paperback books. They included updated reprints of loose leaf Monstrous Compendium Appendices and new volumes. Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition[edit] The Monster Manual for the third edition of D&D was released in August 2000 as the third of three core books of the system. Monte Cook, Jonathan Tweet, and Skip Williams all contributed to the third edition Monster Manual.[6] Williams is credited with the design of the book. The updates were not intended to make major changes, only to update older monsters to third edition rules. According to Williams, "the first item on the agenda was combing through the game's twenty year collection of monsters, and deciding which ones were going into the book... The design team decided to focus on creatures that fit well into classic dungeon style adventures, with extra emphasis on creatures we felt the game needed."[7] In 2001 Monster Manual won the Origins Award for Best Graphic Design of a Roleplaying Game, Adventure, or Supplement 2000.[8] One reviewer called it "...an essential reference book, and it is a bargain..."[9] The next volumes, Monster Manual II and Fiend Folio were new monster-specific rulebooks. They contain mostly updated monsters from the sourcebooks of earlier editions, though some monsters have almost no overlap with those of their first edition namesakes. There were no new versions of Monster Manual II or Fiend Folio for the 3.5 edition of D&D, although update errata for both volumes and for the original third edition Monster Manual are available for download from the publisher's website.[10] Dungeons & Dragons version 3.5[edit] In July 2003, the Monster Manual was revised and released again for D&D v 3.5. The revision was done by Rich Baker and Skip Williams. The 3.5 revision has a slightly different entry on each monster than 3rd edition. Notably, each monster's attack has been divided into attack and full attack entries.[11] When asked about the hardest part in revising the book, Rich Baker replied: "The hardest part of the job was probably the sheer volume of the work we needed to do. There are hundreds of monster entries, and each monster has a couple dozen data points to examine and check."[12] Some creatures from the Psionics Handbook and the third edition Manual of the Planes were added to the revised book.[11] Further revision included the addition of an enhanced version of most monsters as an example of advancement (usually either with a template or with class levels). Many monsters also included instructions on how to use them as player characters. The Monster Manual v 3.5 was reproduced as a premium reprint on September 18, 2012.[13] Monster Manual III[edit] Main article: Monster Manual III Monster Manual III was published in 2004, and was designed by Rich Burlew, Eric Cagle, Jesse Decker, Andrew J. Finch, Gwendolyn F.M. Kestrel, Rich Redman, Matthew Sernett, Chris Thomasson, and P. Nathan Toomey. This Monster Manual is notable for its descriptions of where the monsters might be found in the Eberron and Forgotten Realms campaign settings.[14] Chris Perkins explained: "Almost all of the monsters in the Monster Manual III are new. We didn't want to give gamers a bunch of beasties they'd already seen, and we found several interesting monster niches to fill.[15] Monster Manual IV[edit] Main article: Monster Manual IV Monster Manual IV, published July 2006, was designed by Gwendolyn F.M. Kestrel, Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, Matthew Sernett, Eric Cagle, Andrew Finch, Christopher Lindsay, Kolja Raven Liquette, Chris Sims, Owen K.C. Stephens, Travis Stout, JD Wiker, and Skip Williams. This book was also published in the v3.5 format and used the new stat block format that was introduced in the Dungeon Master's Guide II. Monster Manual IV contained fewer actual monsters than Monster Manual II and III, but had sample lairs and encounters for them, gave stats for classes and templates applied to old creatures, and full page maps. The book also ties into the "Year of the Dragons" theme that Wizards of the Coast planned out for 2006 with the Spawn of Tiamat, yet contains no new monsters that are considered true dragons. Special Edition Monster Manual[edit] In October 2006, the Special Edition Monster Manual was released, completing the set of special edition core rulebooks started in 2004 to commemorate the 30th anniversary of D&D. Like the others, this book was leather-bound with silver-gilt edges and a cloth bookmark. The book was expanded with some new information, 31 new illustrations, and a new index. All collected errata up to its release date were included in this revision.[16] Monster Manual V[edit] Main article: Monster Manual V Monster Manual V was released in July 2007, with David Noonan as lead designer, and additional design by Creighton Broadhurst, Jason Bulmahn, David Chart, B. Matthew Conklin III, Jesse Decker, James "Grim" Desborough, Rob Heinsoo, Sterling Hershey, Tim Hitchcock, Luke Johnson, Nicholas Logue, Mike McArtor, Aaron Rosenberg, Robert J. Schwalb, Rodney Thompson, and Wil Upchurch. This book was published in the same format as the Monster Manual IV, featuring lairs and tactics and, like III and IV, detailing how these new monsters fit into Eberron and Forgotten Realms. Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition[edit] The D&D 4th edition Monster Manual was released with the other core books on June 6, 2008. It featured the demon prince Orcus on the cover. The book was designed by Mike Mearls, Stephen Schubert, and James Wyatt. Monster Manual 2 was released on May 20, 2009 with Demogorgon on the cover; Monster Manual 3 was released on June 15, 2010 featuring Lolth on its cover. Monster Vault was released November 16, 2010 and featured monsters introduced in the Monster Manual revised to the new format that was introduced in Monster Manual 3. Monster Vault: Threats to the Nentir Vale was released June 28, 2011 and re-introduced a few new monsters as well as several related to the setting of Nentir Vale. All volumes of the Monster Vault are parts of the Dungeons & Dragons Essentials line of 4th edition D&D products. Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition[edit] On September 30, 2014, the D&D 5th edition Monster Manual was the second core book released for the new edition.[17] On the staggered release schedule, Jeremy Crawford wrote "our small team couldn’t finish the books at the same time and also ensure their high quality. [...] We could either stagger their releases, or we could sit on the books until all three were finished".[18] Crawford and Mike Mearls co-lead design for the Fifth Edition of Dungeons & Dragons. The cover depicts the beholder Xanathar attacking adventurers in the Underdark. Reception[edit] In Publishers Weekly's "Best-selling Books Week Ending October 13, 2014", Monster Manual was #5 in "Hardcover Nonfiction" and sold 16,956 units.[19] The 5th edition Monster Manual won the 2015 Origins Award for Best Role Playing Supplement and Fan Favorite Role Playing Supplement.[20] The book won two 2015 gold ENnie Awards: "Best Monster/Adversary" and "Best Interior Art".[21] Reviews[edit] Casus Belli (v4, Issue 12 - Nov/Dec 2014)[22] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. pp. 106–107. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ a b c d e f Turnbull, Don (August–September 1978). "The Open Box, The Monster Manual". White Dwarf (8): 16–17. ^ a b "The History of TSR". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on October 4, 2008. Retrieved August 20, 2005. ^ "Dungeons & Dragons FAQ". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on October 3, 2008. Retrieved October 3, 2008. ^ "Monster Manual". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 24, 2013. ^ "Profiles: Monte Cook". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#275): 10, 12, 14. September 2000. ^ Ryan, Michael G. (October 2000). "ProFiles: Skip Williams". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#276): 12, 14, 16. ^ "2000: List of Winner". Origins Game Fair. Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts and Design. Archived from the original on December 24, 2007. Retrieved December 24, 2007. ^ Shafer, Scott (October 20, 2000). "Pyramid Picks: Monster Manual (WotC) and Creature Collection (Sword & Sorcery Studios), for D&D3/d20". Pyramid. Steve Jackson Games. Retrieved December 24, 2007. ^ "D&D v.3.5 Accessory Update Booklet". Wizards.com. 2003. Archived from the original on August 11, 2003. ^ a b Ehrbar, Steven E. (August 22, 2003). "Pyramid Review: Monster Manual v.3.5 (for Dungeons & Dragons)". Pyramid. Steve Jackson Games. Retrieved December 24, 2007. ^ Ryan, Michael (July 4, 2003). "Product Spotlight: D&D 3.5". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved August 11, 2013. ^ "3.5 Edition Premium Monster Manual". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 24, 2013. ^ Honeywell, Steve (January 21, 2005). "Pyramid Review: Monster Manual III (for Dungeons & Dragons)". Pyramid. Steve Jackson Games. Retrieved December 24, 2007. ^ Ryan, Michael (September 3, 2004). "Product Spotlight: Monster Manual III". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved August 12, 2013. ^ "Wizards.com". Archived from the original on November 16, 2006. ^ "Monster Manual | Dungeons & Dragons". dnd.wizards.com. Retrieved 2020-06-21. ^ Hall, Charlie (2014-12-08). "D&D's last core book is your comprehensive guide to breaking the rules". Polygon. Retrieved 2020-06-20. ^ "Publishers Weekly Bestseller Lists | Back Issue 10/13/2014". www.publishersweekly.com. Retrieved 2020-06-21. ^ http://icv2.com/articles/news/view/31740/2015-origins-award-winners ^ "2015 ENnie Award Winners". ENNIE Awards. 2015-08-12. Retrieved 2020-06-21. ^ https://rpggeek.com/rpgissuearticle/162398/monster-manual-une-superbe-menagerie-du-bizarre External links[edit] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Dungeons & Dragons monsters Detailed information on the 1st Monster Manual and differences between printings 3rd Edition Monster Manual at Wizards of the Coast website 4th Edition Monster Manual at Wizards of the Coast website 5th Edition Monster Manual at Wizards of the Coast website Errata: Monster Manual Monsters by Challenge Rating v t e Dungeons & Dragons rulebooks and accessories Original Dungeons & Dragons Core Dungeons & Dragons Chainmail Supplements Supplement I: Greyhawk Supplement II: Blackmoor Supplement III: Eldritch Wizardry Supplement IV: Gods, Demi-Gods, and Heroes Swords & Spells Basic Dungeons & Dragons Core Basic Set Expert Set Companion Set Master Rules Immortals Rules Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Creature Catalogue The Shady Dragon Inn Wrath of the Immortals Modules Adventures in Blackmoor Castle Amber Castle Caldwell and Beyond City of the Gods Combat Shield and Mini-adventure Curse of Xanathon Death's Ride The Duchy of Ten Earthshaker! The Endless Stair The Gem and the Staff Ghost of Lion Castle Horror on the Hill In Search of Adventure In Search of the Unknown The Isle of Dread The Jade Hare The Keep on the Borderlands The Kidnapping of Princess Arelina Legacy of Blood The Lost City Master Player Screen Mystery of the Snow Pearls Night's Dark Terror Palace of the Silver Princess Queen's Harvest Rahasia The Revenge of Rusak Sabre River Temple of the Frog Test of the Warlords The Tree of Life The Veiled Society War Rafts of Kron Where Chaos Reigns Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Core Players Handbook Dungeon Masters Guide Monster Manual Supplements Deities & Demigods Dragonlance Adventures Dungeoneer's Survival Guide Empires of the Sands Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Set Greyhawk Adventures Lords of Darkness The Magister Manual of the Planes Monster Manual II Moonshae Oriental Adventures The Savage Frontier Unearthed Arcana Waterdeep and the North Wilderness Survival Guide World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting Modules Against the Cult of the Reptile God Against the Giants The Assassin's Knot Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords The Bane of Llywelyn Beyond the Crystal Cave Blood of the Yakuza Bloodstone Pass The Bloodstone Wars Castle Greyhawk Conan Against Darkness! Conan Unchained! Danger at Dunwater Day of Al'Akbar Deep Dwarven Delve Descent into the Depths of the Earth Dragonlance modules Dragons of Despair Dungeonland Dwellers of the Forbidden City The Final Enemy The Forest Oracle Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun The Gauntlet The Ghost Tower of Inverness Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl Hall of the Fire Giant King The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan Isle of the Ape The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth The Lost Island of Castanamir Lost Tomb of Martek The Mines of Bloodstone Oasis of the White Palm Pharaoh Queen of the Demonweb Pits Queen of the Spiders Ravager of Time Ravenloft Ravenloft II: The House on Gryphon Hill Red Sonja Unconquered Ruins of Adventure Scourge of the Slave Lords The Secret of Bone Hill The Sentinel Shrine of the Kuo-Toa Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh Swords of Deceit Swords of the Undercity The Temple of Elemental Evil The Throne of Bloodstone To Find a King Tomb of Horrors Tomb of the Lizard King Treasure Hunt Under Illefarn Vault of the Drow The Village of Hommlet White Plume Mountain Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monstrous Compendium/Monstrous Manual Supplements Anauroch Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Artifacts The Code of the Harpers The Complete Book of Dwarves The Complete Book of Humanoids The Complete Fighter's Handbook The Complete Psionics Handbook The Dalelands Demihuman Deities Draconomicon Drow of the Underdark Dwarves Deep Earth, Air, Fire, and Water Faiths & Avatars Forgotten Realms Adventures The Forgotten Realms Atlas Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting From the Ashes Greyhawk: The Adventure Begins A Guide to the Astral Plane Hall of Heroes Heroes' Lorebook Iuz the Evil Jungles of Chult Legends & Lore The Marklands Monster Mythology Old Empires The Ruins of Undermountain The Shining South Tome of Magic Villains' Lorebook Adventures Against the Giants: The Liberation of Geoff The Bloodstone Lands Border Watch The City of Skulls Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad Die Vecna Die! The Doomgrinder Doom of Daggerdale Fate of Istus Five Shall Be One Gargoyle Greyhawk Ruins Halls of the High King House of Strahd Howl from the North Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure Night Below Patriots of Ulek Rary the Traitor Return of the Eight Return to the Keep on the Borderlands Return to the Tomb of Horrors Return to White Plume Mountain Slavers The Star Cairns Treasures of Greyhawk Vecna Lives! Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Challenges Book of Vile Darkness Defenders of the Faith Deities and Demigods Enemies and Allies Epic Level Handbook Faiths and Pantheons Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Ghostwalk Hero Builder's Guidebook Living Greyhawk Gazetteer Lords of Darkness Magic of Faerûn Monsters of Faerûn Manual of the Planes Masters of the Wild Monster Manual II Oriental Adventures Psionics Handbook Races of Faerûn Savage Species Song and Silence Stronghold Builder's Guidebook Sword and Fist Tome and Blood Adventures Bastion of Broken Souls City of the Spider Queen Deep Horizon The Forge of Fury The Fright at Tristor Heart of Nightfang Spire Lord of the Iron Fortress Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil The Speaker in Dreams The Standing Stone The Sunless Citadel Dungeons & Dragons v3.5 Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Dungeons & Dragons Basic Game Supplements An Adventurer's Guide to Eberron Book of Exalted Deeds City of Splendors: Waterdeep City of Stormreach Cityscape Complete Adventurer Complete Arcane Complete Champion Complete Divine Complete Mage Complete Psionic Complete Scoundrel Complete Warrior Draconomicon Dragon Magic Dragonmarked Dragons of Eberron Dragons of Faerûn Drow of the Underdark Dungeon Master's Guide II Dungeonscape Eberron Campaign Setting Elder Evils Exemplars of Evil Expanded Psionics Handbook Faiths of Eberron Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss Fiendish Codex II: Tyrants of the Nine Hells Five Nations The Forge of War Frostburn The Grand History of the Realms Heroes of Battle Heroes of Horror Libris Mortis Lords of Madness Lost Empires of Faerûn Magic Item Compendium Magic of Incarnum Miniatures Handbook Monster Manual III Monster Manual IV Monster Manual V Planar Handbook Player's Handbook II Races of Destiny Races of the Dragon Races of Stone Races of the Wild Rules Compendium Sandstorm Spell Compendium Stormwrack Tome of Battle: The Book of Nine Swords Tome of Magic Underdark Unearthed Arcana Weapons of Legacy Adventures Eberron Eyes of the Lich Queen Grasp of the Emerald Claw Shadows of the Last War Voyage of the Golden Dragon Whispers of the Vampire's Blade Expedition series Expedition to Castle Ravenloft Expedition to the Demonweb Pits Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk Expedition to Undermountain Fantastic Locations City of Peril Dragondown Grotto Fane of the Drow Fields of Ruin The Frostfell Rift Hellspike Prison Other adventures Barrow of the Forgotten King Fortress of the Yuan-Ti Red Hand of Doom Scourge of the Howling Horde The Shattered Gates of Slaughtergarde The Sinister Spire Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arcane Power Divine Power Dark Sun Campaign Setting Dungeon Master's Guide 2 Draconomicon: Chromatic Dragons Draconomicon: Metallic Dragons Eberron Campaign Guide Eberron Player's Guide Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide Forgotten Realms Player's Guide Manual of the Planes Martial Power Martial Power 2 Monster Manual 2 Monster Manual 3 Player's Handbook 2 Player's Handbook 3 Primal Power Psionic Power Adventures Assault on Nightwyrm Fortress Demon Queen's Enclave Keep on the Shadowfell King of the Trollhaunt Warrens Madness at Gardmore Abbey Marauders of the Dune Sea Orcs of Stonefang Pass Prince of Undeath Pyramid of Shadows Thunderspire Labyrinth Tomb of Horrors Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Elemental Evil Player's Companion Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide Volo's Guide to Monsters Xanathar's Guide to Everything Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica Acquisitions Incorporated Eberron: Rising from the Last War Explorer's Guide to Wildemount Mythic Odysseys of Theros Tasha's Cauldron of Everything Adventures Hoard of the Dragon Queen The Rise of Tiamat Princes of the Apocalypse Out of the Abyss Curse of Strahd Storm King's Thunder Tomb of Annihilation Waterdeep: Dragon Heist Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage Baldur's Gate: Descent Into Avernus Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden Anthologies Tales from the Yawning Portal Ghosts of Saltmarsh Candlekeep Mysteries Magazines Dragon Dungeon v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond