Mortal Kombat: The Album Soundtrack album by The Immortals Released May 31, 1994 Recorded 1993-1994 Genre Techno, eurodance Label Virgin Records Producer Oliver Adams Professional ratings Review scores Source Rating AllMusic [1] Mortal Kombat: The Album is a soundtrack album by The Immortals (Maurice "Praga Khan" Engelen and Oliver Adams, best known for their work on the techno/Industrial/New Beat band Lords of Acid), released in 1994 to accompany the home versions of the video game Mortal Kombat. Television commercials for the home versions included a brief plug for the album at the end.[2] Album information[edit] The album featured a techno song for each of the 7 playable characters, as well as Goro, along with two additional tracks. Track 5, "Techno Syndrome (Mortal Kombat)," dates back to 1993 when it was released as a single; the year when the game was released for consoles. "Techno Syndrome" (with its signature scream of "Mortal Kombat!") has subsequently become famous as "the Mortal Kombat theme song" because of its use in the 1995 film, and remixed versions of the song continue to be associated with the Mortal Kombat franchise. The "Hypnotic House (Mortal Kombat)" was used as an intro in the Mortal Kombat Sega CD. "Techno Syndrome" is also a hidden song featured in the Sega CD version of Mortal Kombat when one chooses to enter the "soundtrack" mode at the Sega CD intro screen. It can also be accessed by putting the CD in a CD player and selecting track 17. The album peaked at #16 on the Billboard Heatseekers in the United States. Track listing[edit] All songs written by Maurice Engelen and Oliver Adams except where noted. "Johnny Cage (Prepare Yourself)" "Kano (Use Your Might)" "Sub-Zero (Chinese Ninja Warrior)" "Liu Kang (Born In China)" "Techno Syndrome (Mortal Kombat)" – written by Oliver Adams "Scorpion (Lost Soul Bent On Revenge)" "Sonya (Go Go Go)" "Rayden (Eternal Life)" "Goro (The Outworld Prince)" "Hypnotic House (Mortal Kombat)" References[edit] ^ "The Immortals -- Mortal Kombat". AllMusic.com. Retrieved September 24, 2015. ^ "Gimme Those Tunes". Electronic Gaming Monthly (57). EGM Media, LLC. April 1994. p. 20. v t e Mortal Kombat Video games Fighting games Mortal Kombat (1992) Mortal Kombat II Mortal Kombat 3 Ultimate Trilogy Mortal Kombat 4 Gold Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Mortal Kombat: Deception Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe Mortal Kombat (2011) Mortal Kombat X Mortal Kombat 11 Adventure games Mortal Kombat Mythologies: Sub-Zero Mortal Kombat: Special Forces Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks Compilations Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection Other media Films Mortal Kombat (1995) Mortal Kombat: Annihilation Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge Mortal Kombat (2021) Television Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm Mortal Kombat: Conquest Mortal Kombat: Legacy episodes Card games Mortal Kombat Kard Game Epic Battles Music Mortal Kombat: The Album Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Score Mortal Kombat: More Kombat Mortal Kombat: Annihilation – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Songs Inspired by the Warriors Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Other Comics Malibu Comics Mortal Kombat: Live Tour Characters Baraka Cassie Cage Cyrax Ermac Goro Jade Jax Johnny Cage Kabal Kano Kenshi Kitana Kung Lao Liu Kang Mileena Nightwolf Noob Saibot Quan Chi Raiden Rain Reptile Scorpion Sektor Shang Tsung Shao Kahn Sheeva Shinnok Sindel Skarlet Smoke Sonya Blade Stryker Sub-Zero Related Controversies surrounding Mortal Kombat Fatality Midway Games NetherRealm Studios Mortal Kombat: Rebirth Injustice: Gods Among Us Injustice 2 Category Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125