This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize its key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (December 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Mortal Kombat: Conquest Also known as Mortal Kombat: Konquest Mortal Kombat: The Series Mortal Kombat Krusades Based on Mortal Kombat by Ed Boon John Tobias Developed by Juan Carlos Coto Starring Paolo Montalbán Daniel Bernhardt Kristanna Loken Tracy Douglas Bruce Locke Jeffrey Meek Narrated by Kevin Michael Richardson (Opening titles only) Composer Jonathan Sloate Country of origin United States No. of seasons 1 No. of episodes 22 Production Executive producers Lawrence Kasanoff Robert Friedman Tom Campbell Producer Bobby Friedman Running time 43 minutes Production companies Threshold Entertainment New Line Television Distributor Warner Bros. Television Distribution Release Original network Syndication Original release October 3, 1998 (1998-10-03) – May 22, 1999 (1999-05-22) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Mortal Kombat: Conquest (stylized on-screen as Mortal Kombat: Konquest) is an American martial arts television series based on the Mortal Kombat fighting game series, which aired for one season, from 1998 to 1999. Set prior to the events of the first game, the series follows the original Kung Lao (Paolo Montalbán) as he protects Earthrealm with the help of warriors Siro (Daniel Bernhardt) a former bodyguard and Taja (Kristanna Loken) a former thief. Their mission to prepare for the next tournament all the while defending their realm from threats from within Earthrealm and Outworld. Contents 1 Summary 2 Cast 2.1 Main 2.2 Recurring 2.3 Game characters 2.4 Notable guest appearances 3 Production and release 4 Episodes 5 Home media 6 Reception 7 References 8 External links Summary[edit] Many centuries ago, Earth was an enchanting and desirable planet. Powerful and rich with natural resources, the vicious megalomaniac Shao Kahn wanted Earth as part of his growing collection of conquered realms known as Outworld. To protect Earth, Mortal Kombat was created: a tournament in which the fate of the planet is decided in battles between competitors from Earthrealm and Outworld. Five hundred years in the past, the monk warrior Kung Lao defeated Shao Kahn's sorcerer, Shang Tsung. When Kung Lao spared his life, Shao imprisoned Shang in the cobalt mines. Kung Lao now had to train the next generation of warriors, who would give their lives to save Earth. Kung Lao created a partnership and friendship between two warriors: Siro, a former bodyguard, and Taja, an ex-thief. In the mysterious city of Zhuzin, Kung Lao and his new friends are guided and watched over by the thunder god Rayden. The three now battle various evils of both Outworld and Earthrealm, including an imprisoned Shang Tsung, who swore eternal revenge on Kung Lao for his humiliating defeat, and the sultry and seductive Vorpax, who is also imprisoned in the mines and has an agenda of her own. Cast[edit] Main[edit] Paolo Montalbán as Kung Lao Daniel Bernhardt as Siro Kristanna Loken as Taja Tracy Douglas as Vorpax Bruce Locke as Shang Tsung Jeffrey Meek as Raiden and Shao Kahn Recurring[edit] John Reilly as Baron Reyland Jennifer Renton as Geneviere "Jen" Reyland Angelica Bridges as Omegis Sung Hi Lee as Kiri Tahitia Hicks as Ankha Dana Hee as Siann Lena Cardwell as Lamera Jaime Pressly as Mika Renee Tenison as Sora Fabiana Udenio as Kreeya Roshumba Williams as Qali Eva Mendes as Hanna Andreea Radutoiu as Jola Alexander Walters as Tomas Greg Vaughan as Kebral Josie Davis as Peron Kathleen Kinmont as Dion Game characters[edit] Chris Casamassa as Scorpion J.J. Perry as Sub-Zero Audie England and Dara Tomanovich as Kitana Sultan Uddin as Noob Saibot Adoni Maropis as Quan Chi Megan Brown as Mileena Percy "Spitfire" Brown as Rain Jim Helsinger as Reiko Jon Valera as Reptile Notable guest appearances[edit] With Conquest immediately following TNT's top-rated program, WCW Monday Nitro, WCW wrestlers Meng and Wrath filmed separate appearances. Former QVC model Dorian John played the barmaid Magda in the episodes "Twisted Truth" and "Quan Chi." Production and release[edit] Mortal Kombat: Conquest was produced by Threshold Entertainment (who produced the Mortal Kombat film series) in association with New Line Television (television arm of the films' distributor). Warner Bros. Television Distribution distributed the series. The program was filmed at Disney-MGM Studios in Orlando, Florida. The Warner Bros. unit (eventual holder of the Mortal Kombat property),[1] as New Line's corporate sibling-turned-parent, syndicated the series until it was later picked up by TNT, which aired the remaining new episodes in addition to broadcasting repeats of the first-run syndication run. With a lucrative timeslot following WCW Monday Nitro, Conquest was very popular, but according to the show's developer, Joshua Wexler, this resulted in higher budget costs for the show than anticipated. The cancellation was not announced at first, and rumors of a second season circulated. However, TNT pulled the plug on the show, leaving it with a cliffhanger ending. The ending was planned to have been resolved in the second season, which would have summed up the series and corresponded with the MK timeline. Episodes[edit] No. Title Directed by Written by [2] Original air date Prod. code [2] 1 "Warrior Eternal, Part 1" Oley Sassone Juan Carlos Coto October 3, 1998 (1998-10-03) 1 After defeating Shang Tsung in Mortal Kombat, Kung Lao must learn that victory is not the end but only the beginning. 2 "Warrior Eternal, Part 2" Oley Sassone Juan Carlos Coto October 10, 1998 (1998-10-10) 2 After barely managing to escape execution, Kung Lao rushes with Siro and Taja to save his love from a new deadly enemy: Scorpion. 3 "Cold Reality" Doug Lefler Steve Hattman October 17, 1998 (1998-10-17) 3 Kung Lao and his friends find themselves attacked by the Lin Kuei and their most powerful fighter, Sub-Zero. 4 "Immortal Kombat" Scott Paulin Sean Catherine Derek October 24, 1998 (1998-10-24) 4 Due to Shang Tsung's sorcery, Siro and Taja are rapidly aging and it's up to Kung Lao not only to find a cure for them, but also fight the sorcerer. When he gets to the forest, he meets Omegis, an immortal sorceress who has what he is looking for, but at first she will not let him return. When he goes back to the aged Siro and Taja, he fights Shang Tsung, which incurs the wrath of Rayden, when Kung Lao waives the sacred rules. 5 "The Essence" Jim Johnston Sean Catherine Derek October 31, 1998 (1998-10-31) 5 Kung Lao meets the mysterious Princess Kitana of Edenia, who comes to Earthrealm in search of the Essence of her realm. 6 "Noob Saibot" Charles Siebert William Thomas Quick November 7, 1998 (1998-11-07) 6 Siro and Taja meet a seer named Kiri, who tells them of an underworld city with a shrine guarded by two powerful warriors. Kiri says they will grow stronger if they defeat these warriors, but she really hopes they will release Noob Saibot to kill Kung Lao. 7 "Debt of the Dragon" Jim Johnston Sean Catherine Derek November 14, 1998 (1998-11-14) 7 The Black Dragon, an infamous underworld organization, have appeared in Zhu Zin. They claim ownership of the trading post and demand Kung Lao, Siro and Taja leave. While they resist the Black Dragon, a member named Jola makes a deal with Shang Tsung for power and revenge. He gives her the powers of the black dragon, but she abuses her new-found flame-throwing powers out of arrogance and nearly dies. Shang sends her back to the mines, where she is to remain forever. 8 "Undying Dream" Rick Jacobson Carl Ellsworth November 21, 1998 (1998-11-21) 8 Taja is pulled into a portal and arrives in the Cobalt Mines, captured by Shang Tsung, after being caught under an illusion of seeing her dead father. Kung Lao and Siro have to save her, even if it means walking into a trap. 9 "Quan Chi" Bruce Seth Green Steve Hattman November 28, 1998 (1998-11-28) 9 Quan Chi sends a trio of women to infect Kung Lao, Taja and Siro with a potion. The potion magnifies their flaws: Kung Lao is consumed by rage, Siro becomes a drunkard, and Taja returns to thievery. With the three getting out of control, Rayden has to find a way to break this spell before it's too late. 10 "Unholy Alliance" Charles T. Kanganis Story by : Kearie Peak Written by : Sean Catherine Derek December 5, 1998 (1998-12-05) 10 Shang Tsung forms an unlikely alliance with Quan Chi to defeat Kung Lao; they agree that if Shang can lure Kung Lao into a trap of their creation, Shang must teach Quan Chi how to steal souls. They lure Kung Lao into a realm created by them both, with everything he could possibly want. But it's all an elaborate trap for Shang Tsung to capture him and leave the Earth Realm defenceless. In a backstory, Taja makes a bet with Siro - a day of slave labor if she can take him down in one move. 11 "Thicker Than Blood" Reza Badiyi Sean Catherine Derek December 12, 1998 (1998-12-12) 11 An old love from Siro's past, Hannah, turns up in Zhu Zin in search of his help. Hannah reveals she married Siro's estranged brother, Cassar, who has gone missing. Siro is reluctant to help until he learns Scorpion used magic to make Cassar one of his warriors. 12 "Shadow of a Doubt" Peter Ellis Nancy Greene, Steve Hattman & Sean Catherine Derek (teleplay) February 6, 1999 (1999-02-06) 12 Kung Lao is badly wounded in a fight with Rain. With him practically defenceless, Shao Kahn sends Mileena to masquerade as Princess Kitana and finish off the weakened Kung Lao. However, after taking too much time, Kahn punishes his "new daughter" with lengthening her front teeth and being given a mask to hide her true hideousness. 13 "Twisted Truth" Chip Chalmers Steve Hattman & Sean Catherine Derek February 13, 1999 (1999-02-13) 13 A warrior named Tomas arrives, saying he wants to join Kung Lao in defending Earth Realm. All seems well until it looks like Tomas has murdered some barmaids. Has he? Or is there something bigger going on? 14 "Festival of Death" Charles Siebert James Cappe February 20, 1999 (1999-02-20) 14 A traveling circus arrives in Zhu Zin with Qali among it. Kung Lao, Taja and Siro suspect something is wrong and they're right. The circus turns out to be a way for Quan Chi to raise an army. 15 "The Serpent and the Ice" Jack Sholder Steve Hattman & Sean Catherine Derek February 27, 1999 (1999-02-27) 15 Shao Kahn partners two bitter enemies, Sub-Zero and Scorpion, to destroy Kung Lao. 16 "Kreeya" Bruce Seth Green Sean Catherine Derek James Cappe & Robert Rabinowitz March 6, 1999 (1999-03-06) 16 Empress Kreeya arrives on Earth Realm to build up an army. Her target: Outworld. Vorpax, revealed to be working for Kreeya, invites Kung Lao, Taja and Siro to join them. 17 "The Master" Harvey S. Laidman James Cappe April 17, 1999 (1999-04-17) 17 Long ago, Master Cho was betrayed by Shang Tsung so he could fight for Shao Kahn. With Shang Tsung presently loose on Earth Realm, Master Cho intends to settle the score. 18 "In Kold Blood" Reza Badiyi James Cappe April 24, 1999 (1999-04-24) 18 Kreeya has returned and is now teamed up with Reptile. 19 "Flawed Victory" Charles Siebert Steve Hattman & Sean Catherine Derek May 1, 1999 (1999-05-01) 19 Shao Kahn enlists Quan Chi to find the missing Shang Tsung and return him to the Cobalt Mines. Shang disguises himself as Quan Chi and tries to kill the emperor with the intention to make him look like a traitor. 20 "Balance of Power" Scott Paulin Duke Sandefur May 8, 1999 (1999-05-08) 21 As Shao Kahn furiously seeks his traitor (Reptile), the balance of power is menacingly shifting putting everyone on Earth Realm and Outworld in danger. Vorpax convinces Kung Lao and his friends to help her kill Creeya. When her mother is dead she takes her powers to become the new queen and teams up with Shang Tsung. 21 "Stolen Lies" Reza Badiyi Sean Catherine Derek & James Cappe May 15, 1999 (1999-05-15) 20 When Taja's old friend Dion suddenly makes her appearance at the trading post, search of a mysterious city called Shakaana, which holds a very deadly secret. The people of the city, called the Shaakans, worship a "god" they call Shaaka, who is really Shao Kahn in disguise, with every aspect of their culture reflecting this blind worship of the Emperor. At first, Kung Lao's friends don't believe him when he presents the evidence, but they later discover that the Shaakans are being lied to by Shao Kahn's so-called "disciples", particularly his Shadow Priests, into thinking they will be getting salvation in "Far-land" (really Outworld). However, the people are so naive and careless that they refuse to believe the truth. Dion is also revealed to be a traitor, aligning herself with Shao. After Rayden saves Kung Lao from being killed by one of the Shadow Priests, Rayden orders the Shaakans to leave the city. 22 "Vengeance" Reza Badiyi Steve Hattman May 22, 1999 (1999-05-22) 22 Shao Kahn unleashes his fury against all his enemies, real or imaginary, and Rayden is the only one who can stop him. Unfortunately Kung Lao and those who betrayed the emperor are killed by Shao Kahn's minions. Furious, Rayden attacks and defeats Shao Kahn but his powers are diminished before he can kill him. Rayden is taken prisoner and is forced to observe as Earthrealm falls under Shao Kahn's rule. Home media[edit] Mortal Kombat: Conquest has been released on DVD in the United Kingdom and Australia, where it enjoyed a more successful run on television. Unofficial collections produced in the UK consist of unrelated and edited episodes merged so that each disc contains a theme, and some of the DVDs contain spelling errors on the covers. Several episodes of the series, consisting of one show per disc, were released in Germany; two of the discs feature episodes centered around Kreeya and Sub-Zero. DVDs were also recently released in Portugal, with many spelling errors on the covers.[3][4] In 2015, Warner Home Video released Mortal Kombat: Conquest - Season One on DVD in Region 1 for the very first time.[5] Reception[edit] In 2010, 4thletter! ranked Conquest as sixth on the list of "The Top Ten Most Ridiculous Things to Come Out of Mortal Kombat".[6] In 2011, 1UP.com featured the series in the article "The Top Ten Times Mortal Kombat Went Wrong", calling it a "wire-fu disaster".[7] References[edit] ^ "Midway sale to Warner Bros. approved". The Los Angeles Times. 2009-07-02. ^ a b From the United States Copyright Office catalog: "Public Catalog - Copyright Catalog (1978 to present) – Basic Search [search: "Mortal Kombat : no." and "Mortal Kombat Conquest"]". United States Copyright Office. Retrieved 2017-10-17. ^ "Mortal Kombat Conquest DVD Volume 1 (Official Australian Release)". Archived from the original on 2007-10-08. Retrieved 2007-07-27. ^ "Mortal Kombat Conquest DVD Volume 2 (Official Australian Release)". Archived from the original on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-07-27. ^ 'The Complete Series' of the '98 Show is Announced for DVD! Archived 2014-12-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Top Ten Most Ridiculous Things to Come Out of Mortal Kombat, 4thletter!, June 22nd, 2010 ^ "The Top Ten Times Mortal Kombat Went Wrong". 1UP.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2011. External links[edit] Mortal Kombat: Conquest at IMDb Mortal Kombat: Conquest at epguides.com The Mortal Kombat Conquest Site v t e Mortal Kombat Video games Fighting games Mortal Kombat (1992) Mortal Kombat II Mortal Kombat 3 Ultimate Trilogy Mortal Kombat 4 Gold Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Mortal Kombat: Deception Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe Mortal Kombat (2011) Mortal Kombat X Mortal Kombat 11 Adventure games Mortal Kombat Mythologies: Sub-Zero Mortal Kombat: Special Forces Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks Compilations Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection Other media Films Mortal Kombat (1995) Mortal Kombat: Annihilation Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge Mortal Kombat (2021) Television Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm Mortal Kombat: Conquest Mortal Kombat: Legacy episodes Card games Mortal Kombat Kard Game Epic Battles Music Mortal Kombat: The Album Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Score Mortal Kombat: More Kombat Mortal Kombat: Annihilation – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Songs Inspired by the Warriors Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Other Comics Malibu Comics Mortal Kombat: Live Tour Characters Baraka Cassie Cage Cyrax Ermac Goro Jade Jax Johnny Cage Kabal Kano Kenshi Kitana Kung Lao Liu Kang Mileena Nightwolf Noob Saibot Quan Chi Raiden Rain Reptile Scorpion Sektor Shang Tsung Shao Kahn Sheeva Shinnok Sindel Skarlet Smoke Sonya Blade Stryker Sub-Zero Related Controversies surrounding Mortal Kombat Fatality Midway Games NetherRealm Studios Mortal Kombat: Rebirth Injustice: Gods Among Us Injustice 2 Category