Short sentence expressing a motivation A motto (derived from the Latin muttum, 'mutter', by way of Italian motto, 'word', 'sentence')[1][2][3] is the general motivation or intention of an individual, family, social group or organization.[2][3] Mottos are usually found predominantly in written form (unlike slogans, which may also be expressed orally), and may stem from long traditions of social foundations, or from significant events, such as a civil war or a revolution. A motto may be in any language, but Latin has been widely used, especially in the Western world. Contents 1 Heraldry 2 Language 3 Examples 4 Literature 5 See also 6 References Heraldry[edit] Arms of Brady Brim-DeForest, Baron of Balvaird with the motto above the crest as is traditional in Scottish heraldry. In heraldry, a motto is often found below the shield in a banderole; this placement stems from the Middle Ages, in which the vast majority of nobles possessed a coat of arms and a motto. In the case of Scottish heraldry it is mandated to appear above the crest.[4] Spanish coats of arms may display a motto in the bordure of the shield.[5] In heraldic literature, the terms "rallying cry" respectively "battle banner" are also common, which date back to the battle cry, and is usually located above the coat of arms. In English heraldry mottos are not granted with armorial bearings, and may be adopted and changed at will. In Scottish heraldry, mottos can only be changed by re-matriculation, with the Lord Lyon King of Arms.[6] Although unusual in England and perhaps outside English heraldic practice, there are some examples, such as in Belgium, of the particular appearance of the motto scroll and letters thereon being blazoned;[7] a prominent example is the obverse of the Great Seal of the United States (which is a coat of arms and follows heraldic conventions), the blazon for which specifies that the motto scroll is held in the beak of the bald eagle serving as the escutcheon's supporter. Ships and submarines in the Royal Navy each have a badge and motto, as do units of the Royal Air Force.[8] Language[edit] Latin has been very common for mottos, but for nation states their official language is generally chosen. Examples of unusual choices in motto language include: County of Somerset, Sumorsǣte ealle (All men of Somerset), Anglo-Saxon;[9][10] South Cambridgeshire in the English Fens, Niet Zonder Arbyt (Not Without Labour), Dutch;[11][12] South Africa, ǃke e: ǀxarra ǁke (Unity in diversity), ǀXam. A canting motto is one that contains word play.[13] For example, the motto of the Earl of Onslow is Festina lente (literally "make haste slowly"), punningly interpreting on-slow.[14] Similarly, the motto of the Burgh of Tayport, Te oportet alte ferri ("It is incumbent on you to carry yourself high"), is a cant on "Tayport at auld Tay Ferry", also alluding to the local lighthouse.[15] The motto of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Fidelity, Bravery, Integrity, is a backronym of the letters F.B.I. Examples[edit] United in diversity, the motto of the European Union Out of many, one, the motto of the United States United we stand, divided we fall Literature[edit] In literature, a motto is a sentence, phrase, poem, or word prefixed to an essay, chapter, novel, or the like suggestive of its subject matter. It is a short, suggestive expression of a guiding principle for the written material that follows.[3] For example, Robert Louis Stevenson's Travels with a Donkey in the Cévennes uses mottos at the start of each section.[16] See also[edit] Epigram Hendiatris List of Latin phrases List of mottos List of national mottos Mission statement Slogan Tagline References[edit] ^ "Motto". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 31 January 2011. ^ a b "Motto". Oxford University Press. Retrieved 31 January 2011. ^ a b c "Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary (1913)". The ARTFL Project. The University of Chicago. Archived from the original on 6 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013. ^ Von Volborth, Carl-Alexander (March 1980). Heraldry of the World. Blandford Pr. p. 192. ^ Von Volborth, Carl-Alexander (March 1980). Heraldry of the World. Blandford Pr. p. 211. ^ Innes-Smith, Robert (1990). An Outline of Heraldry in England and Scotland. Pilgrim Press. pp. 14. ISBN 0-900594-82-9. Mottos are not necessarily hereditary and can be adopted and changed at will. ^ "USS Winston S. Churchill (DDG-81)". Archived from the original on 2007-10-10. Retrieved 2007-10-23. ^ Cassells, Vic (2000). The capital ships: Their battles and their badges. Kangaroo Press. p. 190. ^ "The Danish Invasions". Somerset County Council archives. Retrieved 26 June 2015. ^ "Somerset - Coat of arms (crest) of Somerset". ^ "Civic Heraldry of England and Wales – East Anglia and Essex Area". civicheraldry.co.uk. Archived from the original on 28 August 2009. Retrieved 8 November 2009. ^ "South Cambridgeshire". Rural Services Network. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2013. ^ The manual of heraldry : being a concise description of the several terms used, and containing a dictionary of every designation in the science. Illustrated by four hundred engravings on wood (5th ed.). Arthur Hall, Virtue & Co. 1800. p. 132. Retrieved 21 December 2013. ^ Mark Antony Lower (1860), "Onslow", Patronymica Britannica ^ "Tayport - Coat of arms (crest) of Tayport". ^ Stevenson, Robert Louis (1907). Travels with a Donkey in the Cevennes. London: Chatto & Windus. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mottos. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Look up motto in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125