Museum in Ankara, Turkey Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Established 1921 Location Gözcü Street No:2 06240 Ulus, Ankara, Turkey Visitors 450,000[1] Website www.anadolumedeniyetlerimuzesi.gov.tr The Museum of Anatolian Civilizations (Turkish: Anadolu Medeniyetleri Müzesi) is located on the south side of Ankara Castle in the Atpazarı area in Ankara, Turkey. It consists of the old Ottoman Mahmut Paşa bazaar storage building, and the Kurşunlu Han. Because of Atatürk's desire to establish a Hittite museum, the buildings were bought upon the suggestion of Hamit Zübeyir Koşay, who was then Culture Minister, to the National Education Minister, Saffet Arıkan. After the remodelling and repairs were completed (1938–1968), the building was opened to the public as the Ankara Archaeological Museum. Today, Kurşunlu Han, used as an administrative building, houses the work rooms, library, conference hall, laboratory and workshop. The old bazaar building houses the exhibits. Within this Ottoman building, the museum has a number of exhibits of Anatolian archeology. They start with the Paleolithic era, and continue chronologically through the Neolithic, Early Bronze, Assyrian trading colonies, Hittite, Phrygian, Urartian, Greek, Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, Seljuq and Ottoman periods. There is also an extensive collection of artifacts from the excavations at Karain, Çatalhöyük, Hacılar, Canhasan, Beyce Sultan, Alacahöyük, Kültepe, Acemhöyük, Boğazköy (Gordion), Pazarlı, Altıntepe, Adilcevaz and Patnos as well as examples of several periods. The exhibits of gold, silver, glass, marble and bronze works date back as far as the second half of the first millennium BC. The coin collections, with examples ranging from the first minted money to modern times, represent the museum's rare cultural treasures. Museum of Anatolian Civilizations reaching the present time with its historical buildings and its deeply rooted history was elected as the first "European Museum of the Year" in Switzerland on April 19, 1997. Contents 1 The history of the museum 2 History of buildings 3 Exhibited artifacts 4 Galleries 5 See also 6 References 7 External links The history of the museum[edit] Open square in front of the museum entrance The first museum in Ankara was established by Mübarek Galip Bey, Directorate of Culture, in 1921, in the section of the Castle of Ankara called Akkale. In addition to this museum, artifacts from the Augustus Temple and the Byzantine Baths were also collected. Upon recommendation of Atatürk and from the view of establishing an "Eti Museum" in the center, the Hittite artifacts from the region were sent to Ankara and therefore a larger museum was needed. The Director of Culture at that time, Hamit Zübeyir Koşay and Saffet Arıkan, Minister of Education recommended that the Mahmut Paşa Bazaar and the Inn be repaired and converted into a museum. This recommendation was accepted and restoration continued from 1938 to 1968. Upon the completion of repairs of the bazaar, where the domed structure is, in 1940, a committee chaired by German Archaeologist H. G. Guterbock arranged the museum.[citation needed] In 1943, while the repairs of the building were still in progress, the middle section was opened for visitors. Repair projects of this part were carried out by Architect Macit Kural and repair work upon tender was performed by Architect Zühtü Bey. In 1948 the museum administration left Akkale as a storage house, and the museum was in four rooms of Kurşunlu Han the repairs of which were completed. Restoration and exhibition projects of the part around the domed structure were prepared and applied by Architect İhsan Kıygı. Five shops were left in their original form, and the walls between the shops were destroyed and thus a large location was provided for exhibition. The museum building reached its present structure in 1968. Kurşunlu Han, which has been used as an administration building, has research rooms, a library, a conference hall, a laboratory and workshops, and the Mahmut Pasha Vaulted Bazaar has been used as the exhibition hall. History of buildings[edit] The Anatolian Civilizations Museum is in two Ottoman buildings located near Ankara Castle, in the historical Atpazarı district of Ankara. One of the buildings is Mahmut Paşa Bedesteni and the other is Kurşunlu Han (inn, caravanserai). The Mahmut Paşa Bedesteni was built by Mahmut Pasha, one of the ministers (viziers) of Mehmed II the Conqueror during 1464-1471. The building does not have any inscriptions. In some sources, it is recorded that pure Angora garments were distributed here. The design of the building is of the classical type. There are 10 domes covering a rectangle designed to enclose the location, and there are 102 shops facing each other. According to historical records and registry books, the Kurşunlu Han was built as a foundation (vakıf) to finance Mehmet Pasha's (Mehmet the Conqueror's vizier) alms giving in Üsküdar, Istanbul. It does not have any inscriptions either. During the repairs of 1946, coins of the Murat II period were discovered. The findings indicate that the Han existed in the fifteenth century. The Han has the typical design of Ottoman Period hans. There is a courtyard and an arcade in the middle and they are surrounded by two-storey rooms. There are 28 rooms on the ground floor, 30 rooms on the first floor. The rooms have furnaces. There is a barn with an "L" type on the ground floor on west and south directions of the rooms. On the north side of the han there are 11 shops and 9 shops on east side and 4 shops facing each other within the garden. The inn (han) was built by Mehmet Pasha and in 1467 Mehmet Pasha was promoted to Prime Minister (Grand Vizier). Upon orders by Mahmut Pasha the vaulted bazaar was built. He kept his position until 1470. He had his mosque, soup kitchen and madrasa in Üsküdar, and his body is buried there. These two buildings constituting the museum today were abandoned after the fire in 1881. Exhibited artifacts[edit] Palaeolithic Age (....8000 BC): The Palaeolithic Age is represented in the museum by the finds uncovered in the Antalya Karain Cave. People of the Palaeolithic Age were hunter-gatherers who used stone and bone tools. The stone tools are displayed under three time categories: Lower Paleolithic Age, Middle Paleolithic Age and Upper and Late Upper Paleolithic Age. Neolithic Age (8000-5500 BC) : During this age, the first villages appeared and agriculture began. The artifacts from Çatalhöyük and Hacılar, which are two of the most important sites of the Neolithic Age, are exhibited in this section. The collection includes Mother Goddess sculptures, wall paintings, clay figurines, stamps, earthenware containers, and agricultural tools made from bones. The most impressive parts of this exhibit are a hunting scene on plaster from the 7th millennium BC, a reproduction of a Çatalhöyük room with wall-mounted bull heads, a Mother Goddess Kybele (later Cybele) sculpture, obsidian tools, wall paintings of Mount Hasan erupting, and wall paintings of a leopard. Chalcolithic Age (Copper-Stone) (5500-3000 BC): In addition to stone tools, copper was processed and used in everyday life during this age. The artifacts recovered in Hacılar, Canhasan, Tilkitepe, Alacahöyük and Alişar Hüyük are exhibited in the museum. The collection includes a large collection of stone and metal tools, goddess figurines, seals, and decorative jewelry. Bronze figurine of a naked woman breast-feeding a baby, from a grave in Horoztepe. Early Bronze Age (3000-1950 BC): The people of Anatolia amalgamated copper and tin and invented bronze at the beginning of the 3000 BC. They also processed the known metals with casting and hammering techniques. In addition to valuable metal artifacts buried as grave goods in royal tombs in Alacahöyük, artifacts from Hasanoğlan, Mahmatlar, Eskiyapar, Horoztepe, Karaoğlan, Merzifon, Etiyokuşu, Ahlatlıbel, Karayavşan, Bolu, Beycesultan Semahöyük, Karaz-Tilkitepe are represented in the Old Bronze Age section of the museum. The Hatti tribes dominate the Bronze Age display. The collection includes solar discs, deer-shaped statuettes, thinner version of female figurines and gold jewelry. There is also a reconstruction of a burial ceremony which emphasizes the religious practices of this ancient people. Assyrian Trade Colonies (1950-1750 BC): In this period, writing emerged in Anatolia for the first time. Since Akkadian times, Mesopotamians were aware of Anatolian resources and riches. As a result, they engaged in broad trade relations, spearheaded by Assyrians and with them they brought in their languages and cylinder and stamp seals which later was developed into a writing system. Over 20,000 clay tablets, inscribed in Assyrian cuneiform, shed light to this period. Most of the written documents are concerned with trade, economy, and law. Tin, textiles, and clothes were brought by the Assyrian donkey caravans for the local people and these goods were exchanged for silver and gold. Kültepe was the center of the trade network. As a result, we witness an explosion in the diversity of the finds. Cuneiform tablets, drinking vessels in the shape of sacred animals like bull, lion, eagle, boar, rabbit, which were used in religious ceremonies, cult objects, cylinder and stamp seals and their impressions, all kinds of weapons and metal cups of artistic value made of clay, stone, gold, silver, lead, copper, bronze, precious stones and tiles from the Assyrian trade colonies were discovered at Kültepe, Acemhöyük, Alişar and Boğazköy. Another interesting class of finds related to this 200-year period is rhytons of Kultepe, a special group of ceramic art which constitutes the basis of the Hittite culture. Bronze tablet from Çorum-Boğazköy dating from 1235 BC Hittite Period (1750-1200 BC): The ancient Hittites' first political union was established near the crescent of the Kızılırmak River in Anatolia around 2000 BC. The important sites are Boğazköy (Hattusa), İnandık, Eskiyapar, Alacahöyük, Alişar, Ferzant. The highlight of the Great Hittite Empire section is the relief of the God of War taken from the King's Gate at Hattusa. Embossed bull figure containers, various fruit bowls and vases with animal shapes, infamous İnandık vase that depicts a wedding ceremony, tablets of government archives as well as the seals of the kings, bronze statues of fertility gods, bulls, and deer are other interesting displays. The exhibit also includes pictures from Boğazköy, reconstruction of a religious ceremony, reconstruction of King's Gate at Boğazköy and pictures from the excavation at Boğazköy. One of the most important artifacts is the tablet in Akkadian scripts (1275-1220 BC) - a correspondence from Egyptian Queen Nefertari (wife of Ramses II) to Hittite Queen Puduhepa (wife of Hattusili III) written after Kadesh Peace Treaty - the first peace treaty in the world history, dated 1275-1220 BC found at Boğazköy. Phrygian Period (1200-700 BC) : The Phrygians, the Sea People, came to Anatolia from the Balkans in 1200 BC. They acquired control over Central Anatolia and made Gordion their capital city. The finds from the royal tumulus at Gordion form the majority of this section. The tumulus measured 300 m (980 ft) in diameter and 50 m (160 ft) in height. The reproduction of the tomb of King Midas, found in the ancient tumulus, is also displayed here. Carved and inlaid wooden furniture, hinged dress pins, ritual vessels, depictions of animals such as lions, rams and eagles, the reconstruction of a burial ceremony and the statue of the Mother Goddess Kybele (to whom the Phrygians worshipped as their main deity) are represented in this section. Late Hittite Period (1200-700 BC) : After the fall of the Hittite Empire as a result of the invasion of the Phrygians, some of the Hittites moved to south and south-east Anatolia and established new states. The most important sites of this period are Malatya–Arslantepe, Karkamış (Carchemish) and Sakçagözü. The 10-domed old bazaar forming the center hall of the museum houses reliefs and statues from Neo-Hittite period. The theme of war is emphasized in the reliefs with soldiers and chariots. Also, rock-cut reliefs portraying the Hittite rulers, the gods of the Hittite pantheon, and statues of powerful animals such as lions and bulls are represented. Urartian Period (1200-600 BC) : The Urartuans lived in East Anatolia during the same period as the Phrygians. The most important Urartian sites are Altıntepe, Adilcevaz, Kayalıdere, Patnos, Van, Haykaberd. Urartians made new advances in architecture and mining. Lydian Period (1200-546 BC) : The origin of Lydian art comes from the Bronze Age in which there were relations, friendly or hostile, between their ancestors and the Hittites. Lydians made spectacular progress in the Iron Age, especially from Gyges period to Croesus (685 to 547 BC). The exhibited artifacts mostly date from the 6th century BC. Classical Period and Ankara through the ages: The collection includes Greek, Hellenistic, Roman and Byzantine Period artifacts such as statues, jewelry and decorative vessels made of gold, silver, glass, marble, and bronze as well as coins with examples ranging from the first minted money to modern times. In addition, there is a section displaying the finds uncovered recently from Ankara's surroundings. Galleries[edit] Museum Galleries Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Hunt painting Mother Goddess from Çatalhöyük, frontal view Mother Goddess, lateral view Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Mother Goddess Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Pot Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Woman on pitcher Hittite monument, an exact replica of monument from Fasıllar A statue in the courtyard Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Pitcher Assyrian Colonies period Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Vessel Assyrian Colonies period Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Pithos Hittite Bronze religious standard symbolizing the universe, used by Hittite priests Stag statuette, symbol of a Hittite male god Bronze ceremonial standard of the Hittites Chimera with a human head and a lion's head; Late Hittite period Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Bitik Vase Hittite Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Vessel head Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Vessel head Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Relief Neo-Hittite Reconstruction of the tomb of King Midas Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Phrygian Table Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Chariot Phrygian Bull heads from Çatalhöyük Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Relief Urartian Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Ivory plaquettes Urartian Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Urartian Votive plate Urartian Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Situla Assyrian Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Lion Urartian Perspective of a gallery Marble head of a Roman woman Piece of jewelry, an earring. Piece of jewelry, a mirror See also[edit] Anatolian Civilizations State Art and Sculpture Museum Ankara Ethnography Museum References[edit] ^ Museum's official website External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Museum of Anatolian Civilizations. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Museum's official website; in the Turkish language. PlanetWare - Museum of Anatolian Civilizations TransAnatolie.com - Anatolian Civilizations Museum very large private website; though a user wrote "seems to be a pure "picture gape" gallery - no times, no periods." the site has many pictures with precise captions. Major periods are used to group pictures. For its over 900 pictures highly appreciated by users from Harvard, Oxford, Princeton, do I need to go on? v t e Archaeological museums in Turkey Aegean Region Afyonkarahisar Archaeological Museum Aydın Archaeological Museum Bodrum Castle Bolvadin Museum Bostanlı Open-air Archaeological Museum Ephesus Archaeological Museum Hierapolis Izmir Archeology Museum Archaeological Museum of Manisa Uşak Museum of Archaeology Black Sea Region Amasya Museum Bolu Museum Çorum Archaeological Museum Kastamonu Archaeological Museum Konuralp Museum Samsun Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography Sinop Archaeological Museum Tokat Museum Trabzon Museum Central Anatolia Region Çatalhöyük Eskişehir Archaeological Museum Konya Archaeological Museum Gordion Museum Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Eastern Anatolia Region Kars Museum Marmara Region Bursa Archaeological Museum Çanakkale Archaeological Museum Great Palace Mosaic Museum Istanbul Archaeology Museums Kırklareli Museum Sadberk Hanım Museum Tekirdağ Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography Mediterranean Region Adana Archaeology Museum Alanya Archaeological Museum Antalya Museum Arslan Eyce Private Amphora Museum Burdur Archaeological Museum Hatay Archaeology Museum Karatepe-Aslantaş Open-Air Museum Mersin Museum Misis Mosaic Museum Silifke Museum Tarsus Museum Southeastern Anatolia Region Adıyaman Archaeological Museum Diyarbakır Archaeological Museum Gaziantep Museum of Archaeology Şanlıurfa Museum Zeugma Mosaic Museum v t e Museums in Ankara Archaeology and history museums Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Roman Baths of Ankara Castles Ankara Castle Culture and art museums State Art and Sculpture Museum Historic house museums Pembe Köşk, Atatürk's Residence and Railway Museum Literary museums Mehmet Akif Ersoy Literature Museum Library Military museums Ankara Aviation Museum Turkish State Cemetery War of Independence Museum Palaces Atatürk Museum Mansion Science and technology museums Çengelhan Rahmi M. Koç Museum Feza Gürsey Science Center METU Science and Technology Museum Miscellaneous Atatürk's Residence and Railway Museum Gökyay Association Chess Museum Ethnography Museum of Ankara İşbank Museum MİT Museum of Espionage Museum of Turkish Aeronautical Association Republic Museum Stamp Museum TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum Ulucanlar Prison Museum  Turkey portal Category v t e Museums in Turkey Aegean Region Adatepe Olive Oil Museum Afyonkarahisar Archaeological Museum Akhisar Museum Atatürk's House (Şuhut) Aydın Archaeological Museum Bergama Museum Bostanlı Open-air Archaeological Museum Burhaniye National Forces Culture Museum Çamlık Railway Museum Çeşme Museum Denizli Museum Natural History Museum of Ege University İnciraltı Sea Museum İzmir Archaeological Museum İzmir Art and Sculpture Museum Izmir Ethnography Museum İzmir Toy Museum Kütahya Archaeological Museum Manisa Archaeological Museum Milas Museum Muğla Museum Ödemiş Museum Ödemiş Urban Archives and Museum Tahtakuşlar Tire City Museum Uşak Museum of Archaeology İzmir Women's Museum Victory Museum Black Sea Region Alaçam Population Exchange Museum Amasra Museum Amasya Museum Baksı Museum Bolu Museum Çorum Archaeological Museum Dikyamaç Museum Giresun Museum Hagia Sophia, Trabzon Karabük Kardemir Iron-Steel Museum Karadeniz Ereğli Museum Kastamonu Ethnography Museum Ordu Ethnographical Museum Rize Atatürk Museum Samsun Atatürk Museum Sinop Fortress Prison Sinop Archaeological Museum Söğüt Ertuğrul Gazi Museum Tokat Museum Trabzon Museum Central Anatolia Region Aksaray Museum Akşehir Museum Anıtkabir Ankara Aviation Museum Atatürk Museum Mansion Atatürk's Residence and Railway Museum Çengelhan Rahmi M. Koç Museum Erimtan Museum Eskişehir Museum Eskişehir Aviation Museum Eskişehir Caricature Museum Eskişehir Meerschaum Museum Eskişehir Wax Museum Ethnography Museum of Ankara Feza Gürsey Science Center Gordion Museum Gökyay Association Chess Museum İnönü Military Quarter and War Museum Karaman Museum Kayseri Archaeology Museum Kırıkkale MKE Weapons Industry Museum Kırşehir Museum Konya Archaeological Museum Konya Ethnography Museum Konya Ereğli Museum Mehmet Akif Ersoy Literature Museum Library METU Science and Technology Museum Mevlana Museum Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Museum of Modern Glass Art, Eskişehir Museum of woodworking Nevşehir Museum Niğde Archaeological Museum Pembe Köşk Republic Museum Roman Baths of Ankara Sahip Ata Museum Sivas Congress and Ethnography Museum Stamp Museum State Art and Sculpture Museum Tayfun Talipoğlu Typewriter Museum TCDD Open Air Steam Locomotive Museum Ulucanlar Prison Museum Vakıf Museum War of Independence Museum Yozgat Museum Eastern Anatolia Boğatepe Cheese Museum Elazığ Archaeology and Ethnography Museum Ali Demirsoy Natural History Museum Kars Museum Malatya Museum Marmara Region Museum of Nationist Forces in Balıkesir Bilecik Museum Bursa Archaeological Museum Bursa Atatürk Museum Bursa Forestry Museum Bursa Karagöz Museum Bursa Museum of Turkish and Islamic Art Bursa Energy Museum Çanakkale Archaeological Museum Edirne Museum Gelibolu War Museum Kırklareli Museum Kocaeli Museum Konuralp Museum Mudanya Armistice House Kutman Wine Museum Namık Kemal House Museum Rákóczi Museum Sakarya Museum SEKA Paper Museum Tekirdağ Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography Tofaş Museum of Cars and Anatolian Carriages Troy Museum For museums in Istanbul see Museums in Istanbul Mediterranean Region Adana Archaeology Museum Adana Cinema Museum Alanya Archaeological Museum Anamur Museum Arslan Eyce Private Amphora Museum Atatürk Museum Adana Ethnography Museum Antalya Museum Atatürk's House Museum (Antalya) Burdur Archaeological Museum Emirler Picnic Area and Museum Hatay Archaeology Museum İskenderun Naval Museum Kahramanmaraş Archaeology Museum Kahramanmaraş Liberation Museum Karatepe-Aslantaş Open-Air Museum Mersin Archaeological Museum Mersin Atatürk Museum Mersin Museum Mersin Naval Museum Mersin State Art and Sculpture Museum Mersin Water Museum Mersin Urban History Museum Misis Mosaic Museum Narlıkuyu Museum Osmaniye City Museum Saint Paul's Church, Tarsus Silifke Museum Silifke Atatürk Museum Tarsus Çanakkale Park Museum Tarsus Museum Taşucu Amphorae Museum Taşucu Atatürk Museum Southeastern Anatolia Region Adıyaman Archaeological Museum Ahmet Arif Literature Museum Library Cahit Sıtkı Tarancı Museum Diyarbakır Archaeological Museum Gaziantep Museum of Archaeology Kilis Museum Mardin Museum Şanlıurfa Archaeology and Mosaic Museum Ziya Gökalp Museum  Turkey portal Category Coordinates: 39°56′18″N 32°51′43″E﻿ / ﻿39.93833°N 32.86194°E﻿ / 39.93833; 32.86194 Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125