Nonprofit organization "Mythcon" redirects here. For the Mythicist Milwaukee event, see Mythinformation Conference. Mythopoeic Society Status Active Genre Inklings Venue Michigan State University Location(s) East Lansing, Michigan Country United States Inaugurated 1967; 54 years ago (1967) Attendance 100–200 Organized by Mythopoeic Society Filing status Non-profit Website www.mythsoc.org The Mythopoeic Society (MythSoc) is a non-profit organization devoted to the study of mythopoeic literature, particularly the works of J. R. R. Tolkien, Charles Williams, and C. S. Lewis, all members of The Inklings, an informal group of writers who met weekly in C.S. Lewis' rooms at Magdalen College, Oxford, from the early 1930s through late 1949. Contents 1 History 2 Publications 3 Activities 4 Mythopoeic Awards 5 See also 6 References 7 External links History[edit] The Mythopoeic Society was founded in 1967 by Glen H. GoodKnight. Originally composed of discussion groups based in the Los Angeles area, it expanded to include organized branches across North America; in 1972 it assimilated the Tolkien Society of America. Membership is open to those who read, study, or write in the genres of myth and fantasy. Publications[edit] Three periodical publications are produced by the society: Mythprint is a quarterly newsletter with notices of Society activity, book reviews and articles;[1] Mythopoeic Society membership includes electronic Mythprint (PDF), also available in print format by subscription. Mythlore, edited by Janet Brennan Croft, publishes peer-reviewed articles on mythic and fantastic works, available by subscription; since 2017, back numbers are freely available at an archive provided by SWOSU.[2] The Mythic Circle is a collection of original fiction and poetry, published yearly, available by subscription. In addition to the periodicals, the society formed The Mythopoeic Press to publish material by and about writers of mythopoeic and fantastic literature, especially focused on The Inklings. Works published include out-of-print materials, collections of short articles and essays, and scholarly items.[3] Activities[edit] The society sponsors local discussion groups throughout the United States and the Annual Mythopoeic Conference, also known as Mythcon, generally held on college or university campuses in various locations, primarily within the United States.[4] Mythcon XX was held in Vancouver, British Columbia, in 1989. Mythcon XXIII was held at Keble College, Oxford, England, in 1992 as part of The J.R.R. Tolkien Centenary Conference, co-sponsored with The Tolkien Society. Likewise, Mythcon XXXVI in 2005 was held at Aston University, Birmingham, England, combined with Tolkien 2005 - 50 Years of The Lord of the Rings, sponsored by The Tolkien Society.[5] Mythopoeic Awards[edit] Main article: Mythopoeic Awards Since 1971 the Mythopoeic Society has bestowed a series of annual awards to outstanding works. In 1991 the literary award was broken into two categories: the Mythopoeic Fantasy Award for Adult Literature and the Mythopoeic Fantasy Award for Children’s Literature. The Mythopoeic Scholarship Award in Inklings Studies is given to books on J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and/or Charles Williams that make significant contributions to Inklings scholarship. The Mythopoeic Scholarship Award in Myth and Fantasy Studies is given to scholarly books on other specific authors in the Inklings tradition, or to more general works on the genres of myth and fantasy. For the scholarship awards, books first published during the previous three years are eligible, including finalists for previous years. See also[edit] Speculative fiction portal Mythopoeic literature The Tolkien Society Tolkien fandom Science fiction studies References[edit] ^ "Mythprint: History and Back Issues" Mythopoeic Society. Retrieved 2017-01-06. ^ Weinreich, Frank; Honegger, Thomas (2011). "Die aktuelle Tolkienforschung im Überblick: Personen – Organisationen – Verlage – Werke" [A Survey of Research on Tolkien: People – Organisations – Publishers – Works]. Zeitschrift für Fantastikforschung (in German) (2): 63–89. ISBN 9783643998880. ^ "Mythopoeic Press". Mythopoeic Society. Retrieved April 9, 2014. ^ Mythopoeic Conferences Mythopoeic Society. Retrieved 2017-01-06. ^ History of Mythopoeic Conferences Mythopoeic Society. Retrieved 2017-01-06. External links[edit] Official website Article: Geek Stuff to Do Mythcon 2009 by Corrina Lawson July 7, 2009, Wired.com v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category