Main articles: Fantasy and Mythology Mythic fiction is literature that is rooted in, inspired by, or that in some way draws from the tropes, themes and symbolism of myth, legend, folklore, and fairy tales.[1] The term is widely credited to Charles de Lint and Terri Windling.[2] Mythic fiction overlaps with urban fantasy and the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, but mythic fiction also includes contemporary works in non-urban settings. Mythic fiction refers to works of contemporary literature that often cross the divide between literary and fantasy fiction.[3] Windling promoted mythic fiction as the co-editor (with Ellen Datlow) of The Year's Best Fantasy and Horror annual volumes for sixteen years, and as the editor of the Endicott Studio Journal of Mythic Arts. Though mythic fiction can be loosely based in mythology, it frequently uses familiar mythological personages archetypes (such as tricksters, or the thunderer). This is in contrast to mythopoeia, such as the works of J. R. R. Tolkien, which invent their own legends and folklore or construct entirely new pantheons. Contents 1 Subgenres 2 Notable authors 3 See also 4 References Subgenres[edit] African Mythology. Home to a great many cultures, nations, religions and languages, African Mythology is vastly diverse. Despite no single set of mythos or legends uniting the continent, different cultures and groups share similarities such as the Deity Leza who exists amongst the Bantu people as well as in those from Central and Southern regions of Africa. Asian Mythology Folklores & Fairytales Greek Mythology Medieval Legends Native American Folklore Norse Mythology Roman Mythology Notable authors[edit] Angela Carter - Best known for her collection of short stories known as 'The Bloody Chamber', Angela Carter was a prominent rewriter of Western European fairytales, presenting them in various new lights, predominantly bringing them into the Gothic. Gao Xinghian Madeline Miller - Madeline Miller wrote 'The Song of Achilles' that rewrites the Trojan War featuring a homosexual romance. Mia Yun John Crowley[4] Rick Riordan - Best known for his series Percy Jackson & The Olympians and Heroes of Olympus, Riordan's books are some of the most popular in the genre, for crossing multiple mythologies. Susanna Clarke Zora Neale Hurston - Published a collection of Southern, Black folklore called 'Mules & Men' as well as a fictional study of Caribbean voodoo practices called 'Tell my Horse'. See also[edit] Fairytale fantasy List of genres Matter of Rome Mythpunk Slipstream (genre) Superhero fiction References[edit] ^ "A Mythic Fiction Reading List", The Journal of Mythic Arts ^ Julie Bartel, The Continuum Encyclopedia of Young Adult Literature, "Mythic Fiction for Yong Adults," The Continuum International Publishing Group, Inc., 2005. ^ Julie Bartel, The Continuum Encyclopedia of Young Adult Literature, "Mythic Fiction for Yong Adults," The Continuum International Publishing Group, Inc., 2005. ^ Dirda, Michael. "A book-length historical fantasy about a crow? It's not as birdbrained as that sounds". Washington Post. Retrieved 2019-09-10. v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category