This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (April 2018) This article may present fringe theories, without giving appropriate weight to the mainstream view, and explaining the responses to the fringe theories. Please help improve it or discuss the issue on the talk page. (July 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A picture of Nahuelito. Nahuelito is a cryptid lake monster purported to live in Nahuel Huapi Lake, Patagonia, Argentina. Like Nessie, the Loch Ness Monster, the Argentine creature is named after the lake it supposedly resides in and has been described as a giant serpent or a huge hump, as well as a plesiosaur.[1] Nahuelito has been allegedly shown through photos showing a hump, or a serpentine body. History[edit] Its name means yaguarete, a large felid species from the Americas. The origin of the current legend is believed to go back to indigenous stories prior to the period of the conquest of America. The first explorers obtained from the natives of the place legends about the occasional encounters with aquatic monsters. In 1897, Dr. Clemente Onelli, director of the Buenos Aires Zoo, begins to receive sporadic reports about a possible strange creature inhabiting the Patagonian lakes.[2] In 1910, George Garret worked at a company located near the Nahuel Huapi. After navigating the lake and about to disembark, he could see a creature about 400 meters away, the visible part of which was between 5 and 7 meters long and protruded about 2 meters above the water. Commenting on his experience with local people, Garret learns similar stories told by the indigenous people. But Garret's sighting in 1910 was only made public in 1922, when he recounted it to the Toronto Globe newspaper and echoed in the international press, thus motivating himself to organize the first expedition to search for Nahuelito.[3] The Buenos Aires Zoo has been attempting to collect evidence of a plesiosaur in Argentina's Patagonian lakes since 1922, under the patronage of Clemente Onelli, but no consequential evidence was found.[1] The small lake where the presence of the creature was claimed is known today as Laguna del Plesiosaurio (Plesiosaur's lagoon). More recently, in 1960, the Argentine Navy was said to have chased an unidentified underwater object in the lake for 18 days, without being able to identify it, which some people related to this alleged creature.[4] In 1988, photos of the Nahuelito were published in a magazine of the Río Negro newspaper. These were taken at a short distance with an analog camera, in which the object was near the coast of Bariloche. "It is not a log of whimsical shapes. It is not a wave. El Nahuelito showed his face." said a man, who did not reveal his name, in a letter he left with the photos.[5] References[edit] ^ a b "Histórico relato enriquece el contenido de la película sobre Nahuelito". www.elcordillerano.com.ar (in Spanish). November 25, 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Rey, Carlos (2007). Nahuelito: El misterio sumergido [Nahuelito: The submerged mistery] (in Spanish). ^ Rey, Carlos (2007). Nahuelito: El misterio sumergido [Nahuelito: The submerged mistery] (in Spanish). ^ Rey, Carlos (2007). Nahuelito: El misterio sumergido [Nahuelito: The submerged mistery] (in Spanish). ^ "¿Reapareció "Nahuelito"?". www.infobae.com.ar (in Spanish). April 17, 2006. Retrieved 18 July 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) This article relating to a myth or legend from Argentina is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e