Deities venerated in Myanmar Burmese nat statues in the shrine Nat oun (Suxorimus) hung on a post in a house. The nats (နတ်; MLCTS: nat; IPA: [naʔ]) are deities venerated in Myanmar and neighboring countries in conjunction with Buddhism. They are divided between the 37 Great Nats and all the rest (i.e., spirits of trees, water, etc.). Almost all of the 37 Great Nats were human beings who met violent deaths (စိမ်းသေ, lit. 'green death'). They may thus also be called nat sein (နတ်စိမ်း; lit. 'green deities'). The word 'sein', while meaning 'green', is being used to mean 'raw' in this context. There are however two types of nats in Burmese Buddhist belief. Nat deities are termed lower nats or auk nats (အောက်နတ်), whether named or unnamed, whereas ahtet nats (အထက်နတ်) or higher nat dewas inhabit the six heavens.[1] Much like sainthood, nats can be designated for a variety of reasons, including those only known in certain regions in Burma. Nat worship is less common in urban areas than in rural areas, and is practised among ethnic minorities of Myanmar as well as in the mainstream Bamar society. It is however among the Theravada Buddhist Bamar that the most highly developed form of ceremony and ritual is seen.[2] Every Burmese village has a nat sin (နတ်စင်) which essentially serves as a shrine to the village guardian nat called the ywa saung nat (ရွာစောင့်နတ်). An offertory coconut (နတ်အုန်းသီး) is often hung on the main southeast post (ဥရူတိုင်) in the house, wearing a gaung baung (headdress) and surrounded by perfume, as an offering to the Min Mahagiri (Lord of the Great Mountain), also known as the ein dwin (အိမ်တွင်းနတ်) or ein saung (အိမ်စောင့်နတ်) (house guardian) nat. One may inherit a certain member or in some instances two of the 37 Nats as mi hsaing hpa hsaing (မိဆိုင်ဖဆိုင်; lit. 'mother's side, father's side') from one or both parents' side to worship depending on where their families originally come from. One also has a personal guardian deity called ko saung nat (ကိုယ်စောင့်နတ်).[3] Contents 1 Nat worship and Buddhism 2 Nat worship and ecology 3 Popular nat festivals 4 List of official nats 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Nat worship and Buddhism[edit] A nat kadaw dressed as U Min Gyaw at a nat pwè in Mingun, August 1989 Academic opinions vary as to whether Burmese Buddhism and Burmese spirit worship are two separate entities, or merged into a single religion.[citation needed] Some Burmese[who?] might say spirit worship is superstition and downplay its role in society. The formalizing of the official 37 Nats by King Anawrahta (1044–1077) of Bagan, has been interpreted as Burmanisation and establishment of Bamar supremacy in the Irrawaddy valley after the unification of the country and founding of the First Burmese Empire.[2] Worship of nats predates Buddhism in Burma. With the arrival of Buddhism, however, the nats were merged, syncretistically, with Buddhism.[citation needed] Nat worship and ecology[edit] Mount Popa from Kyaukpadaung road, the smaller precipice Taung Kalat with its nat shrines atop to left of picture The widespread traditional belief among rural folks that there are forest guardian spirits called taw saung nats (တောစောင့်နတ်) and mountain guardian spirits called taung saung nats (တောင်စောင့်နတ်) appears to act as a deterrent against environmental destruction up to a point. Indiscriminate felling particularly of large trees is generally eschewed owing to the belief that they are dwellings of tree spirits called yokkazo (ရုက္ခစိုး) and that such an act would bring the wrath of the nat upon the perpetrator.[4] Popular nat festivals[edit] Mount Popa and Taung Kalat to left of picture seen from a distance across a dry riverbed Offerings of alcohol and liquor to Min Kyawzwa at a nat pwe in Amarapura The most important nat pilgrimage site in Burma is Mount Popa, an extinct volcano with numerous temples and relic sites atop a mountain 1300 metres tall located near Bagan in central Burma. The annual festival is held on the full moon of the month of Natdaw (December) of the Burmese calendar.[5] Taungbyone, north of Mandalay in Madaya Township, is another major site with the festival held each year starting on the eleventh waxing day and including the full moon in the month Wagaung (August).[6] Yadanagu at Amarapura, held a week later in honour of Popa Medaw ("Mother of Popa"), who was the mother of the Taungbyone Min Nyinaung ("Brother Lords"), is also a popular nat festival.[3] Nats have human characteristics, wants, and needs. They are flawed, having desires considered derogatory and immoral in mainstream Buddhism. During a nat pwè, which is a festival during which nats are propitiated, nat kadaws (နတ်ကတော် "lord-consort",[7] i.e. "medium, shaman") dance and embody the deity in . Historically, the nat kadaw profession was hereditary and passed from mother to daughter. Until the 1980s, few nat gadaws were male. Since the 1980s, persons identified by outsiders as trans women have increasingly performed these roles.[7] Music, often accompanied by a hsaing waing ("orchestra"), adds much to the mood of the nat pwè, and many are entranced. People come from far to take part in the festivities in various nat shrines called nat kun or nat naan, get drunk on palm wine and dance wildly in fits of ecstasy to the wild beat of the Hsaing waing music, possessed by the nats.[5] Whereas nat pwès are annual events celebrating a particular member of the 37 Nats regarded as the tutelary spirit in a local region within a local community, with familial custodians of the place and tradition and with royal sponsorship in ancient times, hence evocative of royal rituals, there are also nat kannah pwès where individuals would have a pavilion set up in a neighbourhood and the ritual is generally linked to the entire pantheon of nats. The nat kadaws as an independent profession made their appearance in the latter half of the 19th century as spirit mediums, and nat kannahs are more of an urban phenomenon which evolved to satisfy the need of people who had migrated from the countryside to towns and cities but who wished to carry on their traditions or yo-ya of supplicating the mi hsaing hpa hsaing tutelary deities of their native place.[2] List of official nats[edit] Traditional offerings of bananas and coconut at a nat shrine Me Wunna with her sons Min Gyi and Min Lay at Mount Popa King Anawrahta of Bagan (1044–1077) designated an official pantheon of 37 nats after he had failed to enforce a ban on nat worship. His stratagem of incorporation eventually succeeded by bringing nats to Shwezigon Pagoda portrayed worshipping Gautama Buddha and by enlisting Śakra , a Buddhist protective deity, to head the pantheon above the Mahagiri nats as Thagyamin.[5][8] Seven out of the 37 Nats appear to be directly associated with the life and times of Anawrahta.[8] The official pantheon is made up predominantly of those from the royal houses of Burmese history, but also contains nats of Thai (Yun Bayin) and Shan (Maung Po Tu) descent; illustrations of them show them in Burmese royal dress. Listed in proper order, they are: Thagyamin (သိကြားမင်း) Min Mahagiri (မင်းမဟာဂီရိ) Hnamadawgyi (နှမတော်ကြီး) Shwe Nabay (ရွှေနံဘေး) Thonbanhla (သုံးပန်လှ) Taungoo Mingaung (တောင်ငူမင်းခေါင်) Mintara (မင်းတရား) Thandawgan (သံတော်ခံ) Shwe Nawrahta (ရွှေနော်ရထာ) Aungzwamagyi (အောင်စွာမကြီး) Ngazi Shin (ငါးစီးရှင်) Aung Pinle Hsinbyushin (အောင်ပင်လယ်ဆင်ဖြူရှင်) Taungmagyi (တောင်မကြီး) Maungminshin (မောင်မင်းရှင်) Shindaw (ရှင်တော်) Nyaunggyin (ညောင်ချင်း) Tabinshwehti (တပင်‌ရွှေထီး) Minye Aungdin (မင်းရဲအောင်တင်) Shwe Sitthin (ရွှေစစ်သင်) Medaw Shwezaga (မယ်တော်ရွှေစကား) Maung Po Tu (မောင်ဘိုးတူ) Yun Bayin (ယွန်းဘုရင်) Maung Minbyu (မောင်မင်းဖြူ) Mandalay Bodaw (မန္တလေးဘိုးတော်) Shwe Hpyin Naungdaw (ရွှေဖျင်း နောင်တော်‌) Shwe Hpyin Nyidaw (ရွှေဖျင်း ညီတော်) Mintha Maungshin (မင်းသား မောင်ရှင်) Htibyuhsaung (ထီးဖြူဆောင်း) Htibyuhsaung Medaw (ထီးဖြူဆောင်း မယ်တော်) Pareinma Shin Mingaung (ပရိမ္မရှင် မင်းခေါင်) Min Sithu (မင်းစည်သူ) Min Kyawzwa (မင်းကျော်စွာ) Myaukhpet Shinma (မြောက်ဘက်ရှင်မ) Anauk Mibaya (အနောက် မိဘုရား) Shingon (ရှင်ကုန်း) Shingwa (ရှင်ကွ) Shin Nemi (ရှင်နဲမိ) See also[edit] Burmese folk religion Deva (Buddhism) Hungry ghost Lên đồng Preta References[edit] ^ Braun, Kelly (January 15, 2001). "Syncretism in Burma and Thailand". Axis Mundi, University of Alberta. Archived from the original on 2007-08-08. Retrieved 2008-09-15. ^ a b c Brac de la Perriere, Benedicte. "The Spirit-possession Cult in the Burmese Religion" (PDF). dhammaweb.net. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-03-04. Retrieved 2008-09-14. ^ a b Spiro, Melford (1996). Burmese Supernaturalism. Transaction Publishers. p. 114. ISBN 978-1-4128-1901-5. ^ Dr Sein Tu. "Traditional Myanmar Folk Beliefs and Forest and Wildlife Conservation". Perspective (January 1999). Retrieved 2008-09-13.[permanent dead link] ^ a b c Maung Htin Aung (February 1958). "Folk-Elements in Burmese Buddhism". The Atlantic Monthly. Archived from the original on 2008-09-06. Retrieved 2008-09-11. ^ Shwe Mann Maung. "The Taung Byone Nat Festival". Perspective (August 1997). Archived from the original on 2004-07-17. Retrieved 2008-09-11. ^ a b Ho, Tamara C.; Discourse (Fall 2009). "Transgender, Transgression, and Translation: A Cartography of Nat Kadaws". 31 (3). Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ a b DeCaroli, Robert (2004). Haunting the Buddha: Indian Popular Religions and the Formation of Buddhism. Oxford University Press, US. ISBN 978-0-19-516838-9. Retrieved 2008-09-13. 'King Mae Ku: From Lan Na Monarch to Burmese Nat', in: Forbes, Andrew, and Henley, David, Ancient Chiang Mai Volume 1. Chiang Mai, Cognoscenti Books, 2012. Salek, Kira (May 2006). "Myanmar's River of Spirits". National Geographic Magazine. pp. 136–157. U Kyaw Tun; et al. (2005-01-15). "Nat in My Classroom!". Tun Institute of Learning. Archived from the original on 2012-12-03. Retrieved 2006-07-03. Temple, R.C. (1906). The Thirty-seven Nats-A Phase of Spirit-Worship prevailing in Burma. Hla Tha Mein External links[edit] "Images of the 37 nats". NYPL Digital Gallery. Nat belief and Buddhism Photo essay by Claudia Wiens The Nats - Online Burma/Myanmar Library Friends in High Places Preview of a documentary film by Lindsey Merrison Nat Dance YouTube Mintha Theater Dance theater in Mandalay, Burma. Spirit of Burma 2006 Nat Pwè recordings The Nat Spirits and Burmese Animism Windows on Asia, Michigan State University Myanmar Cyclone Brings Rise in Centuries-Old 'Nat' Worship The Wall Street Journal, June 30, 2008, video and photo slideshows Festival brings noise and colour to Taungbyone Zaw Win Than, The Myanmar Times Vol. 22 No. 430, August 4–10, 2008 Myanmar Nat Pwe in Bago Flickr photos by Boonlong1 My House Nat Can Whip Your House Nat Ethan Todras-Whitehill, Student Traveler, 2006-11-24 An account of the Taungbyone 2010 nat pwe spirit festival at Arcane Candy Part 1 and Part 2 Myanmar's River of Spirits Kira Salak, National Geographic. May 2006 This article contains Burmese script. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Burmese script. v t e Religion in Myanmar Buddhism Schools and movements Theravada Thudhamma Nikaya Shwegyin Nikaya Hngettwin Nikaya Dwara Nikaya Dhammayutti Nikaya (Mahayin) Other topics Burmese Buddhist titles Agga Maha Pandita Sayadaw Thathanabaing Thilashin Yogi Kappiya State Sangha Maha Nayaka Committee Kyaung Monastic schools in Myanmar Monastic examinations Burmese pagoda Buddhābhiṣeka Okāsa Phongyibyan Other religions Burmese folk religion Nat (spirit) Christianity Catholicism Protestantism Hinduism Islam Judaism Other topics Freedom of religion Ministry of Religious Affairs and Culture (Myanmar) Category v t e Nats and spirits of Burmese folk religion Official pantheon Thagyamin (Śakra) Mahagiri Hnamadawgyi Shwe Nabay (Naga Medaw) Thonbanhla Taungoo Mingaung Mintara Thandawgan Shwe Nawrahta Aungzwamagyi Ngazishin Aung Pinle Hsinbyushin Taungmagyi (Shin Nyo) Maungminshin (Shin Byu) Shindaw Nyaunggyin Tabinshwehti Minye Aungdin Shwe Sitthin Medaw Shwezaga Maung Po Tu Yun Bayin (Mekuti) Maung Minbyu Mandalay Bodaw Shwe Hpyin Naungdaw Shwe Hpyin Nyidaw Mintha Maungshin Htibyuhsaung Htibyuhsaung Medaw Pareinma Shin Mingaung Min Sithu Min Kyawzwa Myaukhpet Shinma Anauk Mibaya Shingon Shingwa Shin Nemi (Ma Hnelay) Hindu nats Beikthano Byamma Maha Peinne Sandi Thiwa (Paramethwa) Thuyathadi Thukanda Other nats Popa nats Popa Medaw (Me Wunna) Koyin Maung Taungdaw Thakhinma Ayeyarwady delta nats U Shin Gyi Kwin Paing Ahpo Bago nats Bago Medaw (Nankaraing Medaw) Ko Aung Naing Nine Towns nats Ko Myo Shin Pale Yin (Amay Pale) Hkuncho Hkuntha Lord of the White Horse nats Yamma Myinbyushin Kanni Myinbyushin Shwepyay Myinbyushin Shwesitthin Myinbyushin Five Mother nats Ashay Medaw Anauk Medaw (Amay Yay Yin) Taung Medaw Myauk Medaw Amay Gyan Miscellaneous Shin Upagutta Shin Thiwali Beikthano Nat Ponmagyi Bo Bo Gyi Koe Thein Shin Lawka Nat Lay Kyun Maung Ma Ngwe Taung Medaw Lay Ba Mogaung Kyawzwa Mya Nan Nwe Pakhan U Min Gyaw Shinma Aungphyu Ma Phae Wah Four Heavenly Kings Akathaso Bhummaso Yokkaso Wathondare Mani Maykhala Kayin Maunghnama Shwe Kyunbin Maunghnama v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category