Magic involving communication with the deceased This article is about the form of magic. For the film, see Necromancy (film). "Necromancer" redirects here. For other uses, see Necromancer (disambiguation). Part of a series on Anthropology of religion Illustration portraying a scene from the Bible wherein the Witch of Endor uses a necromantic ritual to conjure the spirit of Samuel at the behest of Saul; from the frontispiece of Sadducismus Triumphatus (1681) by Joseph Glanvill. Basic concepts Afterlife Animism Augur Augury Communitas Comparative religion Divination Greek divination Methods of divination Divine language Evolutionary origin of religions Fetishism Great Spirit Haruspex Henotheism Initiation Liminality Magic (supernatural) Apotropaic magic Mana Monotheism Necromancy Nympholepsy Oracle Ornithomancy Polytheism Pythia Rite of passage Ritual Revitalization movement Sacred dance Sacred language Sacred–profane dichotomy Shamanism Soul dualism Superstition Theories about religions Totem Transtheism Veneration of the dead Case studies Magic Coral Gardens and Their Magic Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants Neo-Paganism Ritual Angakkuq Babaylan Bobohizan Bomoh Bora Dukun Miko Jhākri Pawang Slametan Wu Revitalization movement Cargo cult Ghost Dance Handsome Lake Related articles The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life Purity and Danger Myth and ritual Archaeology of religion and ritual Poles in mythology Major theorists Augustin Calmet Akbar S. Ahmed Talal Asad Joseph Campbell Mary Douglas Émile Durkheim Arnold van Gennep E. E. Evans-Pritchard James Frazer Clifford Geertz Robin Horton Claude Lévi-Strauss Robert Marett Roy Rappaport Saba Mahmood Marshall Sahlins Melford Spiro Stanley Tambiah Victor Turner Edward Burnett Tylor Daniel Martin Varisco Anthony F. C. Wallace Journals Anthropological Perspectives on Religion Folklore The Hibbert Journal The Journal of Religion Oceania Religions Ethnic and folk religions Afro-American religion Alaska Native religion Anito Atua Böö mörgöl Chinese folk religion Hanitu Hausa Kejawèn Native American religion Noaidi Shindo Shamanism in Siberia Shinto Traditional African religions Buddhism Mahayana Nichiren Pure Land Shingon Theravada Tiantai Tibetan Vajrayana Zen Christianity Adventism Anglicanism Armenian Apostolic Church Baptists Calvinism Catholic Church Coptic Orthodoxy Eastern Orthodoxy Ethiopian Orthodoxy Greek Orthodoxy Lutheranism Methodism Nestorianism Oriental Orthodoxy Pentecostalism Protestantism Quakers Russian Orthodoxy Hinduism Hindu denominations Shaivism Shaktism Smartism Vaishnavism Islam Ahmadiyya Ibadi Mahdavia Non-denominational Quranists Shia Sufism Sunni Yazdânism Judaism Conservative Hasidic Karaite Orthodox Reform Jainism Sikhism Social and cultural anthropology v t e Necromancy (/ˈnɛkrəmænsi/)[1][2] is the practice of magic involving communication with the dead – either by summoning their spirits as apparitions, visions or raising them bodily – for the purpose of divination, imparting the means to foretell future events, discover hidden knowledge, to bring someone back from the dead, or to use the dead as a weapon. Sometimes referred to as "Death Magic", the term may also sometimes be used in a more general sense to refer to black magic or witchcraft.[3][4] The word necromancy is adapted from Late Latin necromantia, itself borrowed from post-Classical Greek νεκρομαντεία (nekromanteía), a compound of Ancient Greek νεκρός (nekrós), "dead body", and μαντεία (manteía), "divination by means of"; this compound form was first used by Origen of Alexandria in the 3rd century AD.[5] The Classical Greek term was ἡ νέκυια (nekyia), from the episode of the Odyssey in which Odysseus visits the realm of the dead souls and νεκρομαντεία in Hellenistic Greek, rendered as necromantīa in Latin, and as necromancy in 17th-century English.[6] Contents 1 Antiquity 2 Early and High Middle Age 3 Late Middle Ages to Renaissance 4 Modern era 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Antiquity[edit] Main article: Magic in the Graeco-Roman world Early necromancy was related to – and most likely evolved from – shamanism, which calls upon spirits such as the ghosts of ancestors. Classical necromancers addressed the dead in "a mixture of high-pitch squeaking and low droning", comparable to the trance-state mutterings of shamans.[7] Necromancy was prevalent throughout antiquity with records of its practice in ancient Egypt, Babylonia, Greece and Rome. In his Geographica, Strabo refers to νεκρομαντία (nekromantia), or "diviners by the dead", as the foremost practitioners of divination among the people of Persia,[8] and it is believed to have also been widespread among the peoples of Chaldea (particularly the Sabians, or "star-worshipers"), Etruria and Babylonia. The Babylonian necromancers were called manzazuu or sha'etemmu, and the spirits they raised were called etemmu. The oldest literary account of necromancy is found in Homer's Odyssey.[9][10] Under the direction of Circe, a powerful sorceress, Odysseus travels to the underworld (katabasis) in order to gain insight about his impending voyage home by raising the spirits of the dead through the use of spells which Circe has taught him. He wishes to invoke and question the shade of Tiresias in particular; however, he is unable to summon the seer's spirit without the assistance of others. The Odyssey's passages contain many descriptive references to necromantic rituals: rites must be performed around a pit with fire during nocturnal hours, and Odysseus has to follow a specific recipe, which includes the blood of sacrificial animals, to concoct a libation for the ghosts to drink while he recites prayers to both the ghosts and gods of the underworld.[11] Practices such as these, varying from the mundane to the grotesque, were commonly associated with necromancy. Rituals could be quite elaborate, involving magic circles, wands, talismans, and incantations. The necromancer might also surround himself with morbid aspects of death, which often included wearing the deceased's clothing and consuming foods that symbolized lifelessness and decay such as unleavened black bread and unfermented grape juice. Some necromancers even went so far as to take part in the mutilation and consumption of corpses.[12] These ceremonies could carry on for hours, days, or even weeks, leading up to the eventual summoning of spirits. Frequently they were performed in places of interment or other melancholy venues that suited specific guidelines of the necromancer. Additionally, necromancers preferred to summon the recently departed based on the premise that their revelations were spoken more clearly. This timeframe was usually limited to the twelve months following the death of the physical body; once this period elapsed, necromancers would evoke the deceased's ghostly spirit instead.[13] While some cultures considered the knowledge of the dead to be unlimited, ancient Greeks and Romans believed that individual shades knew only certain things. The apparent value of their counsel may have been based on things they knew in life or knowledge they acquired after death. Ovid writes in his Metamorphoses of a marketplace in the underworld where the dead convene to exchange news and gossip.[14][15] There are also several references to necromancers – called "bone-conjurers" among Jews of the later Hellenistic period[16] – in the Bible. The Book of Deuteronomy (18:9–12[17]) explicitly warns the Israelites against engaging in the Canaanite practice of divination from the dead: 9When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do according to the abominations of those nations. 10There shall not be found among you any one who maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or who useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, 11or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. 12For all who do these things are an abomination unto the LORD, and because of these abominations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thee (KJV). Though Mosaic Law prescribed the death penalty to practitioners of necromancy (Leviticus 20:27[18]), this warning was not always heeded. One of the foremost examples is when King Saul had the Witch of Endor invoke the spirit of Samuel, a judge and prophet, from Sheol using a ritual conjuring pit (1 Samuel 28:3–25[19]). However, the so-called witch was shocked at the presence of the real spirit of Samuel for in I Sam 28:12 it says, "when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out in a loud voice." Samuel questioned his reawakening asking, "Why hast thou disquieted me?"[20] Saul did not receive a death penalty (his being the highest authority in the land) but he did receive it from God himself as prophesied by Samuel during that conjuration – within a day he died in battle along with his son Jonathan. Some Christian writers later rejected the idea that humans could bring back the spirits of the dead and interpreted such shades as disguised demons instead, thus conflating necromancy with demon summoning. Caesarius of Arles entreats his audience to put no stock in any demons or gods other than the Christian God, even if the working of spells appears to provide benefit. He states that demons only act with divine permission and are permitted by God to test Christian people. Caesarius does not condemn man here; he only states that the art of necromancy exists, although it is prohibited by the Bible.[21] Early and High Middle Age[edit] Many medieval writers believed that actual resurrection required the assistance of God. They saw the practice of necromancy as conjuring demons who took the appearance of spirits. The practice became known explicitly as maleficium, and the Catholic Church condemned it.[22] Though the practitioners of necromancy were linked by many common threads, there is no evidence that these necromancers ever organized as a group. One noted commonality among practitioners of necromancy was usually the utilization of certain toxic and hallucinogenic plants from the nightshade family such as black henbane, jimson weed, belladonna or mandrake, usually in magic salves or potions.[23] Medieval necromancy is believed[by whom?] to be a synthesis of astral magic derived from Arabic influences and exorcism derived from Christian and Jewish teachings. Arabic influences are evident in rituals that involve moon phases, sun placement, day and time. Fumigation and the act of burying images are also found in both astral magic and necromancy. Christian and Jewish influences appear in the symbols and in the conjuration formulas used in summoning rituals.[24] Practitioners were often members of the Christian clergy, though some nonclerical practitioners are recorded. In some instances, mere apprentices or those ordained to lower orders dabbled in the practice. They were connected by a belief in the manipulation of spiritual beings – especially demons – and magical practices. These practitioners were almost always literate and well educated. Most possessed basic knowledge of exorcism and had access to texts of astrology and of demonology. Clerical training was informal and university-based education rare. Most were trained under apprenticeships and were expected to have a basic knowledge of Latin, ritual and doctrine. This education was not always linked to spiritual guidance and seminaries were almost non-existent. This situation allowed some aspiring clerics to combine Christian rites with occult practices despite its condemnation in Christian doctrine.[25] Medieval practitioners believed they could accomplish three things with necromancy: will manipulation, illusions, and knowledge: Will manipulation affects the mind and will of another person, animal, or spirit. Demons are summoned to cause various afflictions on others, "to drive them mad, to inflame them to love or hatred, to gain their favor, or to constrain them to do or not do some deed."[26] Illusions involve reanimation of the dead or conjuring food, entertainment, or a mode of transportation. Knowledge is allegedly discovered when demons provide information about various things. This might involve identifying criminals, finding items, or revealing future events. The act of performing medieval necromancy usually involved magic circles, conjurations, and sacrifices such as those shown in the Munich Manual of Demonic Magic: Circles were usually traced on the ground, though cloth and parchment were sometimes used. Various objects, shapes, symbols, and letters may be drawn or placed within that represent a mixture of Christian and occult ideas. Circles were believed to empower and protect what was contained within, including protecting the necromancer from the conjured demons. Conjuration is the method of communicating with the demons to have them enter the physical world. It usually employs the power of special words and stances to call out the demons and often incorporated the use of Christian prayers or biblical verses. These conjurations may be repeated in succession or repeated to different directions until the summoning is complete. Sacrifice was the payment for summoning; though it may involve the flesh of a human being or animal, it could sometimes be as simple as offering a certain object. Instructions for obtaining these items were usually specific. The time, location, and method of gathering items for sacrifice could also play an important role in the ritual.[27] The rare confessions of those accused of necromancy suggest that there was a range of spell casting and related magical experimentation. It is difficult to determine if these details were due to their practices, as opposed to the whims of their interrogators. John of Salisbury is one of the first examples related by Richard Kieckhefer, but as a Parisian ecclesiastical court record of 1323 shows, a "group who were plotting to invoke the demon Berich from inside a circle made from strips of cat skin" were obviously participating in what the Church would define as "necromancy".[28] Herbert Stanley Redgrove claims necromancy as one of three chief branches of medieval ceremonial magic, alongside black magic and white magic.[29] This does not correspond to contemporary classifications, which often conflate "nigromancy" ("black-knowledge") with "necromancy" ("death-knowledge"). Late Middle Ages to Renaissance[edit] Further information: Renaissance magic Engraving of occultists John Dee and Edward Kelley "in the act of invoking the spirit of a deceased person"; from Astrology (1806) by Ebenezer Sibly. In the wake of inconsistencies of judgment, necromancers and other practitioners of the magic arts were able to utilize spells featuring holy names with impunity, as any biblical references in such rituals could be construed as prayers rather than spells. As a consequence, the necromancy that appears in the Munich Manual is an evolution of these theoretical understandings. It has been suggested that the authors of the Manual knowingly designed the book to be in discord with ecclesiastical law. The main recipe employed throughout the Manual used the same religious language and names of power alongside demonic names. An understanding of the names of God derived from apocryphal texts and the Hebrew Torah required that the author of such rites have at least a casual familiarity with these sources. Within the tales related in occult manuals are found connections with stories from other cultures' literary traditions. For instance, the ceremony for conjuring a horse closely relates to the Arabic One Thousand and One Nights and French romances; Chaucer's The Squire's Tale also bears marked similarities.[30] This becomes a parallel evolution of spells to foreign gods or demons that were once acceptable, and frames them into a new Christian context, albeit demonic and forbidden. As the material for these manuals was apparently derived from scholarly magical and religious texts from a variety of sources in many languages, the scholars who studied these texts likely manufactured their own aggregate sourcebook and manual with which to work spells or magic. In the notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, it is stated that "Of all human opinions that is to be reputed the most foolish which deals with the belief in Necromancy, the sister of Alchemy, which gives birth to simple and natural things."[31] Modern era[edit] In the present day, necromancy is more generally used as a term to describe manipulation of death and the dead, or the pretense thereof, often facilitated through the use of ritual magic or some other kind of occult ceremony. Contemporary séances, channeling and Spiritualism verge on necromancy when supposedly invoked spirits are asked to reveal future events or secret information. Necromancy may also be presented as sciomancy, a branch of theurgic magic. Because of their themes of spirit contact, the long-running show Supernatural Chicago and the annual Harry Houdini séance, both of which are held at the Excalibur nightclub in Chicago, Illinois, dub their lead performer "Neil Tobin, Necromancer".[32] As to the practice of necromancy having endured in one form or another throughout the millennia, An Encyclopædia of Occultism states: The art is of almost universal usage. Considerable difference of opinion exists among modern adepts as to the exact methods to be properly pursued in the necromantic art, and it must be borne in mind that necromancy, which in the Middle Ages was called sorcery, shades into modern spiritualistic practice. There is no doubt, however, that necromancy is the touch-stone of occultism, for if, after careful preparation the adept can carry through to a successful issue, the raising of the soul from the other world, he has proved the value of his art.[33] In popular culture[edit] Necromancy appears in many works of fantasy fiction, often by villains who use it to raise armies of zombies that the heroes must slay. "The Necromancer" by the Canadian rock group Rush from their 1975 album "Caress of Steel" Necromancy is a popular plot element in computer and video game franchise series, such as Bioshock, Borderlands, Diablo, The Elder Scrolls, Warcraft, Magic the Gathering, Gothic and Mortal Kombat, as well as in the tabletop role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons. The Dark Lord Sauron adopts a guise known as the Necromancer in the 1937 novel The Hobbit. In the film Army of Darkness (1992) the protagonist Ash fights a skeletal army raised by the Necronomicon. Warhammer 40,000, The Mummy Returns, Yu-Gi-Oh! GX and Man of Steel feature antagonists who are trying to revive their own people that have been dead for a long time, specifically Necrons, Anubis, Camula and General Zod, respectively. Necromancer is the main protagonist of Tony Vilgotsky's novel Shepherd of the Dead.[34] Necromancer was the title of a song on the Al Stewart 1993 album Famous Last Words (Al Stewart album); the name comes from the song's lyric, "oh, the necromancer inside us all!", with further lyrics referencing commonly associated themes of black magic and the supernatural. Necromancer was the title of a song on the Van der Graaf Generator 1969 album The Aerosol Grey Machine, in which the lyrics describe an unnamed, benevolent necromancer. Necromancy Cottage, or, the Black Art of Gnawing on Bones, a literary fantasy novel written by Rebecca Maye Holiday during her dual studies of law and occult magic at Dalhousie University and University of King's College, followed a necromancer, Desmond Trauer, and his unwilling apprentice, Holly Nemov, who are both made to question the intent of their magic when an outsider visits their secluded island. Holly, an indentured boy and a sea demon, betrays Desmond and has his apprenticeship disavowed. Firestarter (novel) by horror author Stephen King featured Necromancer as the name of a horse that main character Charlie McGee enjoys riding during her time spent trapped at a secret government agency. In the 1984 adaptation of Firestarter (film), antagonist John Rainbird explains to Charlie that a necromancer is "some kind of a wizard". In the band Sundara Karma's second album “Ufilitas’ Alphabet” there is a song entitled “Duller Days” which includes the line “A Necromance as common as the flu”.[35] The 2018 fiction book "A Necromancer's Cult", by Michelle Moffat, describes the personal sacrifices involved in a ritual to bring a woman back from the dead. In the 2018 horror comedy anime Zombie Land Saga, idol producer and supporting character named Kotaro Tatsumi (who happens to be a necromancer) resurrected six "legendary" girls, including the main protagonist Sakura Minamoto, to form an all-zombie idol group known as "Franchouchou" in order to help revitalize Saga Prefecture. In Sheri S. Tepper's True Game series, necromancy is one of the primary Talents that may be possessed by Gamesmen. In the A Certain Magical Index spinoff manga A Certain Scientific Accelerator, the character Esther Rosenthal belongs to a line of necromancers, in which she is the current head. In the MMORPG Wizard101 the term necromancer is used for a character that practices death school magic. In Ridley Scott's Raised by Wolves series, the underlying type of android for a certain character in the show. The Sorceress from the 2013 fantasy beat-em-up Dragon's Crown is a necromancer who can reanimate skeletons found in dungeons to fight as her ally. The film Mythica: A Quest for Heroes and its sequels has the protagonist Marek, a young woman capable of doing necromancy (here an ability to control the dead, plus drain people's life force) along with the villain. Here it is not portrayed as inherently evil, but an addictive, corrupting practicing which Marek must struggle with. "The Bone Witch", a young adult fantasy novel by author Rin Chupeco, follows a girl named Tea whose necromantic magic is scorned; the book was marketed largely using a line from the text regarding a scene where Tea uses necromancy to resurrect her deceased brother. Pet Sematary by Stephen King explores the story of Louis Creed, a doctor whose elderly neighbor shows him how to use an old Mi'kmaq burial ground to resurrect dead animals, and eventually people. This miracle turns out to be more of a curse, as everything resurrected from the burial ground becomes violent and sadistic. An episode of Ghost Stories (Japanese TV series) titled "The Corpse That Roams in the Night - Shirotabi" features an eccentric young schoolgirl with an affinity for animals, who unexpectedly uses supernatural forces to resurrect a pet rabbit from the dead, which emerges as a violent monster. The infamous tongue-in-cheek English dub of the anime series largely followed the same plot, but to more comedic ends. "The Necromancer's Apprentice" by R.M. Prioleau was a small horror novella originally written as an attempt for National Novel Writing Month and later self-published. While receiving poor reviews, the novella, which follows a girl called Jasmine who becomes an apprentice to a necromancer after her parents die, generated a following with readers online. See also[edit] Gastromancy Grógaldr Haitian Vodou List of occult terms Macumba Magick (Thelema) Necromanteion of Acheron Ouija Séance Spirit possession Witchcraft and divination in the Hebrew Bible Yūrei Notes[edit] ^ Jones, Daniel (2003). Roach, Peter; Hartman, James; Setter, Jane (eds.). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (16th ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-81693-9. ^ "Necromancy". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. ^ "necromancy". Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed.). Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster. April 2008. ^ "necromancy". Oxford Dictionary of English (3rd rev. ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. August 2010. ^ "necromancy, n.". Oxford English Dictionary (OED) (3rd ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. September 2003. ^ necyomancy, n., OED. ^ Luck, p. 12. ^ Strabo. Geography, Book XVI, Chapter 2, Section 39. ^ Johnson, p. 808. ^ Ruickbie, p. 24. ^ Homer. Odyssey, Book X, Lines 10–11, and Book XI. ^ Guiley, p. 215. ^ Lewis, p. 201. ^ Luck, p. 13. ^ Ovid. Metamorphoses, Book IV, Fable VII, Lines 440–464. ^ Luck, p. 57. ^ cf. Tanakh, Torah, Devarim 18:9–12. ^ cf. Tanakh, Torah, Vayikra 20:27. ^ cf. Tanakh, Nevi'im, Shmu'el Aleph 28:3–25. ^ William Godwin (1876). Lives of the Necromancers. p. 18. ^ Kors & Peters, p. 48. ^ Kieckhefer 2011, p. 152. ^ Raetsch, Ch. (2005). The encyclopedia of psychoactive plants: ethnopharmacology and its applications. US: Park Street Press. pp. 277–282. ^ Kieckhefer 2011, pp. 165–166. ^ Kieckhefer 2011, pp. 153–154. ^ Kieckhefer 2011, p. 158. ^ Kieckhefer 2011, pp. 159–162. ^ Kieckhefer 1998, p. 191. ^ Redgrove, p. 95. ^ Kieckhefer 1998, p. 43. ^ Leonardo. Notebooks, Volume 2, Chapter XIX, Section III:1213. ^ "Supernatural Chicago". Excalibur Nightclub. Retrieved April 18, 2013. ^ Spence, p. 286. ^ Valentina Vartsaba. Good Mage Versus the Forces of Evil ^ Sundara Karma – Duller Days, retrieved 2019-03-09 References[edit] Cook, D. (1989). Breault, M (ed.). Player's Handbook. Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, 2nd Edition. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR. ISBN 978-0-88038-716-3. Guiley, R. E. (2006). "Necromancy". The Encyclopedia of Magic and Alchemy. New York City, NY: Infobase Publishing. pp. 215–216. ISBN 978-0-8160-6048-1. Homer (1900) [c. 700 BCE]. The Odyssey. S. Butler, trans. London, UK: Longmans, Green & Co. OCLC 4862683. Johnson, M. M. (2004). "Necromancy". In Golden, R. M (ed.). Encyclopedia of Witchcraft: The Western Tradition. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. pp. 808–809. ISBN 978-1-57607-243-1. Kieckhefer, R. (1998). Forbidden Rites: A Necromancer's Manual of the Fifteenth Century. University Park, PA: Penn State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01751-8. Kieckhefer, R. (2011). "Chapter 7: Necromancy in the Clerical Underworld". Magic in the Middle Ages (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 151–175. ISBN 978-0-521-78576-1. Kors, A. C. & Peters, E., eds. (2001). Witchcraft in Europe 400–1700: A Documentary History (2nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-1751-3. Kurtz, S. (1995). Forbeck, M (ed.). The Complete Book of Necromancers. Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, 2nd Edition. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR. ISBN 978-0-7869-0106-7. Láng, B. (2010). Unlocked Books: Manuscripts of Learned Magic in the Medieval Libraries of Central Europe (New ed.). University Park, PA: Penn State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-03378-5. Leonardo da Vinci (1970) [1452–1519]. Richter, J. P (ed.). The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci. New York City, NY: Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-22573-9. Lewis, J. R. (1999). Witchcraft Today: An Encyclopedia of Wiccan and Neopagan Traditions. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-134-2. Luck, G. (2006). Arcana Mundi: Magic and the Occult in the Greek and Roman Worlds—A Collection of Ancient Texts (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-8345-3. Ovid (1717) [8 CE]. Garth, S (ed.). Metamorphoses. J. Addison, W. Congreve, S. Croxall, J. Dryden, L. Eusden, J. Gay, A. Maynwaring & N. Tate, trans. London, UK: Jacob Tonson. OCLC 85877585. Redgrove, H. S. (1920). "Chapter 7: Ceremonial Magic in Theory and Practice". Bygone Beliefs: Being a Series of Excursions in the Byways of Thought. London, UK: W. Rider & Son. pp. 87–110. OCLC 2784604. Rowling, J. K. (2008). The Tales of Beedle the Bard. London, UK: Children's High Level Group. ISBN 978-0-545-12828-5. Ruickbie, L. (2004). Witchcraft Out of the Shadows: A Complete History. London, UK: Robert Hale. ISBN 978-0-7090-7567-7. Siembieda, K.; Long, K. & Rosenstein, J. (1993). Rifts World Book Four: Africa. Taylor, MI: Palladium Books. ISBN 978-0-916211-58-5. Siembieda, K.; Sumimoto, M. & Cartier, R. (1998). Rifts World Book 18: Mystic Russia. Taylor, MI: Palladium Books. ISBN 978-1-57457-011-3. Siembieda, K.; Wujcik, E.; Cartier, R.; Marciniszyn, A.; Jacques, C. & McCall, R. (1996). Palladium Fantasy Role-Playing Game Book III: Adventures on the High Seas (2nd ed.). Taylor, MI: Palladium Books. ISBN 978-0-916211-17-2. Spence, L. (1920). "Necromancy". An Encyclopædia of Occultism. London, UK: Routledge. pp. 286–290. OCLC 264589119. Strabo (1889–1893) [20 BCE – 23 CE]. Hamilton, H. C.; Falconer, W (eds.). Geography. London, UK: George Bell & Sons. OCLC 693763975. Tweet, J.; Cook, M. & Williams, S. (2003). Martin, J. & Rateliff, J (eds.). Player's Handbook: Core Rulebook I. Dungeons & Dragons v3.5. Renton, WA: Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 978-0-7869-2886-6. Further reading[edit] Bacon, R. (1988) [c. 1260–1280]. MacDonald, M (ed.). De Nigromancia. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Heptangle Books. ISBN 978-0-935214-10-9. Archived from the original on 2014-08-23. Dubray, C. (1911). "Necromancy". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York City, NY: Robert Appleton Company. Godwin, W. (1834). Lives of the Necromancers. London, UK: F. J. Mason. OCLC 2657815. Halliday, W. R. (1913). "Chapter XI: Necromancy". Greek Divination: A Study of Its Methods and Principles. London, UK: Macmillan. pp. 235–245. OCLC 25019974. Monroe, A.; Edwards, T., eds. (2010) [1907]. Full Guide to Becoming a Real Wizard, Witch or Necromancer; from "The Scripts of Osari the Wise". New York City, NY: Library Tales/CreateSpace. ISBN 978-1-4499-6763-5. Ogden, D. (2001). Greek and Roman Necromancy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00904-9. Vulliaud, P. (1923). La Kabbale Juive: Histoire et Doctrine—Essai Critique (in French). Paris, France: Émile Nourry. OCLC 22318758. Wendell, L. (1991). The Necromantic Ritual Book. Opelousas, LA: Westgate Publications. ISBN 978-0-944087-03-9. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Wikiquote has quotations related to: API v t e Methods of divination Theriomancy Ailuromancy Alectryomancy Augury Myomancy Myrmomancy Ornithomancy Bibliomancy Bible Homer I Ching Rhapsodomancy Virgil Scrying Aspidomancy Catoptromancy Crystal gazing Hydromancy Oculomancy Cleromancy Astragalomancy Belomancy Cartomancy Cowrie-shell divination Favomancy Kumalak Mengdu Molybdomancy Obi divination Opele Opon Ifá Rhabdomancy Runic magic Sortes Tarot card reading Tasseography Necromancy Gastromancy Taghairm Somatomancy Anthropomancy Cephalonomancy Haruspex Omphalomancy Oracle bone Palmistry Podomancy Rumpology Scapulimancy Other Apophenia Astrology Fortune-telling Geomancy Ifá Omen Oracle Prophecy Technomancy v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Witchcraft and magic Types African witchcraft Witch smeller Asian witchcraft Kulam Australasian witchcraft Makutu European witchcraft Akelarre Benandanti Chaos magic Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva White witch Witch-cult hypothesis Latin American witchcraft Warlock Wicca Witch doctor Practices Animism Black magic Coven Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Flying ointment Goetia Gray magic Jinn Love magic Magic circle Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Poppet Potions Shamanism Black shamanism Yellow shamanism Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Witch ball Witch's ladder Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Broom besom Cloak of invisibility Love charm Magic carpet Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Talisman Fulu Yansheng Coin Wand Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Dayan Drude Elbow witch Huld Kalku Hecate Circe Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Sea witch Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witch of Endor Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Related Witch (word) Witch-hunt accusations against children Witchcraft in Anglo-Saxon England Witchcraft in early modern Britain Witchcraft in Ghana Witchcraft in Italy Witches in fiction v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical definition of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Notable deaths by year Unusual deaths Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality displacement Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Livor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Afterlife Cemetery Consciousness Customs Crematorium Examination Funeral Grief Intermediate state Internet Mourning Online mourning Obituary Vigil Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of death Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Fan death Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Last rites Martyr Megadeath Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia The Order of the Good Death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanatosensitivity The Goodbye Family Category Outline Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125