This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) New Ghostbusters II European cover art Developer(s) HAL Laboratory Publisher(s) HAL Laboratory Activision (Game Boy, NA & EU) Composer(s) Jun Ishikawa Series Ghostbusters Platform(s) Game Boy Nintendo Entertainment System Release Game Boy JP: October 16, 1990 NA: December 1990 PAL: 1991NES/Famicom JP: December 26, 1990 PAL: 1992 Genre(s) Action Mode(s) Single-player New Ghostbusters II (ゴーストバスターズ２, Gōsutobasutāzu 2) is an action video game for the Nintendo Entertainment System and Game Boy, both developed and published by HAL Laboratory in 1990 in Japan and in 1992 in the PAL region. The NES version was never released in North America due to licensing issues with Activision. As a result, NES players in North America only received Activision's Ghostbusters II game. HAL also developed a Game Boy version of New Ghostbusters II, titled simply Ghostbusters II, which they also published in Japan, while Activision published it in North America and PAL regions. Contents 1 Gameplay 2 Version differences 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Gameplay[edit] In the game, the player is presented with four Ghostbusters to choose from: Peter Venkman, Ray Stantz, Egon Spengler, or Winston Zeddemore. The NES version features their accountant, Louis Tully, as a fifth playable character. This, along with the North American version of Ghostbusters II, were the only titles ever released that allowed players to play as Winston. While the action can be performed by oneself in the NES version, a secondary player may join the game with the ability to press B on a second controller to release a ghost-catching trap. The objective of the game is to trap all the ghosts in an area until an arrow appears which alerts the player where to travel to next. A boss appears at the end of each stage. Version differences[edit] New Ghostbusters II for the NES is not a port of the Game Boy version, or vice versa. The Nintendo Entertainment System version features new music, different layouts for the levels and alternate versions of cut scenes between levels and stage bosses. The Game Boy version has 5 stages. None of the versions of New Ghostbusters II has multi-player capabilities. Reception[edit] On release, Famitsu magazine scored the Game Boy version of the game a 25 out of 40.[1] References[edit] ^ お買い物に便利 : 新作ゲームクロスレビュー - ゴースト バスターズ2. Famicom Tsushin. No.22. Pg.18. 26 October 1990. External links[edit] Ghostbusters II - Game Boy at GameFAQs New Ghostbusters II - Nintendo at GameFAQs v t e Ghostbusters Ghost Corps Films Ghostbusters Ghostbusters II Ghostbusters (2016) Ghostbusters: Afterlife Television The Real Ghostbusters episodes Extreme Ghostbusters Comics The Real Ghostbusters Ghostbusters: Legion Video games Ghostbusters (1984) The Real Ghostbusters (1987) Ghostbusters (1990) Ghostbusters II NES Ghostbusters II The Computer Game New Ghostbusters II The Real Ghostbusters (1993) Ghostbusters: The Video Game Ghostbusters: Sanctum of Slime Ghostbusters (2016) Characters Peter Venkman Ray Stantz Egon Spengler Winston Zeddemore Janine Melnitz Stay Puft Marshmallow Man Slimer Music Ghostbusters "Ghostbusters" Ghostbusters II "On Our Own" 2016 soundtrack "Good Girls" "Girls Talk Boys" 2016 score Ghostbusters: Afterlife Related Ghostheads Proton pack Ectomobile 55 Central Park West Firehouse interior Role-playing game Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue The Earth Day Special Casper Zuul Lego Ghostbusters Category This action game–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e