The Glittering Plain by William Morris, Newcastle Publishing Company, 1973 The Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library was a series of trade paperback books published in the United States by the Newcastle Publishing Company between 1973 and 1980. Presumably under the inspiration of the earlier example set by the Ballantine Adult Fantasy series, the series reissued a number of works of fantasy literature that had largely been forgotten, being out of print or otherwise not easily available in the United States, in durable, illustrated trade paperback form with new introductions.[1] For a number of works the Library’s editions constituted the first U.S. or first paperback edition. Together with the earlier series from Ballantine Books, it contributed to the renaissance of interest in the fantasy genre of the 1970s.[2] The Library was produced under the editorship of Robert Reginald and Douglas Menville, editors of Forgotten Fantasy magazine, who were also responsible for several other similar series from other publishers.[3] It included works by authors such as William Morris, H. Rider Haggard, Lord Dunsany, and Leslie Barringer, among others. Projected to include a total of twenty-six fantasy classics, the Library ultimately released only twenty-four. Possibly the remaining two are represented by two non-fantasy books Newcastle published without the series designation, the first two Dr. Nikola novels by Guy Boothby: Enter, Dr. Nikola (September 1975), and Dr. Nikola Returns (March 1976). The covers for the first eight books were generic and described by their designer Douglas Menville as "rather crude".[3] With the fourth book in the series, artists such as George Barr were engaged to produce more attractive covers at a discount, under an arrangement whereby the artist was able to retain the original paintings for private sale after the books were published.[3] The ninth book onward featured more imaginative, wrap around art, and two of the first eight (She and Allan and Gerfalcon) were later reissued in this style. Books[edit] The Glittering Plain, William Morris (September 1973) The Saga of Eric Brighteyes, H. Rider Haggard (March 1974) The Food of Death: Fifty-One Tales, Lord Dunsany (September 1974) The Haunted Woman, David Lindsay (March 1975) Aladore, Sir Henry Newbolt (September 1975) She and Allan, H. Rider Haggard (September 1975) Gerfalcon, Leslie Barringer (March 1976) Golden Wings and Other Stories, William Morris (March 1976) Joris of the Rock, Leslie Barringer (September 1976) Heart of the World, H. Rider Haggard (September 1976) The Wonderful Adventures of Phra the Phoenician, Edwin Lester Arnold (April 1977) Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair, William Morris (April 1977) Shy Leopardess, Leslie Barringer (October 1977) Ayesha: the Return of She, H. Rider Haggard (October 1977) The Fates of the Princes of Dyfed, Kenneth Morris (April 1978) The House of the Wolfings, William Morris (April 1978) Under the Sunset, Bram Stoker (October 1978) Allan Quatermain, H. Rider Haggard (October 1978) The Roots of the Mountains, William Morris (April 1979) Nada the Lily, H. Rider Haggard (April 1979) Jaufry the Knight and the Fair Brunissende, translated by Alfred Elwes (October 1979) The Spirit of Bambatse, H. Rider Haggard (October 1979) When the Birds Fly South, Stanton A. Coblentz (April 1980) Allan's Wife, H. Rider Haggard (October 1980) Notes[edit] ^ Williamson, Jamie (2015). The Evolution of Modern Fantasy: From Antiquarianism to the Ballantine Adult Fantasy Series. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1137518088. Retrieved 5 October 2015. ^ Wolf, Mark J.P. (2014). Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation. New York: Routledge. p. 133. ISBN 978-0415631204. Retrieved 5 October 2015. ^ a b c Cowan, Yuri (2011). "Recovering the Barbarians: Reprinting 'Forgotten Fantasy' in the 1970s". Mémoires du livre. 2 (1). doi:10.7202/045319ar. External links[edit] The Haunted Bibliophile's page on the Forgotten Fantasy Library v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category