1990 film Nightbreed Theatrical release poster Directed by Clive Barker Produced by Gabriella Martinelli Jon Turtle Joe Roth Written by Clive Barker Based on Cabal by Clive Barker Starring Craig Sheffer Anne Bobby David Cronenberg Charles Haid Music by Danny Elfman Cinematography Robin Vidgeon Edited by Mark Goldblatt Richard Marden Production company Morgan Creek Productions Distributed by 20th Century Fox Release date February 16, 1990 (1990-02-16) Running time 102 minutes[1] Country United States Language English Budget $11 million Box office $16 million[2] Nightbreed is a 1990 American dark fantasy horror film written and directed by Clive Barker, based on his 1988 novella Cabal. It stars Craig Sheffer, Anne Bobby, David Cronenberg, Charles Haid, Hugh Quarshie, and Doug Bradley. The film follows an unstable mental patient named Aaron Boone who is falsely led to believe by his doctor that he is a serial killer. Tracked down by the police, his doctor, and his girlfriend Lori, Boone eventually finds refuge in an abandoned cemetery called Midian among a tribe of monsters and outcasts known as the "Nightbreed" who hide from humanity. At the time of its release, the film was a commercial and critical failure. In several interviews, Barker protested that the film company tried to sell it as a standard slasher film,[3] and that the powers-that-be had no real working knowledge of Nightbreed's story.[4] Since its initial theatrical release, Nightbreed has become a cult film.[5][6] Over time, Barker expressed disappointment with the final cut approved by the studio and always longed for the recovery of the reels so the film might be re-edited. In 2014, original film elements for much of the cut material were re-obtained and were edited into a director's cut, released through Scream Factory.[7] Contents 1 Plot 1.1 Alternative ending 2 Cast 3 Production 3.1 Development 3.2 Filming 4 Soundtrack 5 Release 5.1 Marketing 6 Reception 6.1 Critical response 6.2 Box office 6.3 Accolades 7 Merchandise 7.1 Comic books 7.2 Video games 8 Legacy 8.1 TV series 8.2 The Cabal Cut 8.3 Shout! Factory restoration and Director's Cut 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Plot[edit] Aaron Boone dreams of Midian, a city where monsters are accepted. At the request of girlfriend Lori Winston, Boone is seeing psychotherapist Dr. Phillip Decker, a serial killer who convinces Boone that he committed Decker's murders. Decker drugs Boone with LSD disguised as lithium and orders Boone to turn himself in. Before he can do so, Boone is struck by a truck and taken to a hospital. There, Boone overhears the rants of Narcisse, a seemingly insane man who seeks to enter Midian. Convinced that Boone is there to test him, Narcisse gives Boone directions to the hidden city before tearing the skin off his face in order to show his "true" face. He is quickly subdued by hospital staff, and Boone leaves. Boone makes his way to Midian, a city beneath a massive graveyard in the middle of nowhere. Upon encountering supernatural creatures Kinski and Peloquin, Kinski says they should bring him below, but Peloquin refuses to allow in a normal human. Boone claims to be a murderer, but Peloquin smells his innocence and attacks him. Boone escapes, only to encounter a squad of police officers led by Decker. Boone is gunned down after Decker tricks the police into believing Boone is armed. Due to Peloquin's bite, Boone returns to life in the morgue. When he returns to Midian, he finds Narcisse there and is inducted into their society by the Nightbreed's leader, Dirk Lylesburg. In an initiation ceremony, Boone is touched by the blood of their deity, Baphomet. Seeking to understand why Boone left her, Lori investigates Midian. She befriends a woman named Sheryl Anne and drives to the cemetery with her. Leaving Sheryl Anne at the car, Lori explores the cemetery, where she finds a dying wolf-like creature. A woman named Rachel (a nightbreed with the power to transform into smoke) pleads from the shadows for Lori to take it out of the sunlight. Once in the shadows, it transforms into a little girl, Rachel's daughter Babette. Lori asks about Boone but is rebuffed by Lylesburg and scared off by Peloquin. While leaving the cemetery, Lori discovers Sheryl Anne's corpse and her killer, Decker. Decker attempts to use Lori to draw Boone out of hiding. Boone rescues Lori, and Decker learns Boone cannot be killed due to his transformation. Decker escapes, and Boone takes Lori into Midian. Rachel explains to Lori that the monsters of folklore were peaceful beings who were hunted to near-extinction by humans. Lylesburg banishes Boone and Lori from Midian. Decker learns how to kill the Nightbreed and murders the residents of the hotel where Boone and Lori are staying. When Boone discovers the crime scene, he uncontrollably drinks the blood. The police find Boone and take him into custody. At Decker's urging, the police form a militia led by Police Captain Eigerman. A drunken priest named Ashberry joins them as God's servant in their upcoming battle against Midian. Lori, Rachel and Narcisse rescue Boone, and the four return to Midian, where Boone convinces the Nightbreed to fight. During the battle, Ashberry learns there are women and children amongst the Nightbreed. When he tries halting the attack, he is beaten by Eigerman. Ashberry finds the idol of Baphomet and swears allegiance to it. When he is splashed by its blood, he is burned and transformed. Boone learns from Lylesburg that Baphomet plans to destroy Midian. Boone argues to release the Berserkers, a monstrous feral breed that were imprisoned due to their insanity. When Lylesburg is killed before he can open the cages, Boone releases them and the Berserkers turn the tide of battle. Decker confronts Boone and is killed. When Boone faces Baphomet, Baphomet says that Boone has caused the end of Midian, which had been foretold. Baphomet charges Boone with finding a new home for the Nightbreed and renames him Cabal. Boone leaves Midian with Lori and meets with the remaining Nightbreed in a barn, where he says his goodbyes to Narcisse and promises to find a place where they will be safe. In the ruins of Midian, Ashberry stands in front of Decker's corpse and states that he wants vengeance on Baphomet and the Breed. When he presses Baphomet's blood to Decker's wound, Decker springs back to life with a scream as Ashberry repeatedly hollers "Hallelujah". Alternative ending[edit] In the alternative ending used in The Cabal Cut and Director's Cut of the film, the Nightbreed await Boone in a barn whilst Boone says his goodbyes to Lori, as he must find a new home for the Nightbreed. Boone promises to return to her, but fearing she will become old whilst Boone will retain his youth and immortality, Lori stabs herself, forcing Boone to resurrect her as a Nightbreed. Narcisse is killed earlier in the battle by Decker, so he is not present during these events. Meanwhile, Captain Eigerman wanders the underground remains where he stumbles upon the transformed Ashberry, who now desires revenge. Eigerman shares this desire, but Ashberry rejects Eigerman's offer, kills him, and starts his hunt for the Nightbreed. The surviving Nightbreed watch Boone and Lori in the distance. Kinski tells Babette that Boone will return soon, perhaps the next day, to lead them to a new haven. Boone and Lori appear are shown as part of a prophecy in a Nightbreed painting. Decker's resurrection plays as a post-credits scene. Cast[edit] Craig Sheffer as Aaron Boone/Cabal, a man who is turned into a Nightbreed. Anne Bobby as Lori Winston, Aaron's girlfriend. David Cronenberg as Dr. Philip K. Decker, a psychotherapist who doubles as a masked serial killer. Charles Haid as Police Captain Eigerman, a police captain that allies with Decker. Hugh Quarshie as Detective Joyce Hugh Ross as Narcisse, a Nightbreed with a removable face. Doug Bradley as Dirk Lylesberg, a Nightbreed who serves as their acolyte and lawgiver. Catherine Chevalier as Rachel, a shapeshifting Nightbreed that cannot deal with sunlight. Bob Sessions as Pettine Malcolm Smith as Ashbury, a drunken priest who allies with Decker. Oliver Parker as Peloquin, a Nightbreed that is responsible for biting Aaron. Debora Weston as Sheryl Ann, a woman that Lori befriends. Nicholas Vince as Kinski, a Nightbreed with a crescent moon-shaped head. Simon Bamford as Ohnaka, a tattooed member of the Nightbreed. Kim and Nina Robertson as Babette, the Nightbreed daughter of Rachel who has the same traits as her. Christine McCorkindale as Shuna Sassi, a Nightbreed with an animalistic face that is covered in quills. Tony Bluto as Leroy Gomm, an overweight Nightbreed who has retractable tentacles coming out of his stomach. Bernard Henry as Baphomet, a demon who is the deity of the Nightbreed Production[edit] Development[edit] Clive Barker always loved monsters and felt that "there's a corner of all of us that envies their powers and would love to live forever, or to fly, or to change shape at will. So, when I came to make a movie about monsters, I wanted to create a world we'd feel strangely at home in".[8] He was interested in creating a "horror mythology from the ground up" and developing characters that would live on in sequels.[9] As he finished writing the novella Cabal, he realized that it would make a good film that he would direct himself.[10] He originally envisioned a trilogy of films.[11][12] Nightbreed was the first of a planned three-picture deal Barker had with Morgan Creek, Joe Roth's production company, that included an adaptation of Son of Celluloid and a sequel to Nightbreed. The first compromise Barker made was to change the title of the film from Cabal to Nightbreed because Morgan Creek insisted on a more commercial title and thought that the original one did not mean anything.[13] He was given a budget of $11 million, which was a considerable increase from the $2 million he had to work with on Hellraiser. His goal was to make the Star Wars of horror films. The monsters in the book are represented impressionistically over two or three paragraphs and the challenge Barker faced was to visualize them in much greater detail for the film.[14] Filming[edit] For the film, Barker used three soundstages at Pinewood Studios shooting some scenes on location at Wexham Park Hospital, Slough, Berkshire, UK over several nights and in Calgary, Alberta, Canada.[9] Bob Keen and his crew had two months to play around with ideas before doing any modeling work. They used computer-controlled animatronics but only where necessary.[15] Towards the end of principal photography, Barker brought Star Wars concept artist Ralph McQuarrie in to paint mattes for the Necropolis sequences and design the history of the Breed in a symbolic way on an enormous mural across a 60-foot space on the set at Pinewood to be used in the opening credits.[16] Barker was contractually obligated to deliver an R-rated film and could not make it as gory as his previous picture Hellraiser.[9] Barker previewed the first cut of Nightbreed with a temporary soundtrack that did not go well, as people were confused by the characters' motives. He made some changes and the second test screening was much more successful. However, the ending with Decker's death was not well received and Barker changed it.[17] In late July 1989, the studio announced that the release date for Nightbreed was being pushed back from its original autumn 1989 date to early February 1990 instead. The press release cited "the complex demands of the film's ground-breaking post-production optical effects", but this also included McQuarrie's mural and matte paintings, and a week of additional shooting in late August that would see key parts of the narrative re-shot.[16] Barker shot extra scenes over three days in Los Angeles in late 1989 which included additional scenes with David Cronenberg which expanded and clarified his character. Barker's original version ran two-and-a-half hours and Fox asked for almost an hour to be cut prompting editor Richard Marden to leave the project in protest. Nightbreed was cut to two hours and then again to 102 minutes.[17] Soundtrack[edit] Nightbreed (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) Film score by Danny Elfman Released March 20, 1990 Recorded 1990 Genre Soundtrack Length 46:46 Label MCA Producer Danny Elfman and Steve Bartek Danny Elfman chronology Batman (1989) Nightbreed (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) (1990) Dick Tracy (1990) Professional ratings Review scores Source Rating Allmusic [18] SoundtrackNet [19] Filmtracks [20] Musicfromthemovies (favorable)[21] The score was composed by Danny Elfman and conducted by Shirley Walker, who also wrote the additional cue "Charge of the Berserkers" for the film's climax and received an onscreen credit. Elfman said of his score, "Once again it was time for me to stretch out... Combining dark/fun/sweet/tribal all into one. The great joy in the score for me, other than working for Clive Barker, was being able to use the children's voices and a whole slew of ethnic drums and instruments together with an orchestra, in an attempt to bring a unique musical tone to the film."[22] Barker said "Danny is an extraordinary talent. The most uncompromised portion of that entire movie is the score."[23] In an article on Elfman, described as a rising composer in Hollywood who had just scored Tim Burton's Batman and was about to score Warren Beatty's Dick Tracy, Entertainment Weekly's Ron Givens noted that Nightbreed wouldn't get as much attention as these two big-budget movies, yet Givens praised Elfman's "needle-sharp crescendos and creepy choral plainchants" and added: "Seldom has scary-movie music been so spiritual."[24] The song "Country Skin" is a country-and-western rendition of the Oingo Boingo song "Skin" (which appears on the 1990 album Dark at the End of the Tunnel), it was written by Elfman and performed by country singer Michael Stanton.[25] It can be heard in the film, played on a radio.[26][27] It was available as a bonus track on the CD and Cassette version of the soundtrack.[28] Release[edit] Marketing[edit] According to Barker, the studio did not promote it well with posters that misinterpreted the content. When he saw the way they were selling Nightbreed, he "freaked out and said, 'What you doing? This isn't the movie, and was given all kinds of excuses ... 'Well, there isn't time to change it, we have to release it now'."[29] The head of marketing at Morgan Creek never watched all the way through because it "disgusted and distressed" him, according to Barker.[29] The studio did not understand it, it had no movie stars, it was violent,[29] and it had elements of fantasy and horror which they saw as a weakness while Barker saw it as a strength. They ended up marketing Nightbreed as a slasher film with television teasers that were confusing and did not represent it.[30] The trailer was sent to the MPAA and it was rejected 12 times. They forbade any monster footage, and it was cut down to someone being terrorized with a razor, which constituted only five minutes of Barker's film.[17] Looking back, Barker realized that Fox was better at promoting films like White Men Can't Jump but "not so good at selling the quirky stuff".[31] The studio argued that there was no point showing Nightbreed to critics because the people who see horror films do not read reviews. Therefore, the film had to be sold to the lowest common denominator.[32] They refused to preview the film for critics, a decision which angered Barker.[30] Reception[edit] Critical response[edit] Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports 41% of 29 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating was 5.4 out of 10.[33] In his review for the Toronto Star, Henry Mietkiewicz wrote "Nightbreed might have been a monster movie milestone, if Clive Barker's directorial abilities had kept pace with his skill as a master of British horror fiction. Unfortunately, Nightbreed probably will be remembered as much for its haphazard plotting and underdeveloped characters as its delightfully daring concept".[34] Derek Malcolm wrote in his review for The Guardian that "it is neither direct nor subtle enough as a piece of film-making. It is difficult to suggest that evil is human and monsters have souls within the context of a mountain of special effects. The result is patchy in the extreme and not always capable of transcending a genre that has become less and less intriguing as less and less is left to the imagination".[35] However, Entertainment Weekly's Ty Burr gave the film a "B" rating, writing "From the film's Gothic sets, fantastic makeup, and nightmarish plot line, it's clear that Barker owes as much to Poe and Lovecraft as to classic Hollywood screamers like Island of Lost Souls. But Barker's most perverse touch is that he makes these creatures the good guys (no wonder the PR flacks were bamboozled). Despite their grotesque appearance, they're a more colorful and engaging bunch than the emissaries of the normal world. Barker piles on more subversive subtext than his story can bear — it's a monster movie, after all — but his daft, Grand Guignol vision has real power. The quality that freaked out the studio, Barker's ambition, is precisely what makes Nightbreed so impressive."[36] Filmmaker Alejandro Jodorowsky liked the film, calling it "the first truly gay horror fantasy epic", explaining how the unconsummated relationship between doctor and patient is in his view the central theme.[37][38] Box office[edit] Nightbreed was released on February 16, 1990, in 1,488 theaters, grossing $3.7 million on its opening weekend. It went on to make $8.8 million in the United States and Canada and $7 million internationally for a worldwide total of $16 million on an $11 million budget.[39][2] Accolades[edit] Award Category Recipients and nominees Outcome Saturn Awards[40] Best Horror Film Nightbreed Nominated Best Director Clive Barker Nominated Best Make-Up Bob Keen, Geoffrey Portass Nominated Best DVD/BD Special Edition Release Nightbreed: The Director's Cut - Mark Alan Miller[41] Won Amsterdam Fantastic Film Festival Silver Scream Award Clive Barker Won Avoriaz Fantastic Film Festival Special Jury Award Clive Barker Won Fantasporto Critics' Award Clive Barker Won International Fantasy Film Award Best Film – Clive Barker Nominated Merchandise[edit] Comic books[edit] In 1990, to tie in with the film's box office release, Epic Comics produced a four-issue adaptation of the film, which included significant differences from the finished movie, more closely related to Clive Barker's original script. The comic book continued to run past the end of the film, ultimately stretching to twenty-five issues before it was cancelled.[42][43] The comic book was drawn by Alan Grant, John Wagner and Jim Baikie.[44] A two part graphic novel was also produced, Hellraiser vs Nightbreed: Jihad, which merges the two worlds created by Clive Barker and features the Cenobites as agents of order against their chaotic nemesis the Nightbreed, and the Jihad (Holy War) of extermination that the first wage on the latter.[45][46] Nightbreed returned in 1992, as a short story in the second issue of the four issue Epic anthology series.[47] A 12 issue mini-series was published by BOOM! Studios in 2014-2015 following the storyline of the Director's Cut of the film.[48] Video games[edit] Two video games based on the film were released shortly after the movie. The games were intended to form a trilogy[49] but due to the poor performance of the first two the third was never made.[50] Nightbreed, The Action Game The first was a traditional action game[51][52] and was released for the Commodore Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum and Amstrad CPC, and for DOS.[53] Loosely following the same plot as the movie, it intersperses various action sequences. Nightbreed, The Interactive Movie The second game was released for the Amiga and ST and for DOS.[54] Also based on the film, there was less action involved as it was more of an interactive movie.[55] Legacy[edit] TV series[edit] Morgan Creek reportedly began developing a television series based on the original film in 2014.[56][57] In September 2015, Morgan Creek announced the sale of the domestic rights to its library of 78 films. However, the production company plans to retain the TV rights to Nightbreed.[58] In June 2018 Syfy, Morgan Creek and Barker will develop the series.[59] It is being written by Josh Stolberg and directed by Michael Dougherty for SyFy.[60][61] The Cabal Cut[edit] In 2009, Mark Miller, co-head of Barker's production company, Seraphim Films, helped track down the missing footage that was cut out of the director's cut of Nightbreed.[62] Miller discovered, after talking to a production executive at the studio, that the footage was never actually lost but readily accessible. When asked, a studio executive said that there was not a big enough audience to warrant the studio spending money on a new, extended cut of the film.[63] A VHS copy of Barker's 145-minute version of the film's mid-1989 workprint was discovered. It did not feature any of the re-shoots of Decker's murders.[64] An extended 159-minute cut version, from another VHS found in July 2009, premiered on March 27, 2010, as part of the HorrorHound Weekend in Indianapolis.[65] This new version adds almost an hour that was cut from the theatrical release, including a song sung by Lori, and more animation. Barker said that he hopes to bring back Danny Elfman to add more music.[23] In early 2012, Russell Cherrington, a senior lecturer in film and video production at the University of Derby, created a composite cut of the film using the footage found on both VHS tapes and a DVD then recently released by Warner Archive Collection, Warner's made-to-order DVD service. This version is the most complete version of Barker's film available and has been dubbed The Cabal Cut. The cut runs 155 minutes long and was shown at that year's "Mad Monster Party" in North Carolina with actors Craig Sheffer and Anne Bobby attending.[66] The "Mad Monster Party" projection of the Cabal Cut led to a renewal of interest among fans, especially on the Internet.[67] A new petition was created and social networks were used to raise awareness for the extended cut and to encourage producers to release it. This would be colloquially known as "Occupy Midian", a term coined by actress Anne Bobby.[68] A Blu-Ray release of the "Cabal Cut" was announced on July 13, 2017, via the Clive Barker Podcast.[69] This release utilized then-restored footage from the Director's Cut and the pre-existing VHS copies, for a total length of 145 minutes. The release features new material and commentary tracks exclusive to that release. Handled by Morgan Creek and Seraphim Films, the Cabal Cut Blu-Ray was released in a limited quantity through Clive Barker's online store. Shout! Factory restoration and Director's Cut[edit] Barker announced in 2013 that Shout! Factory would release The Cabal Cut on DVD.[70][71] This version was later clarified to be a brand new director's cut that uses the footage and not the full Cabal Cut.[72] Shout! Factory announced The Director's Cut Blu-ray in October 2014. This version, overseen by Clive Barker, runs twenty minutes longer than the theatrical version and contains forty minutes of new and altered footage.[73] Shout, with Warner Home Video, located the original film elements in the Warner archives to newly restore the sequences. Barker stated, "when Scream Factory told me that they found the Nightbreed film footage, I was gob-smacked! This is the ultimate validation of choices made by myself and Mark Miller all the way back in 2008."[74] Shout announced a Special Edition Blu-ray / DVD combo pack and a 3-disc limited edition Blu-ray, containing a booklet and the theatrical cut. When the limited edition sold out during pre-orders, Shout! doubled their production run.[75] See also[edit] List of films featuring hallucinogens References[edit] ^ "Nightbreed (18)". British Board of Film Classification. May 21, 1990. Retrieved February 10, 2015. ^ a b "Morgan Creek Prods. Box Office". Variety. February 15, 1993. p. 46. ^ Timpone, Anthony (1990). "Barker Bites Back". Fangoria Horror Spectacular (n°1). Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ Salisbury, Mark (October 1990). "Flesh And Fury". Fear (22). ^ Black, Amber; Trautmann, Tim (1996). "Interview". The Official Clive Barker Resource: Revelations. Retrieved 22 March 2012. The movie has, and this is wonderful, you know, a lot of fans. And it's a cult movie and it's a real pleasure to me. ^ Halley, Stefan. "10 Films that have gone from Crap to Cult". Eat Sleep Live Film. Archived from the original on November 23, 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ "Films Still To Come...?". The Official Clive Barker Resource: Revelations. Archived from the original on May 12, 2005. Retrieved March 22, 2012. ^ Barker, Clive (December 1988). "Chains of Love". Fear. ^ a b c Nutman, Philip (1991). "Introduction to Nightbreed". Nightbreed U.S. Video (Media notes). Clive Barker. ^ "Nightbreed Presskit". Morgan Creek. 1990. ^ Salisbury, Mark (December 1988). "Chains of Love". Fear. ^ "Nightbreed « The Life and Art of Vern". Outlawvern.com. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ Jones, Alan (November 1989). "Clive Barker's Nightbreed". Cinefantastique. ^ Nutman, Philip (October 1989). "Bring on the Monsters!". Fangoria. ^ Robb, Brian J (May–June 1989). "Games without Frontiers". Fear. ^ a b Gilbert, John (October 1989). "The Breed: The Source of the Soul". Fear. ^ a b c Jones, Alan (September 1990). "Nightbreed: The Trials and Tribulations of Clive Barker". Starburst. ^ McDonald, Steven. "Nightbreed". Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ Viewer Ratings. "Nightbreed". Soundtrack.net. Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ Viewer Ratings. "Nightbreed". Filmtracks.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ "Nightbreed". Musicfromthemovies.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ "Danny Elfman Says..." Danny Elfman's Music For A Darkened People. Retrieved 21 March 2012. ^ a b "Q&A session with Clive Barker & Peter Atkins". 5th Annual LA Times Festival of Books April 29th, 2000. Clivebarker.com. Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ Givens, Ron (February 23, 1990). "The Elfman Cometh". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 21 March 2012. ^ Mattro. "Skin". Song Histories: Officially released tracks. Fool's Paradise: A Tribute to Oingo Boingo. Archived from the original on August 13, 2009. Retrieved 21 March 2012. ^ Elfman, Danny. "Oingo Boingo: The Complete History". Buzzinemusic.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013. Retrieved March 21, 2012. ^ "Nightbreed - Trivia". Imdb.com. Retrieved 21 March 2012. ^ "MCA Records MCAD 8037". Nightbreed- Soundtrack details. Soundtrackcollector.com. Retrieved 21 March 2012. ^ a b c Salisbury, Mark (October 1990). "Flesh and Fury". Fear. ^ a b Timpone, Anthony (1990). "Barker Bites Back". Fangoria Horror Spectacular. ^ Ferrante, Anthony C (September 1993). "Barker Looks Back". Bloody Best of Fangoria. ^ Jones, Alan (July 1990). "How Fox Bungled Nightbreed". Cinefantastique. ^ "Nightbreed (1990)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 13, 2021. ^ Mietkiewicz, Henry (February 20, 1990). "Nightbreeds storytelling sacrificed". The Toronto Star. ^ Malcolm, Derek (September 27, 1990). "The angel who fell to earth". The Guardian. ^ Ty Burr (September 14, 1990). "Nightbreed Review | Reviews and News". EW.com. Retrieved 2011-07-08. ^ Between Death and the Devil: The Unofficial Richard Stanley Website - Dying Light: An obituary for the great British horror movie. (Originally appeared in British Horror Cinema, 2001) everythingisundercontrol.org on Wayback Machine ^ "Lachrymae - The Trail of the Three Mothers". Shadowtheatre13.com. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ "Nightbreed (1990)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 22 March 2012. ^ "The Academy of Science Fiction Fantasy and Horror Films". www.saturnawards.org. Archived from the original on June 26, 2012. Retrieved 2015-10-20. ^ "Clive Barker - Timeline Photos | Facebook". www.facebook.com. Retrieved 2015-10-20. ^ do web 4u. "Night Breed Comics, Night Breed series, Clive Barker, Epic Comics, Horror series". Fullmooncomicbooks.com. Archived from the original on February 12, 2010. Retrieved 2011-07-08. ^ "Aaron Boone (comic book character)". Comicvine.com. Retrieved 2011-07-08. ^ https://www.lambiek.net/artists/b/baikie_jim.htm ^ "Hellraiser Nightbreed: Jihad #1 - (comic book issue)". Comic Vine. June 6, 2008. Retrieved 2011-07-08. ^ "Mile High Comics". Mile High Comics. Retrieved 2011-07-08. ^ "Put a Nightbreed in your tank, Clive Barker's Hellraiser, Imajica - song, music - Copyright Info". Faqs.org. Retrieved 2011-07-08. ^ "Clive Barker's Nightbreed returns in a brand new comic-book series". Blastr. Retrieved 2015-11-13. ^ "Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Interactive Movie (Game)". Giant Bomb. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ "Night Breed: The Interactive Movie download - PC Game". Squakenet.com. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ "Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Action Game". GameSpot. 1990-12-31. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ "Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Action Game (Game)". Giant Bomb. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ Your Sinclair: Nightbreed ^ "Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Interactive Movie for PC". GameFAQs. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ "Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Interactive Movie". GameSpot. 1990-12-31. Retrieved 2014-07-28. ^ Restored Nightbreed Cut Gets DVD Release. 'The Cabal Cut' is finally official - by Owen Williams July 23, 2013, Empire Online ^ Clive Barker Plotting Nightbreed For TV. Hellraiser headed for small screen too - by Owen Williams 04 April 2012, Empire Online ^ "Morgan Creek to Put Film Library Up for Sale". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 2015-11-10. ^ "'Nightbreed' TV Series Reboot From Clive Barker & Morgan Creek In Works At Syfy". Deadline. 22 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. ^ Andreeva, Nellie (2018-06-22). "'Nightbreed' TV Series Reboot From Clive Barker & Morgan Creek In Works At Syfy". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 2020-10-24. ^ Hermans, Grant (2020-09-30). "Exclusive: Godzilla's Michael Dougherty to Direct Nightbreed Series!". Coming Soon. Retrieved 2020-10-24. ^ Barton, Steve (April 1, 2010). "Nightbreed Uncut Report: Wondering What You Didn't See? We've Got the Answers!". DreadCentral.com. Retrieved 12 April 2012. ^ Zahn, James (June 1, 2009). "Nightbreed: The Director's Cut?". Fangoria. Archived from the original on June 12, 2009. ^ Zahn, James (June 10, 2009). "Update on the Director's Cut of Nightbreed". Fangoria. Archived from the original on June 19, 2009. ^ Barton, Steve (February 4, 2010). "See Nightbreed Uncut for the First Time Ever". DreadCentral.com. Retrieved April 12, 2012. ^ Snellings, April; Ron McKenzie (March 21, 2012). "Seraphim's Mark Miller on Nightbreed: The Director's Cut". Rue Morgue. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2012. ^ Turek, Ryan. "Join Occupy Midian and the Push for a Nightbreed: The Cabal Cut Release!". Shocktillyoudrop.com. Retrieved 13 April 2012. ^ Leitao, Jose. "The Cabal Cut Viral Trailer hits YouTube!". The Clive Barker Podcast. Retrieved 13 April 2012. “Occupy Midian” was a name thought up by Anne Bobby during an interview with the Clive Barker Podcast. This group aims to work in close co-operation with the creative people currently restoring the film. ^ "CABAL CUT To Be Released On Blu-Ray!". Clive Barker Podcast. Retrieved 13 July 2017. ^ Michael Plumides talks about Nightbreed: The Cabal Cut Dread Central ^ Zimmerman, Samuel. "[SDCC '13] Scream Factory releasing "Nightbreed: The Cabal Cut" & more!". Fangoria. Retrieved 21 July 2013. ^ Turek, Ryan (2 February 2014). "The Upcoming Nightbreed Special Edition is Not The Cabal Cut". ShockTillYouDrop.com. Retrieved 4 September 2014. ^ "Scream Factory Facebook – Final Specs For Nightbreed: The Directors Cut Revealed!". ^ Squires, John (February 4, 2010). "Full Release Details for Scream Factory's Nightbreed Director's Cut Blu-ray". DreadCentral.com. Retrieved 12 April 2012. ^ "Scream Factory Facebook – Nightbreed: Limited Edition – Now 10,000 Units". Further reading[edit] Clive Barker's The Nightbreed Chronicles; Clive Barker, Murray Close, Stephen Jones; ISBN 1-85286-260-2 Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Making of the Film; Clive Barker, Mark Salisbury, John Gilbert; ISBN 0-00-638136-7 External links[edit] API at IMDb API at Box Office Mojo {{AllMovie title}} template missing ID and not present in Wikidata. API at Rotten Tomatoes Information about Nightbreed Director's Cut., archived from the original on 2011-05-24, retrieved 2014-12-28 Extensive interview with Clive Barker about Cabal and Nightbreed. v t e Works by Clive Barker Literature The Damnation Game The Hellbound Heart Weaveworld Cabal Imajica The Thief of Always Sacrament Galilee Coldheart Canyon Mister B. Gone The Scarlet Gospels Books of the Art The Great and Secret Show Everville The Books of Abarat Abarat Days of Magic, Nights of War Absolute Midnight Collections Books of Blood (short stories) Clive Barker, Illustrator (art) Comic books Tapping the Vein Razorline Ectokid Hokum & Hex Hyperkind Saint Sinner Films, TV and video games Directed by Barker Hellraiser Nightbreed Lord of Illusions Directed by others Underworld Rawhead Rex Hellbound: Hellraiser II Candyman Quicksilver Highway A-Z of Horror Saint Sinner The Plague The Midnight Meat Train Book of Blood Dread Books of Blood Masters of Horror "Haeckel's Tale" "Valerie on the Stairs" Video games Clive Barker's Nightbreed: The Interactive Movie Clive Barker's Undying Clive Barker's Jericho Recurring characters Cenobites Pinhead Kirsty Candyman Harry D'Amour Candy Quackenbush v t e Saturn Award for Best DVD or Blu-ray Special Edition Release Shrek (2-Disc Edition) (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (Extended Edition) (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (Extended Edition) (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (Extended Edition) (2004) Sin City: Recut, Extended, Unrated (2005) Superman II: The Richard Donner Cut (2006) Blade Runner (5-Disc Ultimate Collector's Edition) (2007) Stephen King's The Mist (2-Disc Special Edition) (2008) Watchmen: The Ultimate Cut (2009) Avatar (Extended Collector's Edition) (2010) Giorgio Moroder Presents Metropolis (2011) Little Shop of Horrors: The Director's Cut (2012) Nightbreed: The Director's Cut (2014) X-Men: Days of Future Past: The Rogue Cut (2015) Phantasm: Remastered (2016) Night of the Living Dead (Criterion Collection) (2017)