This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Detail of Yellow Dragon of the Nine-Dragon Wall at the Forbidden City, in Beijing. A Nine-Dragon Wall or Nine-Dragon Screen (九龙壁; pinyin: Jiǔ Lóng Bì) is a type of screen wall with reliefs of nine different Chinese dragons. Such walls are typically found in imperial Chinese palaces and gardens. Early reference to the tradition of putting a screen wall at the gate is found in the Analects, 3:22: therein, it is mentioned as a trivial ritual norm ("The princes of States have a screen intercepting the view at their gates". 邦君樹塞門, trans. by James Legge). List of Nine-Dragon Walls[edit] List of Nine-Dragon Walls: Beihai Park, Beijing. Built in 1756, it features dragons on both sides. Forbidden City, Beijing. Built in 1771, it is located in front of the Palace of Tranquil Longevity. Datong, opposite the Datong Prince's Palace Pingyao Outside China (partial): Haw Par Villa, Singapore Chinatown, Chicago, Built in 2003, it is a miniature reproduction of the wall in Beihai Park, Beijing.[1] Hong Kong: Public Square Street Rest Garden, Yau Ma Tei. Located at the back of the Tin Hau Temple. Wong Tai Sin Temple China Resources Building, Wan Chai District Mississauga Chinese Centre, Mississauga, Canada Forbidden City Beihai Park Datong Pingyao Nine-Dragon Wall in Beihai Park, Beijing Nine-Dragon Wall in the Forbidden City, Beijing References[edit] ^ "Chicago Architecture Info - Nine Dragon Wall". Artefaqs Corporation. Retrieved 30 April 2014. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nine-Dragon Walls Warning: Commons link does not match Wikidata– please check (this message is shown only in preview). 9 (number) Nine Dragons (disambiguation)