Nlaka'pamux Flag of the Nlaka'pamux Nation Tribal Council Total population 3,105[1] (2016 census) Regions with significant populations Canada (British Columbia), United States (Washington) Languages English, Nlaka'pamuctsin Religion Christianity (Anglicanism and Catholicism), Animism Related ethnic groups Okanagan, Nicola people, Nicola Athapaskans Flag of the Nlaka'pamux Nation The Nlaka'pamux or Nlakapamuk[2] (/ɪŋkləˈkæpmə/ ing-klə-KAP-mə;[3] Salish: [nɬeʔképmx]), also previously known as the Thompson, Thompson River Salish, Thompson Salish, Thompson River Indians or Thompson River people, and historically as the Klackarpun,[4] Haukamaugh, Knife Indians and Couteau Indians, are an Indigenous First Nations people of the Interior Salish language group in southern British Columbia. Their traditional territory includes parts of the North Cascades region of Washington. Contents 1 Other names 2 Ethnobotany 3 Religion 4 Governments 4.1 Nlaka'pamux Nation Tribal Council 4.2 Scw’exmx Tribal Council (Originally Nicola Tribal Association or NTA) 4.3 Unaffiliated 5 Language 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Bibliography Other names[edit] Members of a Nlaka’pamux community, circa 1914 Dance Song of the Thompson River Indians Phonograph cylinder recording of song by Nlaka'pamux in British Columbia, 1897. Problems playing this file? See media help. Frontier-era histories and maps transliterate the name Nlaka'pamux as Hakamaugh or Klackarpun; they were also known as the Kootomin, or Couteau (Knife).[5] or Knife Indians. In the dialect of the Thompson language used by the Ashcroft Indian Band, the variant Nl'akapxm is used. The Nlaka'pamux of the Nicola Valley, who are all in the Nicola Tribal Association reserves refer to themselves as Scw'exmx and speak a different dialect of the Thompson language. Together with the Spaxomin people, a branch of the Okanagan people (Syilx) who live in the upper Nicola valley and also belong to the Nicola Tribal Association, they are collectively known as the Nicola people, or Nicolas. Ethnobotany[edit] Vaccinium myrtilloides are used in pies.[6] They use the leaves of Carex as brushes for cleaning things and also use the leaves as forage for their livestock.[7] Religion[edit] The Nlaka'pamux were the object of both Anglican and Roman Catholic missionary efforts in the nineteenth century, resulting in the vast majority belonging to one of the two denominations by the beginning of the twentieth century.[8] Governments[edit] The Nlaka'pamux Nation Tribal Council despite its name does not include all Nlaka'pamux people, but is one of two main tribal bodies within the region, the other being the Nicola Tribal Association. The Lytton First Nation or Lytton Band, focussed on the town of the same name, which is named Camchin or Kumsheen in the Nlaka'pamux language and is one of the largest Nlaka'pamux communities, does not belong to any of the three tribal associations. While the Upper Nicola Band is affiliated with the Scw’exmx Tribal Council it is a Syilx community and part of the Okanagan Nation Alliance it is not Nlaka'pamux and has a different traditional territory than the other Nlaka'pamux Bands. None of the Nlaka'pamux governments are in the British Columbia Treaty Commission process at present.[9] Nlaka'pamux Nation Tribal Council[edit] Boothroyd Indian Band Boston Bar Indian Band Oregon Jack Creek Indian Band Spuzzum Indian Band Lytton Indian Band Skuppah Indian Band Scw’exmx Tribal Council (Originally Nicola Tribal Association or NTA)[edit] A Nlaka'pamux table. Shackan Indian Band (Original NTA) Nooaitch Indian Band (Original NTA) Upper Nicola Band (Original NTA)(A member of the Okanagan Nation Alliance) Coldwater Indian Band (Original NTA) Lower Nicola Indian Band (Affiliated) Unaffiliated[edit] Ashcroft Indian Band Kanaka Bar Indian Band Siska Indian Band Cook's Ferry Indian Band Nicomen Indian Band (Former member of the Fraser Canyon Indian Administration) Language[edit] The Nlaka'pamux speak an Interior Salishan language named nɬeʔkepmxcín, usually transliterated as Nlaka'pamuxtsn and known in English as the Thompson language. The Scw'exmx of the Nicola Valley speak a dialect also called Scw'exmx. See also[edit] Scw'exmx Sxe'xn'x Notes[edit] ^ "Aboriginal Ancestry Responses (73), Single and Multiple Aboriginal Responses (4), Residence on or off reserve (3), Residence inside or outside Inuit Nunangat (7), Age (8A) and Sex (3) for the Population in Private Households of Canada, Provinces and Territories, 2016 Census - 25% Sample Data". www12.statcan.gc.ca. Government of Canada, Statistics. Retrieved 2017-12-08. ^ Keith Thor Carlson (2007). "Precedent and the Aboriginal Response to Global Incursions: Smallpox and Identity Reformation Among the Coast Salish" (PDF). Journal of the Canadian Historical Association / Revue de la Société historique du Canada. 18 (2): 165–201. ^ "Pronunciation Guide to First Nations in British Columbia". Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. 2010-09-15. Archived from the original on 2014-01-23. Retrieved 2013-05-14. ^ [on 1859 map by Lieut. R.C. Mayne, Royal Engineers], ^ Kootomin is a nativized variant of the French couteau ^ Turner, Nancy J., Laurence C. Thompson and M. Terry Thompson et al., 1990, Thompson Ethnobotany: Knowledge and Usage of Plants by the Thompson Indians of British Columbia, Victoria. Royal British Columbia Museum, page 218 ^ Turner, Nancy J., Laurence C. Thompson and M. Terry Thompson et al., 1990, Thompson Ethnobotany: Knowledge and Usage of Plants by the Thompson Indians of British Columbia, Victoria. Royal British Columbia Museum, page 114 ^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Thompson River Indians" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. ^ List of First Communities in BC, BC Treaty Commission Bibliography[edit] Thompson River Salish Dictionary Compiled by Laurence C. Thompson and M. Terry Thompson They Write Their Dreams on the Rock Forever: Rock Writings in the Stein River Valley of British Columbia (with Chris Arnett and Richard Daly Spuzzum: Fraser Canyon Histories, with Andrea LaForet Historical Atlas of British Columbia and the Pacific Northwest, Derek Hayes, Cavendish Books, Vancouver (1999) ISBN The Resettlement of British Columbia: Essays on Colonialism & Geographical Change, University of British Columbia Press; New Ed edition (January 1997) ISBN Shirley Sterling (1997). My Name is Seepeetza. Douglas and McIntyre, Inc. ISBN 0-88899-290-4. NLaka'pamux Language CD by Barbara Joe(2005){Editor/Producer/Technical: Dr. Shawn E. Swakum D.D} Shackan Stories by Jim Toodlican(2006){Editor/Producer/Technical: Shawn E. Swakum D.D} Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125