This article is about the biological function. For the sound art group, see Nocturnal Emissions. For the condition of excessive, accidental ejaculation, see spermatorrhea. "Wet dream" redirects here. For other uses, see Wet dream (disambiguation). "Spontaneous ejaculation" redirects here. For spontaneous ejaculation which does not occur during sleep, see Ejaculation § Hands-free ejaculation. A nocturnal emission, informally known as a wet dream, sex dream, nightfall or sleep orgasm, is a spontaneous orgasm during sleep that includes ejaculation for a male, or vaginal wetness or an orgasm (or both) for a female. Nocturnal emissions are most common during adolescence and early young adult years, but they may happen any time after puberty. It is possible for men to wake up during a wet dream or simply to sleep through it, but for women, some researchers have added the requirement that she should also awaken during the orgasm and perceive that the orgasm happened before it counts as a wet dream. Vaginal lubrication alone does not mean that the woman has had an orgasm.[1] Contents 1 Composition 2 Frequency 2.1 In males 2.2 In females 2.3 Lucid dreaming 3 Cultural views 3.1 Antiquity 3.2 Jewish and Samaritan 3.3 Patristic Christian 3.4 Islamic 3.5 Medieval 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Composition[edit] Due to the difficulty in collecting ejaculate produced during nocturnal emissions, relatively few studies have examined its composition.[2][3] In the largest study, which included nocturnal emission samples from 10 men with idiopathic anejaculation, the semen concentration was equivalent to samples obtained from the same men by penile vibratory stimulation, although the proportions of sperm which were mobile and which were of normal morphology were higher in the nocturnal emission specimens.[2] Frequency[edit] In a detailed study, men and women reported that approximately 8% of their everyday dreams contain some form of sexual-related activity. Four percent of sex dreams among both men and women resulted in orgasms.[4] In males[edit] The frequency of nocturnal emissions is highly variable. Some reported that it is due to being sexually inactive for a period of 1–2 weeks, with no engagement in either intercourse or masturbation. Some males have experienced large numbers of nocturnal emissions as teenagers, while others have never experienced one. In the U.S., 83% of men experience nocturnal emissions at some time in their life.[5] For males who have experienced nocturnal emissions, the mean frequency ranges from 0.36 times per week (about once every three weeks) for single 15-year-old males to 0.18 times per week (about once every five-and-a-half weeks) for 40-year-old single males. For married males, the mean ranges from 0.23 times per week (about once per month) for 19-year-old married males to 0.15 times per week (about once every two months) for 50-year-old married males.[6] In some parts of the world, nocturnal emissions are more common. For example, in Indonesia surveys have shown that 97% of men experience nocturnal emissions by the age of 24.[7] Some males have the emissions only at a certain age, while others have them throughout their lives following puberty. The frequency with which one has nocturnal emissions has not been conclusively linked to frequency of masturbation. Alfred Kinsey found there may be "some correlation between the frequencies of masturbation and the frequencies of nocturnal emissions. In general the males who have the highest frequencies of nocturnal emissions may have somewhat lower rates of masturbation." One factor that can affect the number of nocturnal emissions males have is whether they take testosterone-based drugs. In a 1998 study by Finkelstein et al, the number of boys reporting nocturnal emissions drastically increased as their testosterone doses were increased, from 17% of subjects with no treatment to 90% of subjects at a high dose.[8] Thirteen percent of males experience their first ejaculation as a result of a nocturnal emission.[9] Kinsey found that males experiencing their first ejaculation through a nocturnal emission were older than those experiencing their first ejaculation by means of masturbation. The study indicates that such a first ejaculation resulting from a nocturnal emission was delayed a year or more from what would have been developmentally possible for such males through physical stimulation.[10] In females[edit] The frequency of nocturnal emissions is variable, just as with males. In 1953, sex researcher Alfred Kinsey found that nearly 40% of the women he interviewed have had one or more nocturnal orgasms or wet dreams. Those who reported experiencing these said that they usually had them several times a year and that they first occurred as early as thirteen, and usually by the age of 21. Kinsey defined female nocturnal orgasm as sexual arousal during sleep that awakens one to perceive the experience of orgasm.[1] Research published by Barbara L Wells in the 1986 Journal of Sex Research indicates that as many as 85% of women have experienced nocturnal orgasm by the age of 21. This research was based on women waking up with/during orgasm. Studies have found that more males have more frequent spontaneous nocturnal sexual experiences than females. Female wet dreams may be more difficult to identify with certainty than male wet dreams because ejaculation is usually associated with male orgasm while vaginal lubrication may not indicate orgasm.[1][11] Lucid dreaming[edit] Sexual activity is a commonly reported theme of lucid dreams.[12] LaBerge, Greenleaf, and Kedzierski (1983) undertook a pilot study to determine the extent to which subjectively experienced sexual activity during REM lucid dreaming would be reflected in physiological responses: Since women report more orgasms in dreams than men do, we began with a female subject. We recorded many different aspects of her physiology that would normally be affected by sexual arousal, including respiration, heart rate, vaginal muscle tone, and vaginal pulse amplitude. The experiment called for her to make specific eye movement signals at the following points: when she realized she is dreaming, when she began sexual activity (in the dream), and when she experienced orgasm. She reported a lucid dream in which she carried out the experimental task exactly as agreed upon. Our analysis revealed significant correspondences between the dream activities she reported and all but one of the physiological measures. During the fifteen-second section of her physiological record which she signaled as the moment of orgasm, her vaginal muscle activity, vaginal pulse amplitude, and respiration rate reached their highest values of the night, and they also were considerably elevated in comparison to the rest of the REM period. Contrary to expectation, heart rate increased only slightly. — LaBerge, S., Greenleaf, W., & Kedzierski, B. (1983). Physiological responses to dreamed sexual activity during lucid REM sleep. Psychophysiology, 20, 454-455. Cultural views[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) There are numerous cultural and religious views on nocturnal emissions. Below is a limited summary of some perspectives. Antiquity[edit] In ancient Rome nocturnal emission was perceived as quite natural, as noted by Lucretius in his De Rerum Natura (translated here by William Ellery Leonard): ... Again, those males Into the surging channels of whose years Now first has passed the seed (engendered Within their members by the ripened days) Are in their sleep confronted from without By idol-images of some fair form— Tidings of glorious face and lovely bloom, Which stir and goad the regions turgid now With seed abundant; so that, as it were With all the matter acted duly out, They pour the billows of a potent stream And stain their garment. —  "Titus Lucretius Carus, De Rerum Natura, Book IV, lines 1025-1036". Jewish and Samaritan[edit] Main article: Keri Some examples of passages under the Mosaic law of the Hebrew Bible teach that under the law of Moses, a man who had a nocturnal emission incurred ritual defilement (as with any other instance of ejaculation): "If a man has an emission of semen, he shall bathe his whole body in water and be unclean [Hebrew tameh] until the evening. And every garment and every skin on which the semen comes shall be washed with water and be unclean until the evening." — Leviticus[13] "When you are encamped against your enemies, then you shall keep yourself from every evil thing. If any man among you becomes unclean [Hebrew lo yihyeh tahor, literally 'will not be clean'] because of a nocturnal emission [literally: 'by reason of what happens to him by night'], then he shall go outside the camp. He shall not come inside the camp, but when evening comes, he shall bathe himself in water, and as the sun sets, he may come inside the camp." — Deuteronomy[14] The first of these is part of a passage[15] stating similar regulations about sexual intercourse and menstruation. Leviticus 12 makes similar regulations about childbirth. A third passage relates more specifically to priests, requiring any "of the offspring of Aaron who has ... a discharge", among other causes of ritual defilement, to abstain from eating holy offerings until after a ritual immersion in a mikveh and until the subsequent night-fall.[16] In Judaism, the Tikkun HaKlali, also known as "The General Remedy", is a set of ten Psalms designed in 1805 by Rebbe Nachman, whose recital is intended to serve as repentance for nocturnal emissions. Patristic Christian[edit] Saint Augustine held that male nocturnal emissions, unlike masturbation, did not pollute the conscience of a man, because they were not voluntary carnal acts, and were therefore not to be considered a sin.[17] Islamic[edit] A wet dream (Arabic: احتلام‎, ihtilam) is not a sin in Islam. Moreover, whereas a person fasting (in Ramadan or otherwise) would normally be considered to have broken their fast by ejaculating on purpose (during either masturbation or intercourse), nocturnal emission is not such a cause. However, they are still required to bathe prior to undergoing some rituals in the religion. Muslim scholars consider ejaculation something that makes one temporarily ritually impure, a condition known as junub; meaning that a Muslim who has had an orgasm or ejaculated must have a ghusl (consisting of ablution followed by bathing the entire body so that not a single hair remains dry on the whole body — may also require one to rub the body according to Maliki school of thought, dalk in Arabic — while showering) before they can read any verse of the Qur'an or perform the formal prayers. Informal supplications and prayers (du'a) do not require such a bath.[citation needed] Medieval[edit] Main article: Succubus In European folklore, nocturnal emissions were believed to be caused by a succubus copulating with the individual at night, an event associated with sleep paralysis and possibly night terrors.[citation needed][dubious – discuss] See also[edit] Nocturnal penile tumescence Nocturnal clitoral tumescence Sleep sex Somnophilia Nocturnal enuresis References[edit] ^ a b c "Do women have wet dreams, too?". Go Ask Alice!. May 7, 1999. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012. ^ a b Meng, X; Fan, L; Liu, J; Wang, T; Yang, J; Wang, J; Wang, S; Ye, Z (2013). "Fresh semen quality in ejaculates produced by nocturnal emission in men with idiopathic anejaculation". Fertility and Sterility. 100 (5): 1248–52. doi:10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.07.1979. PMID 23987518. ^ Hovav, Y; Dan-Goor, M; Yaffe, H; Almagor, M (1999). "Nocturnal sperm emission in men with psychogenic anejaculation". Fertility and Sterility. 72 (2): 364–5. doi:10.1016/s0015-0282(99)00239-3. PMID 10439013. ^ American Academy of Sleep Medicine (June 15, 2007). "Sexual Activity Reported In Dreams Of Men And Women". ScienceDaily. ^ Kinsey, Alfred C. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. p. 190. Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ Kinsey, Alfred C. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. p. 190. Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ "Knowledge about Human Reproduction and Experience of Puberty" (PDF). Indonesia Young Adult Reproductive Health Survey 2002–2003. Badan Pusat Statistik (BPS-Statistics Indonesia), Jakarta, Indonesia; National Family Planning Coordinating Board, Jakarta, Indonesia; Ministry of Health, Jakarta, Indonesia, ORC Macro, Calverton, Maryland, U.S. p. 27. Retrieved April 7, 2011. ^ Finkelstein, Jordan W.; Elizabeth J. Susman; Vernon M. Chinchilli; M. Rose D’Arcangelo; Susan J. Kunselman; Jacqueline Schwab; et al. (1998). "Effects of Estrogen or Testosterone on Self-Reported Sexual Responses and Behaviors in Hypogonadal Adolescents". The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. The Endocrine Society. 83 (7): 2281–2285. doi:10.1210/jc.83.7.2281. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2011. ^ Kinsey, Alfred C. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. p. 190. Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ Kinsey, Alfred C. (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. p. 299. Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ "Nocturnal Orgasm...or...Female wet dream?". Newsvine. September 2009. Retrieved 29 July 2012. ^ Garfield, 1979; LaBerge, 1985 ^ 15:16–17 ^ 23:9–1123:9–11 ^ Leviticus 15 ^ Leviticus 22:4 ^ This view is confirmed by the Protestant theologian Philip Schaff. S.23 Kinsey, Alfred C.; Wardell B. Pomeroy; Clyde E. Martin (1948). Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co. External links[edit] The dictionary definition of wet dream at Wiktionary v t e Sleep and sleep disorders Stages of sleep cycles Rapid eye movement (REM) Non-rapid eye movement Slow-wave Brain waves Alpha wave Beta wave Delta wave Gamma wave K-complex Mu rhythm PGO waves Sensorimotor rhythm Sleep spindle Theta wave Sleep disorders Dyssomnia Excessive daytime sleepiness Hypersomnia Insomnia Kleine–Levin syndrome Narcolepsy Night eating syndrome Nocturia Sleep apnea Catathrenia Central hypoventilation syndrome Obesity hypoventilation syndrome Obstructive sleep apnea Periodic breathing Sleep state misperception Circadian rhythm disorders Advanced sleep phase disorder Cyclic alternating pattern Delayed sleep phase disorder Irregular sleep–wake rhythm Jet lag Non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder Shift work sleep disorder Parasomnia Bruxism Nightmare disorder Night terror Periodic limb movement disorder Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder Sleepwalking Sleep-talking Benign phenomena Dreams Exploding head syndrome Hypnic jerk Hypnagogia / Sleep onset Hypnopompic state Sleep paralysis Sleep inertia Somnolence Nocturnal clitoral tumescence Nocturnal penile tumescence Nocturnal emission Treatment Sleep diary Sleep hygiene Sleep induction Hypnosis Lullaby Somnology Polysomnography Other Sleep medicine Behavioral sleep medicine Sleep study Daily life Bed Bunk bed Daybed Four-poster bed Futon Hammock Mattress Sleeping bag Bed bug Bedding Bedroom Bedtime Bedtime story Biphasic and polyphasic sleep Chronotype Comfort object Dream diary Microsleep Mouth breathing Nap Nightwear Power nap Second wind Siesta Sleep and creativity Sleep and learning Sleep deprivation / Sleep debt Sleeping while on duty Sleepover Snoring v t e Outline of human sexuality Physiology and biology Erection Insemination Intersex Libido Nocturnal emission Orgasm Female and male ejaculation Pelvic thrust Pre-ejaculate Pregnancy Sexual arousal Sexual stimulation Health and education Birth control Condom Masters and Johnson Reproductive medicine Andrology Gynaecology Urology Safe sex Sex education Sex therapy (PLISSIT model) Sexology Sexual dysfunction Erectile dysfunction Hypersexuality Hyposexuality Sexual medicine Sexual surrogate Sexually transmitted infection Identity and diversity Gender binary Gender identity Men who have sex with men Sexual identity Sexual orientation Women who have sex with women Law Age of consent Criminal transmission of HIV Child sexual abuse Incest Indecent exposure Obscenity Sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Rape Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual misconduct Sexual slavery Sexual violence History Blue Movie Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist sex wars Golden Age of Porn History of erotic depictions Sexual revolution Relationships and society Anarchism and love/sex Extramarital sex Family planning Flirting Free love Marriage Modesty Polyamory Premarital sex Promiscuity Romance Sex-positive movement Sexual abstinence Sexual addiction Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual objectification Sexual slang By country Ancient Rome China India Japan Philippines South Korea United States Sexual activities Conventional sex Anal sex Bareback BDSM Child sex Creampie Edging Erotic sexual denial Fetishism Fingering Fisting Gang bang Group sex Masturbation Mechanics of sex Nipple stimulation Non-penetrative sex Facial Foot fetishism Footjob Forced orgasm Frot Handjob Mammary intercourse Sumata Oral sex 69 Anilingus Cunnilingus Fellatio Irrumatio Paraphilia Pompoir Quickie Sex in space Sex positions Sexual fantasy Sexual fetishism Sexual intercourse Foreplay Sexual penetration Swinging Tribadism Urethral intercourse Urolagnia Virtual sex Cybersex Erotic talk Wet T-shirt contest Sex industry Red-light district Adult video games Erotica Pornography Film actor Prostitution Survival sex Sex museum Sex shop Sex tourism Child Female Sex worker Sex toy doll Strip club Webcam model Religion and sexuality Buddhism Christian demonology Daoism Islam Mormonism Sex magic  Human sexuality portal