Nunsploitation is a subgenre of exploitation film which had its peak in Europe in the 1970s. These films typically involve Christian nuns living in convents during the Middle Ages. The main conflict of the story is usually of a religious or sexual nature, such as religious oppression or sexual suppression due to living in celibacy. The Inquisition is another common theme. These films, although often seen as pure exploitation films, often contain criticism against religion in general and the Catholic Church in particular. Indeed, some protagonist dialogue voiced feminist consciousness and rejection of their subordinated social role. Many of these films were made in countries where the Catholic Church is influential, such as Italy and Spain. One atypical example of the genre, Killer Nun (Suor Omicidi), was set in then present-day Italy (1978). Nunsploitation, along with nazisploitation, is a subgenre that ran a parallel course alongside women in prison films in the 1970s and 1980s. As with prison films, they are set in isolated, fortress-like convents where the all-female population turns to lesbianism and perversity. The element of religious guilt allows for lurid depictions of "mortifying the flesh" such as self-flagellation and painful, masochistic rituals. The mother superior is usually a cruel and corrupt warden-like martinet who enforces strict discipline (more opportunities for whippings and medieval-style punishments) and often lusts after her female charges. An equally sadistic and lecherous priest is often included to add an element of masculine menace to the story. Some segments from the Scandinavian silent film Häxan (1922) may be seen as a precursor for this genre. A recent act of nunsploitation in a film is in Robert Rodriguez' Machete (2010), where Lindsay Lohan portrays a gun-toting nun.[1] An even more recent example is Darren Lynn Bousman's nunsploitation horror movie St. Agatha (2018).[2] Among other examples of exploitation cinema in Europe over the last sixty years, nunsploitation genre movies are discussed in Mendik and Mathij's recent overview volume on this general trend within regional cinema genres, cultures, and audience consumption. Chris Fujiwara wrote a detailed piece discussing examples of the genre such as Killer Nun (1978), The Nun and the Devil (1973) and Flavia the Heretic (1974), in Hermenaut, a US pop culture journal. Contents 1 Historical basis 2 In Japan 3 Theatrical adaptations 4 Examples of nunsploitation films 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Bibliography Historical basis[edit] Some films, such as the X-rated The Devils, based on a book by Aldous Huxley and directed by Ken Russell, have some basis in fact. Huxley based his original historical account, The Devils of Loudun, on a reported case of mass hysteria and demonic possession that allegedly took place at a French convent in the seventeenth century. Given that the genre was the product of the sixties and seventies, with an occasional contemporary example like the recent Sacred Flesh (1999), there has been little further resort to possible historical source material, like Aelred of Hexham (1110–1167) and his account of the Nun of Watton, for example. Another example might be the life of sister Benedetta Carlini, a 17th-century Italian lesbian nun. Twenty years ago[when?], Graciela Daichman collected stories about aberrant medieval religious women, but since that time, there has been few other serious historical attempt to explore what factual basis might exist for the literary depictions that often served as the basis for nunsploitation cinema. In 2010, Craig Monson wrote Nuns Behaving Badly, which dealt with the social and sexual lives of religious women in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Italy, but such work remains rare.[3] However, recent work on the dramaturgy of demonic possession in medieval Europe may be useful to comprehend the social, psychological and behavioural context of such acts.[4] In Japan[edit] Catholic nun exploitation films have been a subgenre of Japanese exploitation film since at least the early 1970s. Though Christianity was never a dominant religion in Japan, Japan did encounter Christian missionaries. By taking a minority religion as their subject, it has been suggested that these "shockingly perverse and wildly blasphemous" Catholic nun films are "a way of thumbing one's nose at organized religion without attacking the more sacred beliefs of the general society".[5] Some entries in this genre include Norifumi Suzuki's School of the Holy Beast (1974), Masaru Konuma's Cloistered Nun: Runa's Confession (1976), Kōyū Ohara's Sister Lucia's Dishonor (1978), and Wet Rope Confession: Convent Story (1979), Hiroshi Mukai's Nun: Secret (1978), Nobuaki Shirai's Nun Story: Frustration in Black (1980), and Mamoru Watanabe's Rope of Hell: A Nun's Story (1981) and Electric Bible: Sister Hunting (1992).[6] In 1995, big-busted AV idol Mariko Morikawa starred in director Sachi Hamano's Big Tit Monastery (巨乳修道院), another Japanese variation on the nunsploitation genre.[7] Theatrical adaptations[edit] Toronto-based stage artist Jamieson Child, directed in 2015 the stage musical Kill Sister, Kill: A Dark New Musical, as homage to the exploitation genre.[8] Examples of nunsploitation films[edit] Mother Joan of the Angels (Jerzy Kawalerowicz, Poland, 1961) The Lady of Monza (Eriprando Visconti, Italy, 1969) The Devils (Ken Russell, 1971) The Demons (Les Demons, Jesús Franco, France, 1972) Story of a Cloistered Nun (Storia di una monaca di clausura, Domenico Paolella, Italy, 1973) The Nun and the Devil (Domenico Paolella, Italy, 1973) Flavia the Heretic (Flavia, la monaca musulmana, Gianfranco Mingozzi, Italy, 1974) School of the Holy Beast (Norifumi Suzuki, Japan, 1974) Le Scomunicate di San Valentino (Sergio Grieco, Italy, 1974) Satánico pandemonium (Gilberto Martínez Solares, Mexico, 1975) Alucarda (Alucarda, la hija de las tinieblas, Juan López Moctezuma, Mexico, 1975) Cloistered Nun: Runa's Confession (Masaru Konuma, Japan, 1976) Love Letters of a Portuguese Nun (Jesús Franco, West Germany, 1976) Sister Emanuelle (Giuseppe Vari, Italy, 1977) Killer Nun (Suor Omicida, Giulio Berruti, Italy, 1978) The Last House on the Beach (La settima donna, Franco Prosperi, Italy, 1978) Nun: Secret (Hiroshi Mukai, Japan, 1978) Sister Lucia's Dishonor (Kōyū Ohara, Japan, 1978) They Call Her Cleopatra Wong (Bobby A. Suarez, Philippines, 1978) Behind Convent Walls (Interno di un convento, Walerian Borowczyk, Italy, 1978) Malabimba (Andrea Bianchi, 1979) Images in a Convent (Joe D'Amato, Italy, 1979) The Other Hell (Bruno Mattei, Italy, 1980) The True Story of the Nun of Monza (Bruno Mattei, Italy, 1980) Dark Habits (Pedro Almodóvar, Spain, 1983) Convent of Sinners (Joe D'Amato as Dario Donati, Italy, 1986) Nuns on the Run (Jonathan Lynn, United Kingdom, 1990) Electric Bible: Sister Hunting (Mamoru Watanabe, Japan, 1992) Dark Waters (Mariano Baino, 1994) Sacred Flesh (Nigel Wingrove, 1999) Bad Habits (Dominic Deacon, Australia, 2009) Nun of That (Richard Griffin, 2009) Machete (Robert Rodriguez, portrayed by Lindsay Lohan, 2010) Nude Nuns with Big Guns (Joseph Guzman, 2010) The Little Hours (Jeff Baena, 2017) St. Agatha (Darren Lynn Bousman, 2018)[9] See also[edit] Convent pornography Notes[edit] ^ Krystal Clark (July 19, 2010). "Lindsay Lohan Is a Gun Toting Nun in Machete Photo". Screen Crave. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2010. ^ "St. Agatha (2018) – Review | Nun Horror Movie". Heaven of Horror. 2019-02-04. Retrieved 2019-02-13. ^ Craig Monson: Nuns Behaving Badly: Tales of Music, Magic, Art and Arson in the Convents of Italy: University of Chicago Press: 2010. ^ Brian Levack: The Devil Within: Exorcism and Possession in the Christian West: New Haven: Yale University Press: 2013. ^ Thomas Weisser; Yuko Mihara Weisser (1998). Japanese Cinema Encyclopedia: The Sex Films. Miami: Vital Books: Asian Cult Cinema Publications. p. 497. ISBN 1-889288-52-7. ^ Weisser. ^ 巨乳修道院. Japanese Film Database (in Japanese). Retrieved June 3, 2007. ^ "Nunsploitation Heads to NYC In "Kill Sister, Kill"". August 3, 2015. ^ "2011 Online Catalogue Nunsploitation films". www.videoscreams.com. Retrieved 15 August 2019. Bibliography[edit] Graciela Daichman: Wayward Nuns in Medieval Literature: Syracuse: Syracuse University Press: 1986: ISBN 0-8156-2379-8. Chris Fujiwara: "Convent Erotica" Hermenaut 12. Brian Levack: The Devil Within: Exorcism and Possession in the Christian West: New Haven: Yale University Press: 2013. Ernest Mathijs and Xavier Mendik: Alternative Europe: Eurotrash and Exploitation Cinema Since 1945: London: Wallflower: 2004: ISBN 1-903364-93-0. Craig Monson: Nuns Behaving Badly: Tales of Music, Magic, Art and Arson in the Convents of Italy: Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 2010. Anticristo: The Bible of Naughty Nun Sinema and Culture: Guildford: FAB: 2000: ISBN 1-903254-03-5. v t e Exploitation film Blaxploitation Bruceploitation Cannibal Eurospy Euro War / Macaroni Combat Giallo Hippie Martial arts Mexploitation Mockbuster Mondo Nazi exploitation Nunsploitation Outlaw biker Ozploitation Poliziotteschi Pornochanchada Rape and revenge Rumberas film Sexploitation Slasher Spaghetti Western Splatter Sword-and-sandal Turksploitation Vansploitation Women in prison v t e Italian film genres and movements 1900s-1940s Italian futurism Italian neorealism Calligrafismo Telefoni Bianchi Cinecittà Italy portal 1950s-1980s Cannibal films Cannibal boom Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Eurospy / Spaghetti Spy Giallo Hollywood on the Tiber Macaroni Combat / Euro War / Spaghetti War Mondo films Musicarello Nunsploitation Peplum / Sword-and-Sandal Poliziotteschi Sadiconazista Sceneggiata Spaghetti Western Zapata Western Women in prison v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie