"Nyarlathotep" Author H. P. Lovecraft Country United States Language English Published in The United Amateur Publication type Periodical Media type Print (magazine) Publication date November 1920 "Nyarlathotep" is a prose poem[1] by H. P. Lovecraft. It was written in 1920 and first saw publication in that year's November issue of The United Amateur.[2] The poem itself is a bleak view of human civilization in decline, and it explores the mixed sensations of desperation and defiance in a dying society.[3] Contents 1 Background 2 Plot 3 In other media 4 References 5 External links Background[edit] "Nyarlathotep" was based on one of Lovecraft's dreams.[4] The first body paragraph of the poem was written "while he was still half-asleep".[5] The poem, which stands as the first appearance of the titular Cthulhu Mythos entity Nyarlathotep,[6] was described by Lovecraft as "a nightmare".[7] In the inspiring dream, Lovecraft read a letter from his friend Samuel Loveman that contained an invitation, which is as follows: Don’t fail to see Nyarlathotep if he comes to Providence. He is horrible—horrible beyond anything you can imagine—but wonderful. He haunts one for hours afterward. I am still shuddering at what he showed.[8][9] Plot[edit] The story is written in first person and begins by describing a strange and inexplicable sense of foreboding experienced by humanity in general, in anticipation of a great unknown evil. The story proceeds to describe the appearance in Egypt of Nyarlathotep, "of the old native blood" and resembling a Pharaoh, who claims to have "risen up out of the blackness of twenty-seven centuries," and to be receiving messages from other worlds. Coming to the West, he appears to have a profound command of the sciences, constructs marvelous and unfathomable devices, and gains great fame as he travels from city to city demonstrating his inventions and powers. Wherever Nyarlathotep goes, the inhabitants' sleep is plagued by vivid nightmares. The story describes Nyarlathotep's arrival in the narrator's city, and the narrator's attendance at one of Nyarlathotep's demonstrations, in which he defiantly dismisses Nyarlathotep's displays of power as mere tricks. The party of observers is driven out of the hall by Nyarlathotep, and hysterically insists to one another that they are not afraid, and that the city around them is unchanged and alive, even as the electric street lights begin to fail. Everyone falls into a trancelike state and wanders off, dividing into at least three columnal groups: the first of these disappears around a corner, from which there is then heard a echoing moan; another descends into a subway station with the sound of mad laughter; the third group, which contains the narrator, travels outward from the city toward the country. The narrator's party marches through unseasonable snows into a dark rift, with the narrator the last to enter. The story ends by describing a series of horrific, surreal vistas experienced by the narrator, in which chaos and madness pervade an ancient, dying universe ruled by mindless, inhuman gods, whose messenger and "soul" is Nyarlathotep. In other media[edit] Nyarlathotep and elements from the short story of the same name feature prominently in Lovecraftian: The Shipwright Circle by Steven Philip Jones. The Lovecraftian series reimagines the weird tales of H. P. Lovecraft into one single universal modern epic. In the 2007 Dream Theater song "The Dark Eternal Night," lyricist John Petrucci introduces a character similar to Nyarlathotep and quotes phrases from Lovecraft's story.[10] In 2007, the story was adapted into a French graphic novel of the same name, illustrated by Julien Noirel and published by Akileos. The accompanying text was drawn directly from the story. Greek black metal band Varathron wrote and recorded several versions of a track titled "The Tressrising of Nyarlathotep" between 1990 and 1993. References[edit] ^ Smith, Don G. (2006). H. P. Lovecraft in Popular Culture. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company. p. 13. ISBN 0-7864-2091-X. ^ Lovecraft, H. P. (February 16, 2010). Writings in the United Amateur, 1915–1922. Project Gutenberg. p. 128. ASIN B0039GL2GI. Retrieved July 17, 2018. ^ Joshi, S. T. (2001). A Dreamer and a Visionary: H. P. Lovecraft in His Time. Liverpool University Press. p. 140. ISBN 0-85323-946-0. ^ Joshi, S. T. (1996). A Subtler Magick: The Writings and Philosophy of H. P. Lovecraft. Rockville, Maryland: Wildside Press. p. 68. ISBN 1-880448-61-0. ^ Joshi, S. T.; Schultz, David E. (2001). An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 191. ISBN 0-313-31578-7. ^ Ramos, Octavio. "Lovecraftian Beasties: The Many Forms of Nyarlathotep". AXS. Retrieved July 17, 2018. ^ Burleson, Donald R. (1983). H. P. Lovecraft, a Critical Study. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 73. ISBN 0-313-23255-5. ^ Emrys, Ruthanna; Pillsworth, Anne M. "Deities in Brief: "Azathoth" and "Nyarlathotep"". Tor.com. Retrieved July 17, 2018. ^ Khazeni, Dorna. "Church of Monsters". The Believer. Retrieved July 17, 2018. ^ Systematic Chaos (CD liner notes). Dream Theater. Roadrunner Records. 2007. RR 7992-8.CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) External links[edit] Wikisource has original text related to this article: Nyarlathotep API title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Full text at The H. P. Lovecraft Archive. Nyarlathotep public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125