Not to be confused with oblique argument. In grammar, an oblique (abbreviated OBL; from Latin: casus obliquus) or objective case (abbr. OBJ) is a nominal case other than the nominative case, and sometimes, the vocative. A noun or pronoun in the oblique case can generally appear in any role except as subject, for which the nominative case is used.[1] The term objective case is generally preferred by modern English grammarians, where it supplanted Old English's dative and accusative.[2][3] When the two terms are contrasted, they differ in the ability of a word in the oblique case to function as a possessive attributive; whether English has an oblique rather than an objective case then depends on how "proper" or widespread one considers the dialects where such usage is employed. An oblique case often contrasts with an unmarked case, as in English oblique him and them vs. nominative he and they. However, the term oblique is also used for languages without a nominative case, such as ergative–absolutive languages; in the Northwest Caucasian languages, for example, the oblique-case marker serves to mark the ergative, dative, and applicative case roles, contrasting with the absolutive case, which is unmarked. Contents 1 Hindustani 2 Bulgarian 3 English 4 French 5 Kurdish 6 See also 7 References Hindustani[edit] Hindustani (Hindi and Urdu) nouns and pronouns decline for an oblique case which exclusively serves to mark the grammatical case roles using the case-marking postpositions.[4][5][6] The nominative and oblique cases for pronouns are shown in the tables below: Personal pronouns Case 1st Person 2nd Person Singular Plural Intimate Neutral Formal Singular Singular & Plural Nominative मैं mɛ̃ हम ham तू tū तुम tum आप āp Oblique Ergative Regular मुझ mujh तुझ tujh Emphatic मुझी mujhī हमीं hamī̃ तुझी tujhī तुम्हीं tumhī̃ — Genitive Masculine मेरे mērē हमारे hamārē तेरे tērē तुम्हारे tumhārē — Feminine मेरी mērī हमारी hamārī तेरी tērī तुम्हारी tumhārī — Third person pronouns Case Demonstrative1 Relative Interrogative Proximal Distal Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Nominative यह yah ये yē वह vah वे vē जो jo कौन, क्या kaun, kyā ये yē वो vo Oblique Ergative इस is इन्हों inhõ उस us उन्हों unhõ जिस jis जिन्हों jinhõ किस kis किन्हों kinhõ Regular इन in उन un जिन jin किन kin Emphatic इसी isī इन्हीं inhī̃ उसी usī उन्हीं unhī̃ — — किसी kisī किन्हीं kinhī 1 Hindustani does not have true third person pronouns and the demonstratives double as the third person pronouns. There are six noun declension patterns in Hindustani.[7] They are mentioned in the table below: Case Masculine Feminine ending in -आ (-ā) ending in -इ/ई (-i/ī) ending in -उ/ऊ (-u/ū) ending in -ø ending in -इ/ई (-i/ī) ending in -ø Boy Man Knife Tree Girl Mother Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Singular Plural Nominative लड़का lar̥kā लड़के lar̥kē आदमी ādmī आदमी ādmī चाकू cakū चाकू cakū पेड़ per̥ पेड़ per̥ लड़की lar̥kī लड़कियाँ lar̥kiyā̃ माता mātā माताएँ mātāẽ Oblique लड़के lar̥kē लड़कों lar̥kõ आदमियों ādmiyõ चाकुओं cakuõ पेड़ों per̥õ लड़कियों lar̥kiyõ माताओं mātāõ Note: -ø means anything other than -ā, -i, and -ī for masculine and anything other than -i/ī for feminine. The oblique case is used exclusively with these 8 case-marking postpositions.[8][9] Out of these 8 postpositions, the genitive and semblative postpositions decline to agree with the gender, number, and case of the object it shows possession of, or the subject it semblance of to something/someone. Postpositional case-markers Case Case Marker Example English Example English Nominative — लड़का lar̥kā boy तू tū you Ergative ने nē लड़के ने lar̥kē nē the boy तूने tūnē you Accusative को ko लड़के को lar̥kē ko the boy तुझको tujhko you Dative to the boy to you Instrumental से sē लड़के से lar̥kē sē with/using the boy तुझसे tujhsē with/using you Ablative from the boy from you Genitive का kā लड़के का lar̥kē kā boy's तेरा terā your Inessive में mẽ लड़के में lar̥kē mẽ in/inside the boy तुझमें tujhmẽ in/inside you Adessive पे / पर pē/par लड़के पे lar̥kē pē on/at the boy तुझपे tujhpē on you Terminative तक tak लड़के तक lar̥kē tak (up) till the boy तुझतक tujhtak till you Semblative सा sā लड़के सा lar̥kē sā boy-ish, boy-esque तुझसा tujhsā like you Genitive & Semblative marker declension Case Masculine Feminine Singular Plural Singular Plural Nominative ा -ā े -ē ी -ī Oblique े -ē Bulgarian[edit] Bulgarian, an analytic Slavic language, also has an oblique case form for pronouns: Dative role: "Give that ball to me" дай тaзи топка на мен (day tazi topka na men) (This oblique case is a relic of the original, more complex proto-Slavic system of noun cases, and there are remnants of other cases in Bulgarian, such as the vocative case of direct address) English[edit] An objective case is marked on the English personal pronouns and as such serves the role of the accusative and dative cases that other Indo-European languages employ. These forms are often called object pronouns. They serve a variety of grammatical functions which they would not in languages that differentiate the two. An example using first person singular objective pronoun me: in an accusative role for a direct object (including double object and oblique ditransitives): Do you see me? The army sent me to Korea. in a dative role for an indirect object: Kim passed the pancakes to me. (Or colloquially, Kim passed me the pancakes. as the object of a preposition (except in possessives): That picture of me was blurry. (cf. That picture of mine was stolen.) in copular deixis: [referring to a photograph] This is me on the beach. in existentials (sometimes, but not always, replaceable by the nominative—in very formal style):[10] It's me again. (cf. Once again, it is I. [formal]) Who is it?—It's me. (cf. It is I [to whom you are speaking].) It's me who should fix it. (cf. Since I made it, it is I who should fix it.) in a nominative role with predicate or verbal ellipsis: Who made this bicycle?—Me. (cf. Who made this bicycle?—I did.) I like him.—Hey, me too. (cf. I like him.—Hey, I do too.) Who's gonna clean up this mess?—Not me! in coordinated nominals: Me and him are going to the store. (only in highly informal speech) (cf. Is he going? Yes, he and I are going.) as a disjunctive topic marker: Me, I like Spanish. The pronoun me is not inflected differently in any of these uses; it is used for all grammatical relationships except the genitive case of possession (in standard English) and a non-disjunctive nominative case as the subject. It may also be used as a comedic stylistic effect of blatant error (nonstandard, pidgin, baby or foreigner talk or "broken English"): [spoken by Cookie Monster] Me so hungry. (the above example also employs copula deletion to similar effect) French[edit] Old French had a nominative case and an oblique case, called cas sujet and cas régime respectively. In Modern French, the two cases have mostly merged and the cas régime has survived for the majority of nouns. For example, the word "conte (tale)": Old French: Nominative: li cuens (singular), li conte (plural) Oblique: le conte (singular), les contes (plural) Modern French: le conte (singular), les contes (plural) In some cases, both the cas sujet and cas régime of one noun have survived but produced two nouns in Modern French with different meanings. Example today's copain means "friend" and compagnon is "companion", but in Old French these were different declensions of the same noun. Kurdish[edit] Kurdish has an oblique for pronouns, objects, and for objects of Izafe constructs. See also[edit] Object pronoun, which in English take the oblique case Oblique argument Object (grammar) Subject pronoun Disjunctive pronoun Quirky subject References[edit] ^ "oblique" in David Crystal, 2008. A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics, 6th ed. ^ "Objective case (grammar)". (about) education. Retrieved 29 January 2016. ^ "Personal pronoun". Oxford Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 29 January 2016. ^ https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267724707_CASE_IN_HINDI ^ https://www.researchgate.net/publication/226198692_Ergative_Case-marking_in_Hindi ^ "case marking in hindi - Google Search". www.google.com. Retrieved 2020-09-01. ^ "Hindi Noun Cases". hindilanguage.info. 2012-04-19. Retrieved 2020-09-01. ^ http://alt.qcri.org/~ndurrani/pubs/system_grammatical_relations.pdf ^ https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.708.2327&rep=rep1&type=pdf ^ Huddleston, Rodney; Pullum, Geoffrey K. (2002). The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 459. ISBN 0-521-43146-8. v t e Grammatical cases List of cases Declension Morphosyntactic alignment Cases Morphosyntactic alignment Absolutive Accusative Direct Ergative Intransitive Nominative Oblique Partitive Pegative Location, time, direction Ablative Adessive Allative Antessive Apudessive Approximative Delative Distantitive Distributive –temporal Egressive Elative Illative Inelative Inessive Initiative Intrative Lative Limitative Locative –qualitative Medial Perlative Pertingent Postdirective Postelative Postessive Prolative Proximative Subdirective Subelative Subessive Sublative Superdirective Superelative Superessive Superlative Temporal Terminative Possession, companion, instrument Abessive Caritive Comitative Dative Genitive Instrumental –comitative Ornative Possessed Possessive Privative Sociative State, manner Adverbial Comparative Equative Essive –formal –modal Exessive Formal Identical Instructive Modal Multiplicative Orientative Revertive Semblative Translative Cause, purpose Aversive Benefactive Causal –final Evitative Final Other Postpositional Prepositional Vocative Declensions Czech Archaic Dutch English Middle English Old English Finnish German Old High German Gothic Irish Latin Latvian Lithuanian Russian Serbo-Croatian Slovak