Indic language Odia ଓଡ଼ିଆ 'Odia' in Odia script Pronunciation [oˈɽiaː] (listen) Native to India Region Odisha, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh Ethnicity Odias Native speakers 35 million (2011–2019)[1][2] L2 speakers: 4 million[1] Language family Indo-European Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Eastern Odia Early forms Prakrit Magadhi Prakrit Odra Prakrit Early Odia Dialects Northern, Northwestern, Central, Southern, Western, Desiya, Tribal dialects Writing system Odia Script Odia Braille Official status Official language in  India Odisha Jharkhand[3] (additional) West Bengal[4][5] (additional) Regulated by Odisha Sahitya Akademi, Government of Odisha[6] Language codes ISO 639-1 or ISO 639-2 ori ISO 639-3 ori – inclusive code Individual codes: ory – Odia spv – Sambalpuri ort – Adivasi Odia (Kotia) dso – Desiya (duplicate of [ort])[7] Glottolog macr1269  Macro-Oriya(Odra) oriy1255  Odia   Odia majority or plurality   Significant Odia minority This article contains Odia text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Odia script. Odia /əˈdiːə/[8] (ଓଡ଼ିଆ, ISO: Oṛiā, pronounced [oˈɽiaː] (listen);[9] formerly spelled as Oriya) is an Indo-Aryan language spoken in the Indian state of Odisha.[10] It is the official language in Odisha (formerly known as Orissa)[11] where native speakers make up 82% of the population,[12] also spoken in parts of West Bengal,[13] Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh,[14] Odia is one of the many official languages of India; it is the official language of Odisha and the second official language of Jharkhand.[15][16][17] The language is also spoken by a sizeable population of at least 1 million people in Chhattisgarh. Odia is the sixth Indian language to be designated a Classical language, on the basis of having a long literary history and not having borrowed extensively from other languages.[18][19][20][21] The earliest known inscription in Odia dates back to the 10th century CE.[22] Contents 1 History 1.1 Charyapada of 8th Century and its affinity with Odia 1.2 Poet Jayadeva's literary contribution 2 Geographical distribution 2.1 India 2.2 Foreign countries 3 Standardization and Dialects 3.1 Major forms or dialects 3.2 Major Tribal dialects and Sociolects 4 Phonology 5 Grammar 6 Writing system 6.1 Odia Script 7 Literature 8 Sample Text 9 Software 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links History[edit] Odia is an Eastern Indo-Aryan language belonging to the Indo-Aryan language family. It is thought to be directly descended from an Odra Prakrit, which was spoken in east India over 1,500 years ago, and is the primary language used in early Jain and Buddhist texts.[23] Odia appears to have had relatively little influence from Persian and Arabic, compared to other major Indo-Aryan languages.[24] The proto-languages of eastern Magadhan. The split and descent of proto-Odra(Odra Prakrit), the ancestor of modern Odia language, from the proto-Magadhan(Magadhi Prakrit).[25] Urajam inscription in Old Odia, royal charter of Eastern Ganga dynasty (1051 CE) The history of the Odia language is divided into eras: Proto Odia (12th century and earlier): Inscriptions from 10th century onwards provide evidence for the existence of the Old Odia language, although the earliest known inscription that actually contains Odia lines is dated to 1249 CE.[26] Early Middle Odia (1200–1400): The earliest use of prose can be found in the Madala Panji of the Jagannath Temple at Puri, which dates back to the 12th century. Such works as Shishu Veda, Amara Kosha, Gorakha Samhita, Kalasha Chautisha, and Saptanga are written in this form of Odia.[27][28][29] Middle Odia (1400–1700): Sarala Das writes the Vilanka Ramayana.[30][31] Towards the 16th century, poets emerged around the Vaishnava leader Achyutananda, These five poets are Balaram Das, Jagannatha Das, Achyutananda, Ananta Das and Jasobanta Das. Late Middle Odia (1700–1850): Ushabhilasa of Sisu Sankara Das, the Rahasya Manjari of Deba Durlabha Dasa and the Rukmini Bibha of Kartika Dasa were written. A new form of metrical epic-poems (called Chhanda-Kabya) evolved during the beginning of the 17th century when Ramachandra Pattanayaka wrote Haravali. Upendra Bhanja took a leading role in this period- his creations Baidehisha Bilasa, Koti Brahmanda Sundari, Labanyabati were landmarks in Odia Literature. Dinakrushna Das's Rasokallola and Abhimanyu Samanta Singhara's Bidagdha Chintamani are prominent Kavyas of this time. Four major poets emerged in the end of the era are Baladeba Rath, Bhima Bhoi, Brajanath Badajena and Gopala Krushna Pattanaik. Modern Odia (1850 till present day): The first Odia printing typeset was cast in 1836 by the Christian missionaries which made a great revolution in Odia literature and language. Charyapada of 8th Century and its affinity with Odia[edit] The beginning of Odia poetry coincides with the development of charya sahitya, the literature started by Vajrayana Buddhist poets such as in the Charyapada. This literature was written in a specific metaphor called twilight language and prominent poets included Luipa, Tilopa and Kanha. Quite importantly, the ragas that are mentioned for singing the Charyapadas are found abundantly in later Odia literature. Poet Jayadeva's literary contribution[edit] Jayadeva was a Sanskrit poet. He was born in an Utkala Brahmin family of Puri in circa 1200 CE. He is most known for his composition, the epic poem Gita Govinda, which depicts the divine love of the Hindu deity Krishna and his consort, Radha, and is considered an important text in the Bhakti movement of Hinduism. About the end of the 13th century and the beginning of the 14th, the influence of Jayadeva's literary contribution changed the pattern of versification in Odia.[citation needed] Geographical distribution[edit] India[edit] Odia is mainly spoken in the state of Odisha, but there are significant Odia-speaking populations in the neighbouring states, such as Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Chhattisgarh.[32] Due to the increasing migration of labour, the west Indian state of Gujarat also has a significant population of Odia speakers.[33] Significant numbers of Odia speakers can also be found in the cities of Vishakhapatnam, Hyderabad, Pondicherry, Bangalore, Chennai, Goa, Mumbai, Raipur, Jamshedpur, Baroda, Ahmedabad, New Delhi, Guwahati, Shillong, Pune, Gurgaon, Jammu and Silvassa[34] According to 2011 census, 3.1% of Indians in India are Odia speakers,[35] of which 93% belong to Odisha. Foreign countries[edit] The Odia diaspora constitute a sizeable number in several countries around the world, totalling the number of Odia speakers on a global scale to 50 million.[36][37][page needed][need quotation to verify] It has a significant presence in eastern countries such as Thailand, Indonesia, mainly carried by the sadhaba, ancient traders from Odisha who carried the language along with the culture during the old-day trading,[38] and in western countries such as the United States, Canada, Australia and England. The language has also spread to Burma, Malaysia, Fiji, Mauritius, Sri Lanka and Middle East countries.[37] It is spoken as a native tongue by the Bonaz community in northeastern Bangladesh. Standardization and Dialects[edit] Major forms or dialects[edit] Baleswari (Northern Odia): Spoken in Baleswar, Bhadrak and Mayurbhanj districts of Odisha and southern parts of undivided Midnapore of West Bengal. A variant spoken in Baleswar is also known as Baleswaria. Garhjati (Northwestern Odia): Spoken in Kendujhar, Debagarh, eastern Sundergarh, Rairakhol subdivision of Sambalpur and Athmallik subdivision of Anugul districts of Odisha. Central: Kataki: Spoken in Cuttack, Jajpur, Jagatsinghpur, Kendrapara, Dhenkanal and Anugul districts of Odisha. The Cuttack variant is known as Katakia. Standard Odia (official register dialect): Spoken in Puri, Khordha and Nayagarh districts of Odisha. Ganjami (Southern Odia): Spoken in Ganjam, Gajapati and parts of Kandhamal districts of Odisha, Srikakulam district of Andhra Pradesh. A variant spoken in Berhampur is also known as Berhampuria. Sambalpuri (Western Odia): It is the western dialect/variety of Odia language with the core variant spoken in Sambalpur, Jharsuguda, Bargarh, Balangir and Subarnapur districts, along with parts of Nuapada and western parts of Boudh districts of Odisha. Also spoken in parts of Raigarh, Mahasamund and Raipur districts of Chhattisgarh. A 2006 survey of the varieties spoken in four villages in Western Odisha found out that Sambalpuri share three-quarters of their basic vocabulary with Standard Odia and has 75%–76% lexical similarity with Standard Odia.[39][40][41] Desiya (Southwestern Odia): Spoken in southwestern districts of Nabarangpur, Rayagada, Koraput, Malkangiri and southern parts of Kalahandi districts of Odisha and in the hilly regions of Vishakhapatnam and, Vizianagaram districts of Andhra Pradesh.[42] A variant spoken in Koraput is also known as Koraputia. Minor non-literary dialects Medinipur Odia (Medinipuria): Spoken in parts of undivided Midnapore district of West Bengal.[43] Singhbhumi Odia: Spoken in parts of East Singhbhum, West Singhbhum and Saraikela-Kharsawan district of Jharkhand. Phulbani Odia: spoken in Kandhamal and in parts of Boudh district. Sundargadi Odia: Variant of Odia Spoken in Sundargarh district of Odisha and in adjoining Simdega district of Jharkhand and certain pockets in Chhattisgarh. Kalahandia Odia: Variant of Odia spoken in Kalahandi and Nuapada districts and neighbouring districts of Chhattisgarh. Debagadia Odia: Variant of Odia spoken in Debagarh district and neighbouring Rairakhol subdivision of Sambalpur district & Bonai subdivision of Sundargarh district. It is known as Debagadia, Debgadia or Deogarhia. Major Tribal dialects and Sociolects[edit] Bodo Parja (Jharia): Tribal dialect of Odia spoken mostly in Koraput district of Southern Odisha. Relli: Spoken by Reli people in Southern Odisha and bordering areas of Andhra Pradesh. Kupia: Spoken by Valmiki people in the state of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, mostly in Hyderabad, Mahabubnagar, Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, East Godavari and Visakhapatnam districts. Minor Tribal dialects and Sociolects Odia minor dialects include:[44] Bhuyan: Tribal dialect spoken in Northern Odisha. Kurmi: Northern Odisha and Southwest Bengal. Sounti: Spoken in Northern Odisha and Southwest Bengal. Bathudi: Spoken in Northern Odisha and Southwest Bengal. Kondhan: Tribal dialect spoken in Western Odisha. Agharia: Spoken by Agharia community in districts of Western Odisha and Chhattisgarh. Bhulia: Spoken by Bhulia (Weaver) community in districts of Western Odisha and Chhattisgarh. Matia: Tribal dialect spoken in Southern Odisha. Phonology[edit] Play media Pronunciation of Odia alphabet. Odia has 30 consonant phonemes, 2 semivowel phonemes and 6 vowel phonemes. Odia vowel phonemes[45][46] Front Central Back High i u Mid e o Low a ɔ There are no long vowels. All vowels except /o/ have nasal counterparts, but these are not always contrastive. Final vowels are pronounced in the standard language, e.g. Odia [pʰulɔ] contra Bengali [pʰul] "flower".[47] Odia consonant phonemes[45][48] Labial Alveolar /Dental Retroflex Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ɳ ŋ Stop/ Affricate voiceless p t ʈ tʃ k voiceless aspirated pʰ tʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ voiced b d ɖ dʒ ɡ voiced aspirated bʱ dʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ Fricative s ɦ Trill/Flap ɾ ɽ~ɽʰ Lateral approximant l ɭ Approximant w j Odia retains the voiced retroflex lateral approximant [ɭ],[49] among the Eastern Indo-Aryan languages. The velar nasal [ŋ] is given phonemic status in some analyses, as it occurs also as a Final velar nasal [ŋ]. E.g.- ଏବଂ- ebaṅ (ebɔŋ)[50] Nasals assimilate for place in nasal–stop clusters. /ɖ ɖʱ/ have the flap allophones [ɽ ɽʱ] in intervocalic position and in final position (but not at morpheme boundaries). Stops are sometimes deaspirated between /s/ and a vowel or an open syllable /s/+vowel and a vowel. Some speakers distinguish between single and geminate consonants.[51] Grammar[edit] Main article: Odia grammar Odia retains most of the cases of Sanskrit, though the nominative and vocative have merged (both without a separate marker), as have the accusative and dative. There are three genders (masculine, feminine and neuter) and two grammatical numbers (singular and plural). However there are no grammatical gender. The usage of gender is semantic, i.e. to differentiate male member of a class from female member.[52] There are three true tenses (present, past and future), others being formed with auxiliaries. Writing system[edit] Main articles: Odia alphabet and Odia braille A detailed chart depicting evolution of the Odia script as displayed in a museum at Ratnagiri, Odisha Skanda Purana sample written in Sanskrit in Odia script The Odia language uses Odia script (also known as the Kalinga script). It is a Brahmic script used to write primarily Odia language and others like Sanskrit and several minor regional languages. The script has developed over nearly 1000 years with the earliest trace of the script being dated to 1051 AD. It is a syllabic alphabet or an abugida, wherein all consonants have an inherent vowel embedded within. Odia is a syllabic alphabet or an abugida wherein all consonants have an inherent vowel embedded within. Diacritics (which can appear above, below, before, or after the consonant they belong to) are used to change the form of the inherent vowel. When vowels appear at the beginning of a syllable, they are written as independent letters. Also, when certain consonants occur together, special conjunct symbols are used to combine the essential parts of each consonant symbol. The curved appearance of the Odia script is a result of the practice of writing on palm leaves, which have a tendency to tear if you use too many straight lines.[53] Odia Script[edit] Vowels ସ୍ୱର ବର୍ଣ୍ଣ ଅ ଆ ଇ ଈ ଉ ଊ ଋ ୠ ଌ ୡ ଏ ଐ ଓ ଔ Consonants ବ୍ୟଞ୍ଜନ ବର୍ଣ୍ଣ କ ଖ ଗ ଘ ଙ ଚ ଛ ଜ ଝ ଞ ଟ ଠ ଡ ଢ ଣ ତ ଥ ଦ ଧ ନ ପ ଫ ବ ଭ ମ ଯ ୟ ର ଳ ଲ ୱ ଶ ଷ ସ ହ ଡ଼ ଢ଼ କ୍ଷ Diacritics ା ି ୀ ୁ ୂ ୃ ୄ ୢ ୣ େ ୈ ୋ ୌ Signs, Punctuation ଂ ଃ ଁ ୍ ଼ । ॥ ଽ ଓଁ ୰ Numbers ସଂଖ୍ୟା ୦ ୧ ୨ ୩ ୪ ୫ ୬ ୭ ୮ ୯ Literature[edit] Main article: Odia literature The earliest literature in Odia language can be traced to the Charyapadas composed in the 7th to 9th centuries.[54] Before Sarala Das, the most important works in Odia literature are the Shishu Veda, Saptanga, Amara Kosha, Rudrasudhanidhi, Kesaba Koili, Kalasha Chautisha etc.[27][28][29] In the 14th century, the poet Sarala Das wrote the Sarala Mahabharata, Chandi Purana, and Vilanka Ramayana, in praise of the goddess Durga. Rama-Bibaha, written by Arjuna Dasa, was the first long poem written in the Odia language. The following era is termed the Panchasakha Age and stretches until the year 1700. The period begins with the writings of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu whose Vaishnava influence brought in a new evolution in Odia literature. Notable religious works of the Panchasakha Age include those of Balarama Dasa, Jagannatha Dasa, Yasovanta, Ananta and Acyutananda. The authors of this period mainly translated, adapted, or imitated Sanskrit literature. Other prominent works of the period include the Usabhilasa of Sisu Sankara Dasa, the Rahasya-manjari of Debadurlabha Dasa and the Rukmini-bibha of Kartikka Dasa. A new form of novels in verse evolved during the beginning of the 17th century when Ramachandra Pattanayaka wrote Haravali. Other poets like Madhusudana, Bhima Bhoi, Dhivara, Sadasiva and Sisu Isvara-dasa composed another form called kavyas (long poems) based on themes from Puranas, with an emphasis on plain, simple language. However, during the Bhanja Age (also known as the Age of Riti Yuga) beginning with turn of the 18th century, verbally tricky Odia became the order of the day. Verbal jugglery, eroticism characterise the period between 1700 and 1850, particularly in the works of the era's eponymous poet Upendra Bhanja (1670–1720). Bhanja's work inspired many imitators of which the most notable is Arakshita Das. Family chronicles in prose relating religious festivals and rituals are also characteristic of the period. The first Odia printing typeset was cast in 1836 by Christian missionaries. Although the handwritten Odia script of the time closely resembled the Bengali and Assamese scripts, the one adopted for the printed typesets was significantly different, leaning more towards the Tamil script and Telugu script. Amos Sutton produced an Oriya Bible (1840), Oriya Dictionary (1841–43) and[55] An Introductory Grammar of Oriya (1844).[56] Odia has a rich literary heritage dating back to the thirteenth century. Sarala Dasa who lived in the fourteenth century is known as the Vyasa of Odisha. He translated the Mahabharata into Odia. In fact, the language was initially standardised through a process of translating classical Sanskrit texts such as the Mahabharata, Ramayana and Srimad Bhagabata Gita. The translation of the Srimad Bhagabata Gita by Jagannatha Dasa was particularly influential on the written form of the language. Odia has had a strong tradition of poetry, especially devotional poetry. Other eminent Odia poets include Kabi Samrat Upendra Bhanja and Kabisurya Baladev Ratha. Classical Odia literature is inextricably tied to music, and most of it was written for singing, set to traditional Odissi ragas and talas. These compositions form the core of the system of Odissi music, the classical music of the state. Prose in the language has had a late development. Three great poets and prose writers, Kabibar Radhanath Ray (1849–1908), Fakir Mohan Senapati (1843–1918) and Madhusudan Rao (1853–1912) made Odia their own. They brought in a modern outlook and spirit into Odia literature. Around the same time the modern drama took birth in the works of Rama Sankara Ray beginning with Kanci-Kaveri (1880). Among the contemporaries of Fakir Mohan, four novelists deserve special mention: Aparna Panda, Mrutyunjay Rath, Ram Chandra Acharya and Brajabandhu Mishra. Aparna Panda's Kalavati and Brajabandhu Mishra's Basanta Malati were both published in 1902, the year in which Chha Mana Atha Guntha came out in the book form. Brajabandhu Mishra's Basanta Malati, which came out from Bamanda, depicts the conflict between a poor but highly educated young man and a wealthy and highly egoistic young woman whose conjugal life is seriously affected by ego clashes. Through a story of union, separation and reunion, the novelist delineates the psychological state of a young woman in separation from her husband and examines the significance of marriage as a social institution in traditional Indian society. Ram Chandra Acharya wrote about seven novels during 1924–1936. All his novels are historical romances based on the historical events in Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Odisha. Mrutyunjay Rath's novel, Adbhuta Parinama, published in 1915, centres round a young Hindu who gets converted to Christianity to marry a Christian girl. One of the great writers in the 19th century was Pandit Krushna Chandra Kar (1907–1995) from Cuttack, who wrote many books for children like Pari Raija, Kuhuka Raija, Panchatantra, Adi Jugara Galpa Mala, etc. He was last felicitated by the Sahitya Academy in the year 1971–72 for his contributions to Odia literature, development of children's fiction, and biographies. One of the prominent writers of the 19th and 20th centuries was Muralidhar Mallick (1927–2002). His contribution to Historical novels is beyond words. He was last felicitated by the Sahitya Academy in the year 1998 for his contributions to Odia literature. His son Khagendranath Mallick (born 1951) is also a writer. His contribution towards poetry, criticism, essays, story and novels is commendable. He was the former President of Utkal Kala Parishad and also former President of Odisha Geeti Kabi Samaj. Presently he is a member of the Executive Committee of Utkal Sahitya Samaj. Another illustrious writer of the 20th century was Mr. Chintamani Das. A noted academician, he was written more than 40 books including fiction, short stories, biographies and storybooks for children. Born in 1903 in Sriramachandrapur village under Satyabadi block, Chintamani Das is the only writer who has written biographies on all the five 'Pancha Sakhas' of Satyabadi namely Pandit Gopabandhu Das, Acharya Harihara, Nilakantha Das, Krupasindhu Mishra and Pandit Godabarisha. Having served as the Head of the Odia department of Khallikote College, Berhampur, Chintamani Das was felicitated with the Sahitya Akademi Samman in 1970 for his outstanding contribution to Odia literature in general and Satyabadi Yuga literature in particular. Some of his well-known literary creations are 'Bhala Manisha Hua', 'Manishi Nilakantha', 'Kabi Godabarisha', 'Byasakabi Fakiramohan', 'Usha', 'Barabati'. 20th century writers in Odia include Pallikabi Nanda Kishore Bal, Gangadhar Meher, Chintamani Mahanti and Kuntala Kumari Sabat, besides Niladri Dasa and Gopabandhu Das. The most notable novelists were Umesa Sarakara, Divyasimha Panigrahi, Gopala Chandra Praharaj and Kalindi Charan Panigrahi. Sachi Kanta Rauta Ray is the great introducer of the ultra-modern style in modern Odia poetry. Others who took up this form were Godabarisha Mohapatra, Mayadhar Mansingh, Nityananda Mahapatra and Kunjabihari Dasa. Prabhasa Chandra Satpathi is known for his translations of some western classics apart from Udayanatha Shadangi, Sunanda Kara and Surendranatha Dwivedi. Criticism, essays and history also became major lines of writing in the Odia language. Esteemed writers in this field were Professor Girija Shankar Ray, Pandit Vinayaka Misra, Professor Gauri Kumara Brahma, Jagabandhu Simha and Harekrushna Mahatab. Odia literature mirrors the industrious, peaceful and artistic image of the Odia people who have offered and gifted much to the Indian civilisation in the field of art and literature. Now Writers Manoj Das's creations motivated and inspired people towards a positive lifestyle .Distinguished prose writers of the modern period include Baidyanath Misra, Fakir Mohan Senapati, Madhusudan Das, Godabarisha Mohapatra, Kalindi Charan Panigrahi, Surendra Mohanty, Manoj Das, Kishori Charan Das, Gopinath Mohanty, Rabi Patnaik, Chandrasekhar Rath, Binapani Mohanty, Bhikari Rath, Jagadish Mohanty, Sarojini Sahoo, Yashodhara Mishra, Ramchandra Behera, Padmaja Pal. But it is poetry that makes modern Odia literature a force to reckon with. Poets like Kabibar Radhanath Ray, Sachidananda Routray, Guruprasad Mohanty, Soubhagya Misra, Ramakanta Rath, Sitakanta Mohapatra, Rajendra Kishore Panda, Pratibha Satpathy have made significant contributions towards Indian poetry. Anita Desai's novella, Translator Translated, from her collection The Art of Disappearance, features a translator of a fictive Odia short story writer; the novella contains a discussion of the perils of translating works composed in regional Indian languages into English. Four writers in Odia – Gopinath Mohanty, Sachidananda Routray, Sitakant Mahapatra and Pratibha Ray – have been awarded the Jnanpith, a prestigious Indian literary award. Sample Text[edit] The following is a sample text in Odia of Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (ମାନବିକ ଅଧିକାରର ସାର୍ବଜନୀନ ଘୋଷଣା): Odia in the Odia script ଅନୁଚ୍ଛେଦ ୧: ସମସ୍ତ ମଣିଷ ଜନ୍ମକାଳରୁ ସ୍ୱାଧୀନ ଏବଂ ମର୍ଯ୍ୟାଦା ଓ ଅଧିକାରରେ ସମାନ । ସେମାନଙ୍କଠାରେ ବୁଦ୍ଧି ଓ ବିବେକ ନିହିତ ଅଛି ଏବଂ ସେମାନଙ୍କୁ ପରସ୍ପର ପ୍ରତି ଭ୍ରାତୃତ୍ୱ ମନୋଭାବରେ ବ୍ୟବହାର କରିବା ଉଚିତ୍ । Odia in IAST Anuccheda eka: Samasta maṇiṣa janmakāḷaru swādhīna ebaṅ marẏyādā o adhikārare samāna. Semānaṅkaṭhāre buuddhi o bibeka nihita achi ebaṅ semānaṅku paraspara prati bhrātr̥twa manobhābare byabahāra karibā ucit. Odia in the IPA ɔnut͡ʃt͡ʃʰed̪ɔ ekɔ: sɔmɔst̪ɔ mɔɳisɔ d͡ʒɔnmɔkäɭɔɾu swäd̪ʱinɔ ebɔŋ mɔɾd͡ʒjäːd̪ä o ɔd̪ʱikäɾɔɾe sɔmänɔ. semän̪ɔŋkɔʈʰäɾe bud̪d̪ʱi o bibekɔ niɦit̪ɔ ɔt͡ʃʰi ebɔŋ semänɔŋku pɔɾɔspɔɾɔ pɾɔt̪i bʱɾät̪ɾut̪wɔ mɔnobʱäbɔɾe bjɔbɔɦäɾɔ kɔɾibä ut͡ʃit̪ Gloss Article 1: All human beings from birth are free and dignity and rights are equal. Their reason and intelligence endowed with and they towards one another in a brotherhood spirit behaviour to do should. Translation Article 1: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood. Software[edit] Google introduced the first automated translator for Odia in 2020.[57] Microsoft too incorporated Odia in its automated translator later that year. [58] See also[edit] Brahmic scripts Languages of India Languages with official status in India Laxmi Puran List of languages by number of native speakers in India Madala Panji References[edit] ^ a b API at Ethnologue (22nd ed., 2019) ^ "Scheduled Languages in descending order of speaker's strength – 2011" (PDF). Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. ^ "Jharkhand gives second language status to Magahi, Angika, Bhojpuri and Maithili". The Avenue Mail. 21 March 2018. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019. ^ "West Bengal Official Language Act, 1961". www.bareactslive.com. Retrieved 17 September 2020. ^ Roy, Anirban (28 February 2018). "Kamtapuri, Rajbanshi make it to list of official languages in". India Today. Archived from the original on 30 March 2018. Retrieved 30 March 2018. ^ "Odisha Sahitya Academy". Department of Culture, Government of Odisha. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 9 March 2016. ^ Hammarström (2015) Ethnologue 16/17/18th editions: a comprehensive review: online appendices ^ "Odia", Lexico. ^ "PRS | Bill Track | The Constitution (113th Amendment) Bill, 2010". www.prsindia.org. Retrieved 2018-01-31. ^ "World Languages – Countries A to G – Internet World Stats". www.internetworldstats.com. Retrieved 30 January 2019. ^ "Constitution amended: Orissa is Odisha, Oriya is Odia". hindustantimes.com/. 2011-09-06. Retrieved 2018-01-31. ^ Mahapatra, B.P. (2002). Linguistic Survey of India: Orissa (PDF). Kolkata, India: Language Division, Office of the Registrar General. p. 14. Retrieved 20 February 2014. ^ "Ordeal of Oriya-speaking students in West Bengal to end soon". The Hindu. 21 May 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2019. ^ Pioneer, The. "Govt to provide study facility to Odia-speaking people in State". The Pioneer. Retrieved 30 January 2019. ^ "Oriya gets its due in neighbouring state- Orissa- IBNLive". Ibnlive.in.com. 2011-09-04. Retrieved 2012-11-29. ^ Naresh Chandra Pattanayak (2011-09-01). "Oriya second language in Jharkhand". The Times of India. ^ "Bengali, Oriya among 12 dialects as 2nd language in Jharkhand". daily.bhaskar.com. 2011-08-31. Retrieved 2012-11-29. ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 November 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2018.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Odia gets classical language status". The Hindu. 20 February 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2014. ^ "Odia becomes sixth classical language". The Telegraph. Retrieved 29 March 2015. ^ "Milestone for state as Odia gets classical language status". The Times of India. Retrieved 29 March 2015. ^ Pattanayak, Debi Prasanna; Prusty, Subrat Kumar. Classical Odia (PDF). Bhubaneswar: KIS Foundation. p. 54. Retrieved 26 July 2016. ^ Misra, Bijoy (11 April 2009). Oriya Language and Literature (PDF) (Lecture). Languages and Literature of India. Harvard University. ^ "Odia Language". Odisha Tourism. ^ (Toulmin 2006:306) harvcol error: no target: CITEREFToulmin2006 (help) ^ B. P. Mahapatra (1989). Constitutional languages. Presses Université Laval. p. 389. ISBN 978-2-7637-7186-1. Evidence of Old Oriya is found from early inscriptions dating from the 10th century onwards, while the language in the form of connected lines is found only in the inscription dated 1249 A.D. ^ a b Patnaik, Durga (1989). Palm Leaf Etchings of Orissa. New Delhi: Abhinav Publications. p. 11. ISBN 978-8170172482. ^ a b Panda, Shishir (1991). Medieval Orissa: A Socio-economic Study. New Delhi: Mittal Publications. p. 106. ISBN 978-8170992615. ^ a b Patnaik, Nihar (1997). Economic History of Orissa. New Delhi: Indus Publishing. p. 149. ISBN 978-8173870750. ^ Sukhdeva (2002). Living Thoughts of the Ramayana. Jaico Publishing House. p. 7. ISBN 978-81-7992-002-2. ^ Sujit Mukherjee (1998). A Dictionary of Indian Literature: Beginnings-1850. Orient Blackswan. p. 420. ISBN 978-81-250-1453-9. ^ James Minahan (2012). Ethnic Groups of South Asia and the Pacific: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 233. ISBN 978-1-59884-659-1. ^ "A Little Orissa in the heart of Surat – Ahmedabad News". The Times of India. 2003-05-18. Retrieved 2019-07-12. ^ Danesh Jain; George Cardona (2007). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Routledge. p. 445. ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9. ^ "Number of Odia speaking people declines: Census report". sambad. sambad. Retrieved 24 March 2020. ^ "Oriya language". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2020-07-02. Oriya language, also spelled Odia, Indo-Aryan language with some 50 million speakers. ^ a b Institute of Social Research and Applied Anthropology (2003). Man and Life. 29. Institute of Social Research and Applied Anthropology. Retrieved 31 July 2012. ^ Subhakanta Behera (2002). Construction of an identity discourse: Oriya literature and the Jagannath cult (1866–1936). Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers. Retrieved 31 July 2012. ^ Mathai & Kelsall 2013, pp. 4–6. The precise figures are 75–76%. This was based on comparisons of 210-item wordlists. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMathaiKelsall2013 (help) ^ "Sambalpuri". Ethnologue. ^ CENSUS OF INDIA 2011. "LANGUAGE" (PDF). Government of India. p. 7. ^ CENSUS OF INDIA 2011. "LANGUAGE" (PDF). Government of India. p. 7. ^ "Midnapore Oriya". Glottolog. ^ Rabindra Nath Pati, Jagannatha Dash (2002). Tribal and Indigenous People of India: Problems and Prospects. New Delhi: APH PUBLISHING CORPORATION. pp. 51–59. ISBN 81-7648-322-2.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b Ray (2003:526) harvcoltxt error: no target: CITEREFRay2003 (help) ^ Cardona, George; Jain, Danesh (2003). The Indo-Aryan Languages. p. 488. ISBN 9781135797119. ^ Ray (2003:488–489) harvcoltxt error: no target: CITEREFRay2003 (help) ^ Neukom, Lukas; Patnaik, Manideepa (2003) ^ Masica (1991:97) ^ Danesh Jain; George Cardona (2007). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Routledge. p. 490. ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9. ^ Ray (2003:490–491) harvcoltxt error: no target: CITEREFRay2003 (help) ^ Jain, D.; Cardona, G. (2007). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Routledge language family series. Taylor & Francis. p. 450. ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9. Retrieved 2020-08-01. ^ Caldwell, R. (1998). A Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian Or South-Indian Family of Languages. Asian Educational Services. p. 125. ISBN 978-81-206-0117-8. Retrieved 2020-05-26. ^ Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections. Sahitya Akademi. 1997-01-01. ISBN 9788126003655. ^ Biswamoy Pati Situating social history: Orissa, 1800–1997 p30 ^ The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature (Volume Two) (Devraj To Jyoti): 2 p1030 ed. Amaresh Datta – 2006 "Amos Sutton also prepared a dictionary named Sadhu bhasharthabhidhan, a vocabulary of current Sanskrit terms with Odia definitions which was also printed in Odisha Mission Press in 1844." ^ Statt, Nick (26 February 2020). "Google Translate supports new languages for the first time in four years, including Uyghur". The Verge. Retrieved 27 February 2020. ^ https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/translator/blog/2020/08/13/odia-language-text-translation-is-now-available-in-microsoft-translator/ Further reading[edit] Tripathi, Kunjabihari (1962). The Evolution of Oriya Language and Script (PDF). Cuttack: Utkal University. Archived from the original on 2013-05-10.CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Masica, Colin (1991). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Cambridge Language Surveys. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29944-2. Neukom, Lukas; Patnaik, Manideepa (2003). A Grammar of Oriya. Arbeiten des Seminars für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Zürich. Zurich: University of Zurich. ISBN 9783952101094. Ray, Tapas S. (2003). "Oriya". In Cardona, George; Jain, Dhanesh (eds.). The Indo-Aryan Languages. Routledge. pp. 485–522. ISBN 978-0-7007-1130-7. Rabindra Nath Pati, Jagannatha Dash (2002). Tribal and Indigenous People of India: Problems and Prospects. India: APH PUBLISHING CORPORATION. pp. 51–59. ISBN 81-7648-322-2.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link) Ghosh, A. (2003). An ethnolinguistic profile of Eastern India: a case of South Orissa. Burdwan: Dept. of Bengali (D.S.A.), University of Burdwan. Mohanty, Prasanna Kumar (2007). The History of: History of Oriya Literature (Oriya Sahityara Adya Aitihasika Gana). "Oriya Language and Literature" (PDF). Odia.org. Retrieved 2012-11-29. Toulmin, Mathew W S (2006). Reconstructing linguistic history in a dialect continuum: The Kamta, Rajbanshi, and Northern Deshi Bangla subgroup of Indo-Aryan (Ph.D.). The Australian National University. Mathai, Eldose K.; Kelsall, Juliana (2013). Sambalpuri of Orissa, India: A Brief Sociolinguistic Survey (Report). SIL Electronic Survey Reports. External links[edit] Odia edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Odia. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. API at Curlie Odia Wikipedia Praharaj, G.C. Purnnachandra Ordia Bhashakosha (Odia-English dictionary). Cuttack: Utkal Sahitya Press, 1931–1940. A Comprehensive English-Oriya Dictionary (1916–1922) v t e Odia language Language Grammar Dialects Baleswari Northwestern Central Ganjami Sambalpuri Desiya Minor Kalahandia Phulbani Singhbhumi Tribal Bodo Parja Reli Kupia Scripts Odia Karani Kalinga Numerals Odia Braille Literature Literature Chautisa Writers Arts Odisha Sahitya Akademi Odisha Sahitya Academy Award Atibadi Jagannath Das award Sahitya Akademi Award Culture Odissi music Odia calendar v t e Languages of India Official languages Union-level Hindi English 8th schedule to the Constitution of India Assamese Bengali Bodo Dogri Gujarati Hindi Kannada Kashmiri Konkani Maithili Malayalam Meitei (Manipuri) Marathi Nepali Odia Punjabi Sanskrit Sindhi Santali Tamil Telugu Urdu State-level only Angika Bhojpuri Chhattisgarhi Garo Gurung Ho Kamatapuri Kharia Khasi Khortha Kokborok Kurmali Kurukh Lepcha Limbu Magahi Magar Mizo Mundari Newari Rai Rajbangshi Sadri Sherpa Sikkimese Sunwar Tamang Major unofficial languages Over 1 million speakers Awadhi Bagheli Bagri Bajjika Bhili Bundeli Dhundhari Garhwali Gondi Harauti Haryanvi Kangri Khandeshi Kumaoni Lambadi Malvi Marwari Mewari Nimadi Rajasthani Surjapuri Tulu Wagdi Varhadi 100,000 – 1 million speakers Adi Angami Ao Badaga Dimasa Halbi Karbi Kodava Kolami Konyak Korku Koya Kui Kuvi Ladakhi Lotha Malto Mising Nishi Phom Rabha Sema Sora Tangkhul Thadou v t e Modern Indo-Aryan languages Dardic Kashmiri Kashmiri Kishtwari Shina Shina Brokskat Kundal Shahi Kalkoti Ushoji Palula Sawi Pashayi Pashayi Kunar Dameli Gawar-Bati Nangalami Shumashti Chitral Kalasha Khowar Kohistani Indus Kohistani Bateri Chilisso Gowro Kalami Tirahi Torwali Wotapuri-Katarqalai Northern Eastern Doteli Jumli Nepali Central Garhwali Kumaoni Western Dogri Kangri Bhadarwahi Churahi Bhateali Bilaspuri Chambeali Gaddi Pangwali Mandeali Mahasu Pahari Jaunsari Kullui Pahari Kinnauri Hinduri Sirmauri Sarazi Northwestern Punjabi Eastern Punjabi dialects Sansi Lahnda Hindko Inku Khetrani Pahari-Pothwari Saraiki Sindhi Jadgali Kholosi Kutchi Luwati Memoni Sindhi Western Gujarati Aer Gujarati Jandavra Koli Kachi Parkari Wadiyara Lisan ud-Dawat Parkari Koli Saurashtra Vaghri Rajasthani Bagri Goaria Loarki Gujari Dhundari Harauti Malvi Marwari Mewati Mewari Shekhawati Dhatki Nimadi Bhil Bhili Bhilali Chodri Dhodia-Kukna Dhanki Dubli Bauria Bhilori Magari Palya Bareli Pauri Bareli Rathwi Bareli Pardhi Gamit Kalto Vasavi Wagdi Vaagri Booli Others Khandeshi Lambadi Domaaki Domari Romani list of languages Central Western Braj Bhasha Bundeli Haryanvi Hindustani Kauravi Hindi (Manak Hindi) Urdu Deccani Hyderabadi Urdu Rekhta Kannauji Sansi Sadhukkadi Eastern Awadhi Bagheli Chhattisgarhi Fiji Hindi Others Parya Eastern Bihari Bhojpuri Caribbean Hindustani Kurmali Magahi Khortha Maithili Angika Bajjika Majhi Musasa Sadri Tharu Kochila Kuswaric Bote-Darai Danwar Bengali– Assamese Bengali Bengali dialects Sylheti Bishnupriya Manipuri Hajong Chittagonian Chakma Tanchangya Rohingya Kharia Thar Kurmukar Mal Paharia Kamarupic Assamese Kamrupi Goalpariya Rajbanshi (Nepal) Rangpuri Surjapuri Odia Odia Sambalpuri Desiya Bodo Parja Reli Kupia Halbic Halbi Bhatri Kamar Mirgan Nahari Southern Marathi– Konkani Marathic Marathi Varhadi Andh Berar Deccan Varli Phudagi Katkari Kadodi Konkanic Konkani Maharashtrian Konkani Canarese Konkani Insular Maldivian Sinhala Unclassified Bazigar Chinali–Lahul Chinali Lahul Lohar Sheikhgal Pidgins and creoles Andaman Creole Hindi Bombay Hindi Haflong Hindi Nagamese Nefamese Vedda See also: Old and Middle Indo-Aryan; Indo-Iranian languages; Nuristani languages; Iranian languages v t e State of Odisha Capital: Bhubaneswar State symbols Emblem: Emblem of Odisha Song: Bande Utkala Janani Animal: Sambar Bird: Indian roller (Neelakantha) Flower: Ashoka Tree: Sacred fig (Ashwattha) Fish: Mahanadi mahseer Governance Governors Chief ministers Legislative Assembly Constituencies High Court Police Elections Politics Human Rights Commission History Rulers Mahameghavahana dynasty Nala dynasty Mathara dynasty Pitrbhakta dynasty Shailodbhava dynasty Bhauma-Kara dynasty Bhanj dynasty Somavamshi dynasty Eastern Ganga dynasty Gajapati Empire Bhoi dynasty Orissa Tributary States Utkal Sammilani Historic sites Maritime history of Odisha Geography Flora and Fauna Forests Utkal Plains Garhjat Hills Chilika Lake Deomali (Highest point) Districts by division Northern Angul Balangir Bargarh Debagarh Dhenkanal Jharsuguda Kendujhar Sambalpur Subarnapur Sundergarh Central Balasore Bhadrak Cuttack Jagatsinghpur Jajpur Kendrapara Khordha Mayurbhanj Nayagarh Puri Southern Boudh Gajapati Ganjam Kalahandi Kandhamal Koraput Malkangiri Nabrangpur Nuapada Rayagada Cities Angul Balangir Balasore Barbil Bargarh Baripada Bhadrak Bhawanipatna Bhubaneswar Berhampur Cuttack Dhenkanal Jajpur Jharsuguda Jeypore Joda Kendrapara Kendujhar Khordha Paradeep Puri Rourkela Sambalpur Talcher GI products Berhampur Patta Bomkai sari Dhalapathar Parda & Fabrics Ganjam Kewda Flower Ganjam Kewda Rooh Gopalpur Tussar Fabrics Habaspuri sari Khandua Konark stone carving Kotpad Handloom fabrics Odisha Ikat Pattachitra Pipili appliqué work Odisha Rasagola Sambalpuri sari Topics Arts Cinema Cuisine Culture Day Economy Education Festivals Language Act Script Literature Grammar People Tribes Sports Tourism  India portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125