One of Our Dinosaurs is Missing Theatrical release poster Directed by Robert Stevenson Produced by Bill Walsh Written by Bill Walsh Based on The Great Dinosaur Robbery by David Forrest Starring Peter Ustinov Helen Hayes Clive Revill Derek Nimmo Music by Ron Goodwin Cinematography Paul Beeson Edited by Peter Boita Production company Walt Disney Productions Distributed by Buena Vista Distribution Release date July 9, 1975 (1975-07-09) Running time 100 minutes Countries United Kingdom United States Language English Box office $5.5 million (North American rentals)[1] One of Our Dinosaurs is Missing is a 1975 British-American comedy film which is set in the early 1920s, about the theft of a dinosaur skeleton from the Natural History Museum. The film was produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by Buena Vista Distribution Company. The title is a parody of the film title One of Our Aircraft Is Missing, in which both Peter Ustinov and Hugh Burden also appeared. The film was based on the 1970 novel The Great Dinosaur Robbery by David Forrest (pseudonym of David Eliades and Robert Forrest Webb). Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 About the book 4 Production 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] Escaping from China with a microfilm of the formula for the mysterious "Lotus X", Lord Edward Southmere, a Kings Messenger, is chased by a group of Chinese spies. Back in London, Lord Southmere manages to escape from a chauffeur who is trying to kidnap him and then runs into the Natural History Museum. Chinese spies, led by Hnup Wan, follow him, so he hides the microfilm in the bones of one of the large dinosaur skeletons. He is relieved to meet his former nanny, Hettie, in the museum, and asks her to retrieve the microfilm. Southmere then faints and is captured by the Chinese, who tell Hettie and Emily (another nanny) that they are taking him to a doctor. Hettie and Emily enlist other nannies to help them search. They hide in the mouth of the blue whale display until after closing time and then begin looking over the skeleton of a Brontosaurus. They are unsuccessful and most of them have to return home to care for their children, but Hettie, Emily and their friend Susan remain to continue with the search. They are captured and taken to the spies' London headquarters, underneath a Chinese restaurant in Soho. The nannies are locked up in the 'dungeon', with Lord Southmere, but are able to outwit their captors and escape. Meanwhile, the spies have decided to steal the dinosaur, so that they can search it properly. That night, they trick their way into the museum. The three nannies follow on a motorbike and sidecar and watch from the shadows. After the Chinese load the Brontosaurus skeleton on the back of their steam lorry, the nannies steal the vehicle. The spies give chase through the foggy streets of London in their charabanc and a Daimler limousine, but the nannies drive into a railway goods yard, onto a flat wagon at the back of a train, and are carried off to safety. The nannies fail to find the microfilm on the skeleton. Meanwhile, back in London, Hettie's two young charges, Lord Castlebury and his younger brother, Truscott, have been captured by the spies. They are taken to the museum and the chief spy retrieves the microfilm from the other large dinosaur, a Diplodocus skeleton. The two boys are allowed home and tell Hettie the news. Realising that Lord Southmere is now in danger, Hettie organises a rescue. Hettie and her team of nannies invade the Chinese restaurant base and battle with the spies over Lord Southmere. Meanwhile, Emily and Susan return with the Brontosaurus skeleton and the lorry and bring the fight sequence to a shattering conclusion. Everything ends well and the secret of the mysterious "Lotus X" is finally revealed. It turns out that Lotus X is actually a recipe for Wonton soup, to which Southmere says that he tried to tell Hnup Wan that he was a businessman. Wan then advertises the recipe and makes peace with the nannies. Cast[edit] Derek Nimmo as Lord Southmere Hugh Burden as Haines Bernard Bresslaw as Fan Choy Helen Hayes as Hettie Joan Sims as Emily Deryck Guyler as Harris Peter Ustinov as Hnup Wan Clive Revill as Quon Molly Weir as Scots nanny Andrew Dove as Lord Castleberry Max Harris as Truscott Max Wall as Juggler Natasha Pyne as Susan Joss Ackland as B.J. Spence Arthur Howard as Thumley Roy Kinnear as Superintendent Grubbs Leonard Trolley as Inspector Eppers Joe Ritchie as Cabbie Percy Herbert as Mr. Gibbons Joan Hickson as Mrs. Gibbons John Laurie as Jock Angus Lennie as Hamish Jon Pertwee as Colonel Kathleen Byron as Colonel's wife Lucy Griffiths as Amelia Aimée Delamain as Millicent John Bardon as Bookmaker Jane Lapotaire as Miss Prescott Richard Pearson as Sir Geoffrey Michael Elwyn as Haycock Anthony Sharp as Home Secretary Wensley Pithey as Bromley Frank Williams as Dr. Freemo Peter Madden as Sanders Erik Chitty as Museum guard Amanda Barrie as Mrs. B.J. Spence About the book[edit] The book on which the film was based, The Great Dinosaur Robbery, was aimed at an adult audience by its authors, Robert Forrest Webb and David Eliades, and was set in New York. The authors, both very experienced U.K. national journalists and best-selling authors, extensively researched material in New York and were greatly assisted by the American Museum of Natural History, which is situated alongside Central Park, and by the New York Police Department responsible for that area. The authors were disappointed that the humour of the film was aimed at a very much younger audience than that in the book, which had been published, in several languages, extremely successfully throughout Europe and also in Australia, New Zealand and the U.S.. Production[edit] This film was made on location in England at Elstree Studios and Pinewood Studios, along with location shoots at London Zoo, the Natural History Museum and around Windsor, Berkshire and Holyport Green, Maidenhead.[2] The Diplodocus skeleton model was later used in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, in the opening scenes in the Tunisian desert.[3] Whilst this film was in production, Bernard Bresslaw and Joan Sims also appeared in Carry On Behind, another film being made at Pinewood Studios alongside it. References[edit] ^ "All-time Film Rental Champs", Variety, 7 January 1976 p 46 ^ One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing - Filming Locations www.imdb.com ^ 'Unions, eccentrics and alcohol: the Brits who built Star Wars'. Chris Bell, 7 December 2015. www.telegraph.co.uk External links[edit] Official website API at IMDb One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing at the TCM Movie Database API at AllMovie One of Our Dinosaurs is Missing - Time Out Film v t e Films directed by Robert Stevenson Happy Ever After (1932) Falling for You (1933) Tudor Rose (1936) The Man Who Changed His Mind (1936) Jack of All Trades (1936) King Solomon's Mines (1937) Non-Stop New York (1937) Owd Bob (1938) The Ware Case (1938) Young Man's Fancy (1939) Return to Yesterday (1940) Tom Brown's School Days (1940) Back Street (1941) Joan of Paris (1942) Forever and a Day (1943) Jane Eyre (1943) Dishonored Lady (1947) To the Ends of the Earth (1948) The Woman on Pier 13 (1949) Walk Softly, Stranger (1950) My Forbidden Past (1951) The Las Vegas Story (1952) Johnny Tremain (1957) Old Yeller (1957) Darby O'Gill and the Little People (1959) Kidnapped (1960) The Absent-Minded Professor (1961) In Search of the Castaways (1962) Son of Flubber (1963) The Misadventures of Merlin Jones (1964) Mary Poppins (1964) The Monkey's Uncle (1965) That Darn Cat! (1965) The Gnome-Mobile (1967) Blackbeard's Ghost (1968) The Love Bug (1968) Bedknobs and Broomsticks (1971) Herbie Rides Again (1974) The Island at the Top of the World (1974) One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing (1975) The Shaggy D.A. (1976)