Heraldic tincture In heraldry, orange is a rarely used tincture except in Catalan, South African, French municipal and American Military heraldries. As a color, Orange should be used against metals in order not to contradict the rule of tincture. Orange is obviously different from Gules (red), but also (and especially) not to be confused with tenné (or tanné), which depicts the light-brownish color of tanned leather before slowly becoming a tincture of its own, along with carnation used for the depiction of white human skin. Orange didn't receive a hatching pattern during medieval and renaissance times, and first was granted its pattern in Arthur Charles Fox Davies' Complete guide to heraldry, where it was given the "semy of exclamation points" consisting of a semé of vertical dashes (used on their own to indicate red) and dots (used on their own to indicate yellow). A color used for orange in armorials should be, at first, rich and deep enough to clearly distinguish itself from both metals, Argent (white) and Or (yellow), but also from Gules (red), Tenné (light brown) and carnation (flesh-colour). Gallery[edit] Arms of commune Lamorlaye, France. Coat of arms of the Lagouanelle-Dély family. Arms of the commune Tavel, Gard, France. Arms of the commune Monchy-sur-Eu, France. Arms of the commune Margny-les-Compiègne, France Arms of Bellefontaine, France. Arms of Le Sap, France Arms of Brullioles, Rhône, France. Coat of arms of Armenia, bearing an escutcheon orange overall. Arms of Saint-Honoré, Québec. Arms of Anthy-sur-Léman, French Savoy. Arms of Hugleville-en-Caux, Normandy, featuring a leaf orange. Arms of Saint-Martin-du-Manoir, Normandy. Arms of Sorquainville, Normandy, featuring a cow argent with spots orange. Faultive arms of Andelu, Yvelines, France, featuring a roundel orange. Arms of Camps-la-Source, Provence, featuring the Cross orange on the lilies of France. Arms of Coutarnoux, Burgundy, featuring a castle orange. Arms of Lichères-près-Aigremont, in Burgundy External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Orange (heraldry). Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Heraldic tinctures Armoria - Tinctures v t e Tinctures in heraldry Rule of tincture Tricking system Hatching system "Proper" Fimbriation Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermine Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné (tawny) Non-traditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste (sky blue)   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation (flesh-coloured)   Cendrée (ash grey)   Ochre   Orange   Rose (pink) 1 Rarely used – mostly only in some regional traditions or as relatively modern innovations – and considered unheraldic by some. This heraldry-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e