Humanoid monster in Tolkien's fiction This article is about the fictional humanoid monster. For specific characters and other uses, see Orc (disambiguation) and Ork (disambiguation). An Orc mask based on the Warhammer concept An orc (or ork) /ɔːrk/[1] is a fictional humanoid monster akin to a goblin. Orcs were brought into modern usage by the fantasy writings of J. R. R. Tolkien, especially The Lord of the Rings. In Tolkien's works, orcs are a brutish, aggressive, ugly and malevolent race of monsters, contrasting with the benevolent Elves and serving an evil power, though they share a human sense of morality; there is a suggestion, among several somewhat contradictory origin stories, that they are a corrupted race of elves.[2] Mythological monsters with names similar to "orc" can be found in the Old English poem Beowulf, in Early Modern poetry, and in Northern European folk tales and fairy tales. Tolkien stated that he took the name from Beowulf.[T 1] Tolkien's concept of orcs has been adapted and imported into the fantasy fiction of other authors, and into role-playing and strategy games such as Dungeons & Dragons, Warhammer, and Warcraft. Contents 1 Etymology 1.1 Old English 1.2 Early Modern 2 Tolkien 2.1 Stated etymology 2.2 Description 2.3 In-fiction origins 2.4 Alleged racism 2.5 A shared morality 3 Other authors 4 In games 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 7.1 Primary 7.2 Secondary 8 Sources 9 External links Etymology[edit] Old English[edit] Latin Orcus is glossed as Old English "Orc, þyrs ꝉ hel-deofol" ("Goblin, spectre or hell-devil") in the 10th century Cleopatra Glossaries. The Latin word Orcus is glossed as "Orc, þyrs, oððe hel-deofol"[a] ("Goblin, spectre, or hell-devil") in the 10th century Old English Cleopatra Glossaries, about which Thomas Wright wrote, "Orcus was the name for Pluto, the god of the infernal regions, hence we can easily understand the explanation of hel-deofol. Orc, in Anglo-Saxon, like thyrs, means a spectre, or goblin."[3][4][b] The Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal defines ork in the closely related Old Dutch language as a verslindend monster ("devouring monster"),[5] and points at a possible origin in the Old Dutch nork "petulant, crabbed, evil person".[6] The term is used just once in Beowulf as the plural compound orcneas, one of the tribes alongside the elves and ettins (giants) condemned by God: þanon untydras ealle onwocon eotenas ond ylfe ond orcneas swylce gigantas þa wið gode wunnon lange þrage he him ðæs lean forgeald —Beowulf, Fitt I, vv. 111–14[7] Thence all evil broods were born, ogres and elves and evil spirits —the giants also, who long time fought with God, for which he gave them their reward —John R. Clark Hall, tr. (1901)[8] Beowulf's eotenas ond ylfe ond orcneas, "ogres and elves and devil-corpses", inspiring Tolkien to create orcs and other races Orcneas is translated "evil spirits" above, but its meaning is uncertain. Klaeber suggested it consisted of orc < L. orcus "the underworld" + neas "corpses", to which the translation "evil spirits" failed to do justice.[9][c] It is generally supposed to contain an element -né, cognate to Gothic naus and Old Norse nár, both meaning 'corpse'.[10] The usual Old English word for corpse is líc, but -né appears in nebbed 'corpse bed',[11] and in dryhtné 'dead body of a warrior', where dryht is a military unit. If *orcné is to be glossed as orcus 'corpse', the meaning may be "corpse from Orcus (i.e. the underworld)", or "devil-corpse", understood as some sort of walking dead monster.[9] Early Modern[edit] A monster called Orcus is mentioned in Edmund Spenser's 1590 Faerie Queene.[12] The Oxford English Dictionary records an Early Modern period orke, meaning "ogre", in Samuel Holland's 1656 fairy tale Don Zara, a pastiche of Spanish romances such as Don Quixote.[d][13] It is presumed that 'orke'/'ogre' came into English via continental fairy-tales, especially from the 17th-century French writer Charles Perrault, who borrowed most of his stories and developed his "ogre" from the 16th-century Italian writers Giovanni Francesco Straparola (credited with introducing the literary form of the fairy tale) and Giambattista Basile, who wrote in the Naples dialect, stating that he was passing on oral folktales from his region. In the tales, Basile used huorco, huerco or uerco, the Neapolitan form of Italian orco, lit. "Ogre", to describe a large, hairy, tusked, mannish beast who could speak, lived in a dark forest or garden and might capture and eat humans.[e] Tolkien[edit] Tolkien wrote that his orcs were influenced by the goblins in George MacDonald's 1872 The Princess and the Goblin.[T 1] Illustration "The goblins fell back a little when he began, and made horrible grimaces" by Jessie Willcox Smith, 1920 Stated etymology[edit] Tolkien began the modern use of the English term "orc" to denote a race of evil, humanoid creatures. His earliest Elvish dictionaries include the entry Ork (orq-) "monster", "ogre", "demon", together with orqindi and "ogresse". He sometimes used the plural form orqui in his early texts.[f] He stated that the Elvish words for orc were derived from a root ruku, "fear, horror"; in Quenya, orco, plural orkor; in Sindarin orch, plurals yrch and Orchoth (as a class).[T 2][T 1] They had similar names in other Middle-earth languages: uruk in Black Speech (restricted to the larger soldier-orcs);[T 1] in the language of the Drúedain gorgûn, "ork-folk"; in Khuzdul rukhs, plural rakhâs; and in the language of Rohan and in the Common Speech, orka.[T 2] Tolkien stated in a letter to the novelist Naomi Mitchison that his Orcs had been influenced by George MacDonald's The Princess and the Goblin.[T 1] He explained that his "orc" was "derived from Old English orc 'demon', but only because of its phonetic suitability",[T 1] and I originally took the word from Old English orc (Beowulf 112 orc-neas and the gloss orc: þyrs ('ogre'), heldeofol ('hell-devil')).[g] This is supposed not to be connected with modern English orc, ork, a name applied to various sea-beasts of the dolphin order".[T 3] Tolkien also observed a connection with the Latin word orcus, noting that "the word used in translation of Q[uenya] urko, S[indarin] orch is Orc. But that is because of the similarity of the ancient English word orc, 'evil spirit or bogey', to the Elvish words. There is possibly no connection between them."[T 2] Description[edit] Orcs are of human shape, and of varying size;[T 4] in The Hobbit they are called "goblins", though Thorin's Elvish sword from Gondolin is named as "Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter".[T 5] They are depicted as ugly and filthy, with a taste for human flesh. They are fanged, bow-legged and long-armed; some have dark skin as if burned.[T 6] Most are small and avoid daylight.[T 7] In Isengard, the Wizard Saruman has bred a large and powerful kind of orc, the Uruk-Hai, who are not afraid of daylight.[T 6] Orcs eat meat, including the flesh of Men, and may indulge in cannibalism: in The Two Towers, Grishnákh, an Orc from Mordor, claims that the Isengard Orcs eat orc-flesh. Whether that is true or spoken in malice is uncertain: an Orc flings Pippin stale bread and a "strip of raw dried flesh... the flesh of he dared not guess what creature".[T 6] The orcs from Mordor speak the Black Speech, a language invented for them by Sauron, while those from Isengard speak other tongues; to understand each other, they use the Common Speech (Westron), such as Pippin overheard and understood.[T 6][14] In-fiction origins[edit] Further information: Tolkien's monsters Tolkien proposed several semi-contradictory theories for the origins of orcs. In The Tale of Tinúviel, Orcs originate as "foul broodlings of Melkor who fared abroad doing his evil work".[T 8] In The Fall of Gondolin Tolkien wrote that "all that race were bred by Melkor of the subterranean heats and slime."[T 9] In The Silmarillion, Orcs are East Elves (Avari) enslaved, tortured, and bred by Morgoth (as Melkor became known);[T 10] they "multiplied" like Elves and Men. Tolkien stated in a 1962 letter to a Mrs. Munsby that Orc-females must have existed.[15] In The Fall of Gondolin Morgoth made them of slime by sorcery, "bred from the heats and slimes of the earth".[T 11] Or, they were "beasts of humanized shape", possibly, Tolkien wrote, Elves mated with beasts, and later Men.[T 12] Or again, Tolkien noted, they could have been fallen Maiar, perhaps a kind called Boldog, like lesser Balrogs; or corrupted Men.[T 13] Half-orcs appear in The Lord of the Rings, created by interbreeding of Orcs and Men;[T 13] they were able to go in sunlight.[T 7] The "sly Southerner" in The Fellowship of the Ring looks "more than half like a goblin";[T 14] similar but more orc-like hybrids appear in The Two Towers "man-high, but with goblin-faces, sallow, leering, squint-eyed."[T 15] Alleged racism[edit] Tolkien's moral geography of Middle-earth in the Third Age, according to John Magoun[16] Main article: Tolkien and race The scholars of English literature William N. Rogers II and Michael R. Underwood note that a widespread element of late 19th century Western culture was fear of moral decline and degeneration; this led to eugenics.[17] In The Two Towers, the Ent Treebeard says:[T 16] It is a mark of evil things that came in the Great Darkness that they cannot abide the Sun; but Saruman's Orcs can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil![T 16] The film-maker Andrew Stewart, writing in CounterPunch, cites this speech as an instance of "mid-twentieth century scientific racism .. which alarmingly spells out the notion of 'race mixing' as a great sin".[18] Stewart notes, too, that the geography of Middle-earth deliberately pits the good West against the evil East;[18] John Magoun, writing in the J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia, concurs, stating that Middle-earth has a "fully expressed moral geography".[16] Any moral bias towards a north-western geography, however, was directly addressed by Tolkien himself in a letter to Charlotte and Denis Plimmer, who had recently interviewed him in 1967: Auden has asserted that for me 'the North is a sacred direction'. That is not true. The North-west of Europe, where I (and most of my ancestors) have lived, has my affection, as a man's home should. I love its atmosphere, and know more of its histories and languages than I do of other parts; but it is not 'sacred', nor does it exhaust my affections. I do have, for instance, a particular fondness for the Latin language, and among its descendants for Spanish. That is untrue for my story, a mere reading of the synopses should show. The North was the seat of the fortresses of the Devil [ie. Morgoth].[T 17] In a private letter, Tolkien describes orcs as:[T 18] squat, broad, flat-nosed, sallow-skinned, with wide mouths and slant eyes: in fact degraded and repulsive versions of the (to Europeans) least lovely Mongol-types."[T 18] Peter Jackson's film versions of Tolkien's Orcs have been compared to wartime caricatures of the Japanese (here, an American propaganda poster).[19] A variety of critics and commentators have noted that orcs are somewhat like caricatures of non-Europeans. The journalist David Ibata writes that the orcs in Peter Jackson's Tolkien films look much like "the worst depictions of the Japanese drawn by American and British illustrators during World War II."[19] The literary critic Jenny Turner, writing in the London Review of Books, endorses Andrew O'Hehir's comment on Salon.com that orcs are "by design and intention a northern European's paranoid caricature of the races he has dimly heard about".[20][21] O'Hehir describes orcs as "a subhuman race bred by Morgoth and/or Sauron (although not created by them) that is morally irredeemable and deserves only death. They are dark-skinned and slant-eyed, and although they possess reason, speech, social organization and, as the Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey mentions, a sort of moral sensibility, they are inherently evil."[21] He notes Tolkien's own description of them (quoted above), saying it could scarcely be more revealing as a representation of the "Other", says "it is also the product of his background and era, like most of our inescapable prejudices. At the level of conscious intention, he was not a racist or an anti-Semite" and mentions his letters to this effect.[21] In a letter to his son, Christopher who was serving in the RAF in the Second World War, Tolkien wrote of orcs as appearing on both sides of the conflict: Yes, I think the orcs as real a creation as anything in 'realistic' fiction ... only in real life they are on both sides, of course. For 'romance' has grown out of 'allegory', and its wars are still derived from the 'inner war' of allegory in which good is on one side and various modes of badness on the other. In real (exterior) life men are on both sides: which means a motley alliance of orcs, beasts, demons, plain naturally honest men, and angels.[T 19] The scholar of English literature Robert Tally describes the orcs as a demonized enemy, despite (he writes) Tolkien's own objections to demonization of the enemy in the two World Wars.[22] The Germanic studies scholar Sandra Ballif Straubhaar however argues against the "recurring accusations" of racism, stating that "a polycultured, polylingual world is absolutely central" to Middle-earth, and that readers and filmgoers will easily see that.[23] The historian and Tolkien scholar Jared Lobdell likewise disagreed with any notions of racism inherent or latent in Tolkien's works, and wondered "if there were a way of writing epic fantasy about a battle against an evil spirit and his monstrous servants without its being subject to speculation of racist intent".[24] A shared morality[edit] Shippey writes that the orcs in The Lord of the Rings were almost certainly created just to equip Middle-earth with "a continual supply of enemies over whom one need feel no compunction",[25] or in Tolkien's words from The Monsters and the Critics "the infantry of the old war" ready to be slaughtered.[25] Shippey states that all the same, orcs share the human concept of good and evil, with a familiar sense of morality, though he notes that, like many people, orcs are quite unable to apply their morals to themselves. In his view, Tolkien, as a Catholic, took it as a given that "evil cannot make, only mock", so orcs could not have an equal and opposite morality to that of men or elves.[2] Shippey notes that in The Two Towers, the orc Gorbag disapproves of the "regular elvish trick" of seeming to abandon a comrade, as he wrongly supposes Sam has done with Frodo. Shippey describes the implied view of evil as Boethian, that evil is the absence of good; he notes however that Tolkien did not agree with that point of view, believing that evil had to be actively combatted, with war if necessary, the Manichean position.[26] Other authors[edit] In the fantasy series The Harrow, author Philip Mazza includes a race of orcs or the Gulguthra in the ancient tongue. The Gulguthra are members of the Brood, or En' Rauko, an evil race that occupy a post-apocalypse fantasy world. They have low jutting foreheads, snouts, ray-green skin, reddish eyes, large canine teeth, and short pointed ears.[27] As a response to their type-casting as generic evil characters or antagonists, some novels portray events from the point of view of the orcs, or present them as more sympathetic characters. Mary Gentle's 1992 novel Grunts! presents orcs as generic infantry, used as metaphorical cannon-fodder.[14] A series of books by Stan Nicholls, Orcs: First Blood, focuses on the conflicts between orcs and humans from the orcs' point of view.[28] In Terry Pratchett's Discworld series, Orcs are a race that is close to extinction; in his Unseen Academicals it is said that "When the Evil Emperor wanted fighters he got some of the Igors to turn goblins into orcs" to be used as weapons in a Great War, "encouraged" by whips and beatings.[29] In games[edit] Orcs based on The Lord of the Rings have become a fixture of fantasy fiction and role-playing games, where orcs and goblins are usually distinct races of goblinoids.[30] In the fantasy tabletop role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons, orcs were one of the earliest creatures introduced in the game, and were largely based upon those described by Tolkien.[31] The D&D orcs are a tribal race of hostile and bestial humanoids with muscular frames, large canine teeth and snouts rather than human-like noses.[32] The orc appears in the first edition Monster Manual (1977), where it is described as a fiercely competitive bully, a tribal creature often living underground.[33] The mythology and attitudes of the orcs are described in detail in Dragon #62 (June 1982), in Roger E. Moore's article, "The Half-Orc Point of View",[34] and the orc is further detailed in Paizo Publishing's book Classic Monsters Revisited (2008), on pages 52–57.[35] Games Workshop's Warhammer universe features cunning and brutal Orcs in a fantasy setting, who are driven not so much by a need to do evil as to obtain fulfilment through the act of war.[36] In the Warhammer 40,000, a series of science-fiction games, they are a green-skinned alien species, called 'Orks'.[37] Orcs are an important race in the Warcraft, a high fantasy franchise created by Blizzard Entertainment. They are variously savage or "savage but noble" warriors and shamans, prodigiously muscled, with broad noses and distinctive tusked mouths.[30] Several Orc characters from the Warcraft universe are playable heroes in the crossover multiplayer game Heroes of the Storm.[38] In the Elder Scrolls series, many Orcs or Orsimer are skilled blacksmiths.[39] In Hasbro's Heroscape products, Orcs come from the pre-historic planet Grut.[40] They are blue-skinned, with prominent tusks or horns.[41] Several Orc champions ride prehistoric animals (including a Tyrannosaurus rex,[42] a Velociraptor[43] and sabre-tooth tigers, known as Swogs).[44] The Skylander Voodood from the first game in the series, Spyro's Adventure, is an orc.[45] Savage orc For the Love of Waaagh, an Ork from Warhammer 40,000 Orc Grunt, an Orc from Warcraft See also[edit] Haradrim – the dark-skinned "Southrons" who fought for Sauron alongside the Orcs Troll (Middle-earth) – large humanoids of great strength and poor intellect, also used by Sauron Notes[edit] ^ Here "orcus   [orc].. þrys ꝉ heldeofol" is the redaction given by Pheifer 1974 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPheifer1974 (help), p. 37n but þrys appears to be a mistranscription. The original text uses "ꝉ", the scribal abbreviation for Latin vel meaning "or", which Wright has silently expanded as Anglo-Saxon oððe. ^ The Corpus Glossary (Corpus Christi College MS. 144, late 8th to early 9th century) has the two glosses: "Orcus, orc" and "Orcus, ðyrs, hel-diobul. Pheifer 1974, p. 37n harvnb error: no target: CITEREFPheifer1974 (help) ^ Klaeber here takes orcus to be the world and not the god, as does Bosworth & Toller 1898, p. 764 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFBosworthToller1898 (help): "orc, es; m. The infernal regions (orcus)", though the latter seems to predicate on synthesizing the compound "Orcþyrs" by altering the reading of the Cleopatra glossaries as given by Wright's Voc. ii. that he sources. ^ Straparola was translated into Spanish in 1583. Independent of this, there is in Spain to this day the folktale of the "huerco" or "güercu", a harbinger of impending death; a shade in the form of the person about to die. ^ See especially Basile's tales Peruonto and Lo Cuento dell'Uerco. ^ Parma Eldalamberon volume XII: "Quenya Lexicon Quenya Dictionary": 'Ork' ('orq-') monster, ogre, demon. "orqindi" ogresse. [The original reading of the second entry was >'orqinan' ogresse.< Perhaps the intended meaning of the earlier form was 'region of ogres'; cf. 'kalimban', 'Hisinan'. 'The Poetic and Mythologic Words of Eldarissa' gives 'ork' 'ogre, giant' and 'orqin' 'ogress', which may be a feminine form. ...]" ^ In the Cleopatra Glossaries, Folio 69 verso; the entry is illustrated above. References[edit] Primary[edit] This list identifies each item's location in Tolkien's writings. ^ a b c d e f Carpenter 1981, #144 to Naomi Mitchison 25 April 1954 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFCarpenter1981 (help) ^ a b c Tolkien 1994, Appendix C "Elvish names for the Orcs", pp. 289–391 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien1994 (help) ^ Tolkien, J. R. R. (2005). Hammond, Wayne G.; Scull, Christina (eds.). Nomenclature of The Lord of the Rings (PDF). The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-720907-1. ^ The Return of the King book 6, ch. 1, "The Tower of Cirith Ungol" ^ The Hobbit ch. 4, "Over Hill and Under Hill" ^ a b c d Tolkien 1954, Book 3, ch. 3 "The Uruk-Hai" harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien1954 (help) ^ a b Tolkien 2009, p. 536 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien2009 (help) ^ The Book of Lost Tales book 2, part 1 "The Tale of Tinúviel" ^ J. R. R. Tolkien, The Fall of Gondolin ^ Tolkien 1977, p. 40 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien1977 (help) ^ Tolkien 1984, p. 159 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien1984 (help) ^ Tolkien 1993, "Myths transformed", text VIII harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien1993 (help) ^ a b Tolkien 1993, "Myths transformed", text X harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien1993 (help) ^ Tolkien 2009, pp. 180–181 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien2009 (help) ^ Tolkien 2009, p. 566 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFTolkien2009 (help) ^ a b The Two Towers, Lord of the Rings Book 3, Ch. 4, "Treebeard" ^ Carpenter 1981, #294 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFCarpenter1981 (help) ^ a b Carpenter 1981, #210 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFCarpenter1981 (help) ^ Carpenter 1981, #71 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFCarpenter1981 (help) Secondary[edit] ^ "Orc". Cambridge Dictionary. Retrieved 26 January 2020. ^ a b Shippey 2005, pp. 362, 438 (chapter 5, note 14). sfn error: no target: CITEREFShippey2005 (help) ^ Wright, Thomas (1873). A second volume of vocabularies. privately printed. p. 63. ^ Pheifer, J. D. (1974). Old English Glosses in the Épinal-Erfurt Glossary. Oxford University Press. pp. 37, 106.(Repr. Sandpaper Books, 1998 ISBN 0-19-811164-9), Gloss #698: orcus   orc (Épinal); orci   orc (Erfurt). ^ "Ork". Instituut voor de Nederlandse Taal (in Dutch). 2007. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ "Nork". Instituut voor de Nederlandse Taal (in Dutch). 2007. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ Klaeber 1950, p. 5. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKlaeber1950 (help) ^ Klaeber 1950, p. 25 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFKlaeber1950 (help) ^ a b Klaeber 1950, p. 183 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFKlaeber1950 (help): Orcneas: "evil spirits" does not bring out all the meaning. Orcneas is compounded of orc (from the Lat. orcus "the underworld" or Hades) and neas "corpses." Necromancy was practised among the ancient German! ^ Salu, Mary; Farrell, Robert T., eds. (1979). J. R. R. Tolkien, scholar and storyteller: Essays in Memoriam. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. p. 291. ISBN 978-0-80141-038-3. ^ Brehaut, Patricia Kathleen (1961). Moot passages in Beowulf (Thesis). Stanford University. p. 8. ^ Spenser, Edmund (1590). Faerie Queene. Book II, Canto XII, line xlvii. ^ "Orc" Oxford English Dictionary ^ a b Canavan, A. P. (2012). "A.P. Canavan: "Let's hunt some orc!": Reevaluating the Monstrosity of Orcs". New York Review of Science Fiction. Retrieved 7 March 2020. A version of this essay was presented at the International Conference on the Fantastic in 2012. ^ "The Science of Middle-earth: Sex and the Single Orc". TheOneRing.net. Retrieved 29 May 2009. ^ a b Magoun, John F. G. (2006). "South, The". In Drout, Michael D. C. (ed.). The J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment. Routledge. pp. 622–623. ISBN 1-135-88034-4. ^ Rogers, William N., II; Underwood, Michael R. (2000). Sir George Clark (ed.). Gagool and Gollum: Exemplars of Degeneration in King Solomon's Mines and The Hobbit. J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-earth. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 121–132. ISBN 978-0-313-30845-1. ^ a b Stewart, Andrew (29 August 2018). "From the Shire to Charlottesville: How Hobbits Helped Rebuild the Dark Tower for Scientific Racism". CounterPunch. Retrieved 4 March 2020. ^ a b Ibata, David (12 January 2003). "'Lord' of racism? Critics view trilogy as discriminatory". The Chicago Tribune. ^ Turner, Jenny (15 November 2001). "Reasons for Liking Tolkien". London Review of Books. 23 (22). ^ a b c O'Hehir, Andrew (6 June 2001). "A curiously very great book". Salon.com. Retrieved 3 March 2020. ^ Tally, Robert (2019). "Demonizing the Enemy, Literally: Tolkien, Orcs, and the Sense of the World Wars". Humanities. 8 (1): 54. doi:10.3390/h8010054. ISSN 2076-0787. ^ Straubhaar, Sandra Ballif (2004). Chance, Jane (ed.). Myth, Late Roman History, and Multiculturalism in Tolkien's Middle-Earth. Tolkien and the invention of myth : a reader. University Press of Kentucky. pp. 101–117. ISBN 978-0-8131-2301-1. ^ Lobdell, Jared (2004). The World of the Rings. Open Court. p. 116. ISBN 978-0875483030. ^ a b Shippey 2005, p. 265. sfn error: no target: CITEREFShippey2005 (help) ^ Shippey 2001, pp. 131–133. sfn error: no target: CITEREFShippey2001 (help) ^ Mazza, Philip (2014). The Harrow: From Under a Tree. Omni Publishers of NY. ISBN 978-0997710908. ^ "Stan Nicholls". Fantasticfiction.co.uk. Retrieved 21 February 2009. ^ Pratchett, Terry (2009). Unseen Academicals. Doubleday. p. 389. ISBN 978-0385609340. ^ a b "Our Orcs Are Different". TV Tropes. Retrieved 31 January 2020. ^ "'Orc' (from Orcus) is another term for an ogre or ogre-like creature. Being useful fodder for the ranks of bad guys, monsters similar to Tolkien's orcs are also in both games." Gygax, Gary (March 1985). "On the influence of J.R.R. Tolkien on the D&D and AD&D games". The Dragon (95). pp. 12–13. ^ Mohr, Joseph (7 December 2019). "Orcs in Dungeons and Dragons". Old School Role Playing. Retrieved 31 January 2020. ^ Gygax, Gary. Monster Manual (TSR, 1977) ^ Moore, Roger E. "The Half-Orc Point of View." Dragon #62 (TSR, June 1982). ^ Baur, Wolfgang, Jason Bulmahn, Joshua J. Frost, James Jacobs, Nicolas Logue, Mike McArtor, James L. Sutter, Greg A. Vaughan, Jeremy Walker. Classic Monsters Revisited (Paizo, 2008). ^ Priestley, Rick; Thornton, Jake (2000). Warhammer Fantasy Battles Army Book: Orcs & Goblins (6th ed.). Games Workshop: Nottingham. pp. 10–11. ^ Sanders, Rob. "Xenos: Seven Alien Species With A Shot At Conquering the 40k Galaxy". Rob Sanders Speculative Fiction. Retrieved 1 February 2020. ^ "Another orc enters the Heroes of the Storm battleground". Destructoid. Retrieved 31 January 2020. ^ Stewart, Charlie (14 September 2020). "Why the Orcs Could Have a Huge Role in The Elder Scrolls 6". GameRant. Retrieved 13 April 2021. ^ "Blade Gruts". Hasbro.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ "Heavy Gruts". Hasbro.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ "Grimnak". Hasbro.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ "Tornak". Hasbro.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ "Swog Rider". Hasbro.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2017. ^ "Voodood". IGN. 3 November 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2021. Sources[edit] Bosworth, Joseph; Toller, T. Northcote (1898). An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary. 1 A-Fir. The Clarendon Press. p. 764. Carpenter, Humphrey, ed. (1981), The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-395-31555-7 Klaeber, Friedrich (1950). Beowulf and the Finnesburg Fragment. Translated by John R. Clark Hall (3 ed.). Allen & Unwin. Shippey, Tom (2001). J. R. R. Tolkien | Author of the Century. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0261-10401-3. Shippey, Tom (2005) [1982]. The Road to Middle-Earth (Third ed.). Grafton (HarperCollins). ISBN 978-0261102750. Tolkien, J. R. R. (1977), Christopher Tolkien (ed.), The Silmarillion, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-395-25730-1 Tolkien, J. R. R. (1984). Christopher Tolkien (ed.). The Book of Lost Tales. 2. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-395-36614-3. Tolkien, J. R. R. (1994), Christopher Tolkien (ed.), The War of the Jewels, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-395-71041-3 Tolkien, J. R. R. (1993), Christopher Tolkien (ed.), Morgoth's Ring, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-395-68092-1 Tolkien, J. R. R. (2009). The Lord of the Rings (Kindle ed.). HarperCollins. Tolkien, J. R. R. (1954), The Two Towers, The Lord of the Rings, Boston: Houghton Mifflin (published 1987), ISBN 0-395-08254-4 External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Orcs. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) 9 milestones in orcs history. Wired magazine article RPG.NET Article about Orcs Orc Roleplaying Community website v t e The Lord of the Rings J. R. R. Tolkien Influences Middle-earth Film versus book About Volumes The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King Stories "The Scouring of the Shire" "The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen" Translations Russian Swedish Responses Reception Works inspired Fandom Oxonmoot Tolkienmoot Study Structure Elements Artwork Family trees Heraldry Languages Quenya Sindarin Maps Poetry A Elbereth Gilthoniel Namárië Song of Eärendil The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late The Road Goes Ever On A Walking Song Prose Themes Addiction to power Beowulf Christianity Decline and fall England Environmentalism Heroism Magic Music Named weapons Plants Sexuality Race Trees and forests Women Literary devices Character pairing Impression of depth Interlacing Prose style Peoples Maiar Balrogs Sauron Wizards Gandalf Radagast Saruman Free peoples Dwarves Balin Gimli Elves Galadriel Glorfindel Half-elven Arwen Elrond Legolas Thranduil Ents Treebeard Hobbits Bilbo Frodo Merry Pippin Sam Men Beornings Drúedain Dúnedain Aragorn of Gondor Boromir Denethor Faramir of Rohan Éomer Éowyn Wormtongue Théoden Monsters Barrow-wight Gollum Nazgûl Old Man Willow Orcs Shelob Trolls Wargs Watcher in the Water Other Eagles Goldberry Tom Bombadil Geography Eriador Bree Old Forest Rivendell The Shire Gondor Harad Lothlórien Mirkwood Dol Guldur Moria Mordor Barad-dûr Mount Doom Rohan Isengard Battles Helm's Deep Pelennor Fields Morannon Objects Mithril Palantírs Rings of Power One Ring Three Rings Weapons and armour Related works The Hobbit The Adventures of Tom Bombadil Errantry Fastitocalon The Sea-Bell The Road Goes Ever On Bilbo's Last Song The Silmarillion Unfinished Tales The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien The History of Middle-earth The Children of Húrin The History of The Hobbit The Sea-Bell Beren and Lúthien The Fall of Gondolin Adaptations and derivative works Books Bored of the Rings (1969) The Last Ringbearer (1999) Muddle Earth (2003) Illustrations A Map of Middle-earth Pauline Baynes Barbara Remington John Howe Alan Lee Margrethe II of Denmark Ted Nasmith Theatre Fellowship! (2005) Lord of the Rings (2006) Radio The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1955) The Lord of the Rings (NPR, 1979) Hordes of the Things (1980) The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1981) Der Herr der Ringe (1992) Film Animated The Lord of the Rings (Bakshi, 1978) The Return of the King (Rankin/Bass, 1980) Peter Jackson series (Production) The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Two Towers (2002) The Return of the King (2003) Music "Concerning Hobbits" "Into the West" "May It Be" Other Khraniteli (1991) Hobitit (1993) The Lord of the Rings (2021) Fan-made The Hunt for Gollum (2009) Born of Hope (2009) Video games Journey to Rivendell Game One Game Two: Shadows of Mordor War in Middle Earth Vol. I (1990) Vol. I (SNES) Riders of Rohan Elendor Volume II The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King War of the Ring The Third Age The Battle for Middle-earth Tactics The Battle for Middle-earth II The Rise of the Witch-king Conquest Aragorn's Quest War in the North Lego The Lord of the Rings Guardians of Middle-earth Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor Middle-earth: Shadow of War The Lord of the Rings: Gollum The Lord of the Rings Online Mines of Moria Siege of Mirkwood Rise of Isengard Riders of Rohan Helm's Deep Mordor Minas Morgul War of Three Peaks Tabletop role- playing games The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game Middle-earth Role Playing The One Ring Roleplaying Game Adventures in Middle-earth Board games Middle Earth Lord of the Rings Risk: The Lord of the Rings Trilogy Edition War of the Ring Other games Middle Earth Strategy Battle Game The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game Middle-earth Collectible Card Game Lego The Lord of the Rings v t e J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth Bibliography Canon Legendarium Outline Works The Adventures of Tom Bombadil Beren and Lúthien Bilbo's Last Song The Children of Húrin The Fall of Gondolin The Hobbit The Lord of the Rings The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King "The Scouring of the Shire" "The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen" The Road Goes Ever On "The Road Goes Ever On" The Silmarillion "Ainulindalë" Unfinished Tales "Narn i Chîn Húrin" "The Quest of Erebor" History of composition The History of The Hobbit The History of Middle-earth 1–2 The Book of Lost Tales 3 The Lays of Beleriand The Lay of the Children of Húrin The Lay of Leithian 4 The Shaping of Middle-earth 5 The Lost Road and Other Writings 6–9 The History of The Lord of the Rings 10 Morgoth's Ring 11 The War of the Jewels 12 The Peoples of Middle-earth Fictional universe Peoples, Monsters Ainur Maiar Balrogs Wizards Valar Dragons Dwarves Eagles Elves Half-elven Noldor Sundering Ents Hobbits Men Beornings Drúedain Dúnedain Orcs Trolls Characters Celebrimbor Eärendil and Elwing Elendil Elrond Fëanor Finrod Felagund Finwë and Míriel Galadriel Gandalf Glorfindel Goldberry Húrin Isildur Lúthien and Beren Maedhros Melian Morgoth Saruman Sauron Thingol Tom Bombadil Tuor and Idril Túrin Turambar Ungoliant Locations Beleriand Bree-land Gondor Harad Isengard Lonely Mountain Lothlórien Mirkwood Mordor Moria Mount Doom Númenor Rivendell Rohan The Shire Valinor Objects Mithril Palantír Red Book of Westmarch Rings of Power One Ring Three Rings Silmarils Two Trees of Valinor Weapons and armour Named weapons Themes Artwork Beowulf Christianity Cosmology Decline and fall England Family trees Heraldry Languages Magic Music Maps Plants Poetry Style Trees and forests Adaptations and legacy Artists Jenny Dolfen Alan Lee John Howe Ted Nasmith Film Video games Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien Things named after Tolkien and his works Maps, atlases The Atlas of Middle-earth Journeys of Frodo A Map of Middle-earth Literary criticism J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century The J. R. R. Tolkien Encyclopedia The Road to Middle-Earth Tolkien: A Look Behind "The Lord of the Rings" Tolkien: Maker of Middle-earth Tolkien's Legendarium The Lord of the Rings: A Reader's Companion The Complete Guide to Middle-earth A Companion to J. R. R. Tolkien The J. R. R. Tolkien Companion and Guide Tolkien and the Great War Category v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125