For other uses, see Othreis. This article is about the water-nymph. For the genus of polychaetes, see Orseis (polychaete). Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e In Greek mythology, Orseïs (/ɔːrsiːɪs/; Ancient Greek: Ὀρσηΐς, derived from ὄρσω - orsô, "to rouse, stir, awaken, excite or arise") was the water-nymph (Naiad) of a spring in Thessalia, Greece, and the mythical ancestor of the Greeks. In some accounts, she was described as a mountain nymph (oread) of Mt. Othrys and named as Othryis.[1] Mythology[edit] It is uncertain whether Orseis was believed to be the daughter of Oceanus or the river-god of Thessalia, Peneios[citation needed]. There is even a possibility that she was the daughter of Zeus and Deino the Graeae.[citation needed] According to the Library, Orseis married Hellen, son of Deucalion and Pyrrha and brother of Pandora, the legendary eponymous ancestor of the Greeks. Their sons, Dorus, Xuthus, and Aeolus, according to Hesiod's Eoiae or Catalogue of Women[2] together with the sons of Pandora, Graecus, Magnetas and Makedon with Zeus, became the founders of the seven primordial tribes of Hellas (Graecians, Magnetes, Makedones, Dorians, Achaeans, Ionians, and Aeolians).[3] In some accounts, Xenopatra was also called the daughter of Hellen and Orseis.[4] Notes[edit] ^ West (1985a, p. 57) ^ Hesiod, Eoiae or Catalogue of Women, Fr. 4. ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus. Bibliotheca, 1.7.3 ^ Hellanicus in scholia on Plato, Symposium, 208 (p. 376) References[edit] Hesiod, Catalogue of Women from Homeric Hymns, Epic Cycle, Homerica translated by Evelyn-White, H G. Loeb Classical Library Volume 57. London: William Heinemann, 1914. Online version at theio.com Pseudo-Apollodorus, The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. This article relating to a Greek deity is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e