2013 film by Guillermo del Toro For other uses, see Pacific Rim (disambiguation). Pacific Rim Theatrical release poster Directed by Guillermo del Toro Produced by Guillermo del Toro Thomas Tull Jon Jashni Mary Parent Screenplay by Travis Beacham Guillermo del Toro Story by Travis Beacham Starring Charlie Hunnam Idris Elba Rinko Kikuchi Charlie Day Rob Kazinsky Max Martini Ron Perlman Mana Ashida Music by Ramin Djawadi Cinematography Guillermo Navarro Edited by John Gilroy Peter Amundson Production companies Legendary Pictures Double Dare You Productions Distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures Release date July 1, 2013 (2013-07-01) (Mexico City) July 12, 2013 (2013-07-12) (United States) Running time 132 minutes[1] Country United States[2] Language English Budget $180–200 million[3] Box office $411 million[4] Pacific Rim is a 2013 American science fiction monster film directed by Guillermo del Toro, starring Charlie Hunnam, Idris Elba, Rinko Kikuchi, Charlie Day, Robert Kazinsky, Max Martini, Ron Perlman, and Mana Ashida, and the first film in the Pacific Rim franchise. The screenplay was written by Travis Beacham and del Toro from a story by Beacham. The film is set in the future, when Earth is at war with the Kaiju,[a] colossal sea monsters which have emerged from an interdimensional portal on the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. To combat the monsters, humanity unites to create the Jaegers,[b] gigantic humanoid mechas, each controlled by two co-pilots whose minds are joined by a mental link. Focusing on the war's later days, the story follows Raleigh Becket, a washed-up Jaeger pilot called out of retirement and teamed with rookie pilot Mako Mori as part of a last-ditch effort to defeat the Kaiju. Principal photography began on November 14, 2011, in Toronto and lasted through to April 2012. The film was produced by Legendary Pictures and distributed by Warner Bros. It was released on July 12, 2013, in 3D and IMAX 3D, receiving generally positive reviews; the visual effects, action sequences, and nostalgic style were highly praised. While it underperformed at the box office in the United States, it was highly successful in other markets, thus labeling the film as a box office success.[9] It earned a worldwide total of more than $411 million—earning $114 million in China alone, its largest market—becoming Del Toro's most commercially successful film to date. The film is regarded as an homage to kaiju, mecha, and anime media.[10][11] A sequel titled Pacific Rim: Uprising was released on March 23, 2018, with Universal Pictures distributing. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Themes 4 Production 4.1 Development 4.2 Filming 4.3 Design 4.4 Visual effects 5 Music 6 Marketing 7 Release 7.1 Home media 8 Reception 8.1 Box office 8.2 Critical response 8.3 Other response 8.4 Accolades 8.5 Legacy 9 Sequel 10 Other media 10.1 Video game 10.2 Anime series 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links Plot[edit] In 2013, alien monsters called Kaiju emerge from an interdimensional portal called "The Breach" at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean. In response, humanity builds massive robots called Jaegers, each is co-piloted by two or more people, who share a mental link via a process called "Drifting" to share the mental stress of piloting the machine. In 2020, brothers Yancy and Raleigh Becket pilot the Jaeger Gipsy Danger to defend Anchorage from a Category-3 Kaiju codenamed "Knifehead". During the confrontation, the Kaiju unexpectedly pierces the Jaeger's armor, ripping out its left arm and half of its head, which pulls Yancy out of the Conn Pod, killing him. Raleigh, piloting the damaged Jaeger solo, kills Knifehead and walks Gipsy back to shore by himself before collapsing. Traumatized by the loss of his brother and the strain of drifting alone, Raleigh quits the Jaeger program. Five years later, world leaders decide to cease funding for the Jaeger program and replace it with coastal defense walls, since Kaiju are appearing more frequently and Jaegers are being destroyed as quickly as they are built. The remaining Jaegers are relocated to Hong Kong under the command of Marshal Stacker Pentecost, who plans to destroy the Breach using a tactical nuclear weapon. Pentecost tracks down Raleigh to a wall construction site to recruit him for the assault, though Raleigh still remains traumatised by Yancy’s death. Travelling to the Hong Kong base, the Shatterdome, Raleigh is introduced to Mako Mori, the director of the Jaeger's restoration program and Pentecost’s adoptive daughter. Four Jaegers remain in operation – the refurbished Gipsy Danger, the Russian Cherno Alpha, Chinese Crimson Typhoon, and the Australian Striker Eureka, piloted by father and son Herc and Chuck Hansen. To find a new co-pilot, Raleigh participates in tryouts, deciding Mako is "drift-compatible". During their first test, Raleigh falls out of alignment reliving Yancy's death, causing Mako to become lost in the memory of a Kaiju's attack on Tokyo, nearly firing Gipsy’s energy cannon. Pentecost grounds both pilots. Pentecost consults Kaiju experts Newton Geiszler and Herman Gottlieb. Hermann claims the Breach will stabilise and the Kaiju will increase in number, but it will allow the assault to succeed, while Newton suggests attempting to drift with a Kaiju's brain to learn more about them, but is dismissed by his colleagues. Newton attempts it regardless, discovering Kaiju are bioweapons grown by alien colonists. Pentecost instructs Newton to find black market dealer Hannibal Chau to obtain another Kaiju brain to drift with it. Newton realises the Kaiju hive mind gained access to his brain, since drifting is a two-way link, and two new Kaiju, Leatherback and Otachi, are sent simultaneously to find him. All Jaegers save Gipsy Danger are dispatched to intervene. The Kaiju destroy Crimson Typhoon and Cherno Alpha, while Leatherback paralyzes Striker Eureka with an EMP blast. Pentecost sends Gipsy Danger to help, the only Jaeger powered by a nuclear reactor while the others are digital. Gipsy kills Leatherback and Otachi shortly after during her search for Newton. Newton and Hannibal go to harvest Otachi’s secondary brain, discovering she is pregnant. The infant Kaiju bursts out, devours Hannibal, before choking on its own umbilical cord. Newton and Hermann drift with the infant’s brain, discovering the Breach only opens in the presence of a Kaiju's DNA. Pentecost reveals to Raleigh he has terminal cancer due to piloting a first-generation Jaeger, which lacked radiation shielding, the last time being in Tokyo. Two new Kaiju are detected guarding the Breach, prompting Gipsy and the repaired Striker, piloted by Pentecost and Chuck, to go ahead with the assault. Approaching the Breach, the Jaegers are attacked by the Kaiju, and a new "Category Five" Kaiju, Slattern, leading to Striker being crippled. Learning the truth from Newton and Hermann, Pentecost and Chuck decide to sacrifice Striker while Gipsy acts as the nuclear bomb to seal the Breach. After Striker self-destructs, Gipsy slaughters the Kaiju, riding Slattern’s corpse into the Breach. Raleigh removes Mako from Gipsy, manually causing Gipsy to self-destruct, escaping before it explodes and seals the Breach. Raleigh and Mako’s escape pods surface in the Pacific Ocean, they embrace as rescue helicopters arrive. In a mid-credits scene, Hannibal is shown cutting his way out of the dead infant Kaiju, shouting for his missing shoe. Cast[edit] Top to bottom: Charlie Hunnam, Idris Elba, and Rinko Kikuchi star in the film as Raleigh Becket, Stacker Pentecost and Mako Mori respectively. Charlie Hunnam as Raleigh Becket: A washed-up former pilot called out of retirement by the Pan Pacific Defense Corps.[12] On casting Hunnam, del Toro stated: "I saw him and I thought he had an earnest, really honest nature. And he was the kind of guy that I can relate to, as a male audience member I go, 'I like that guy. I would like to have a few beers with that guy' ... he has an earthy quality."[13] Describing the character, Hunnam stated: "When you meet me, in the beginning of the story, I've suffered a giant loss. Not only has it killed my sense of self-worth, but also my will to fight and keep on going. And then, Rinko and Idris, and a couple other people, bring me out of retirement to try to help with this grand push. I think that journey is a very relatable one. Everybody, at some point in their life, has fallen down and not felt like getting back up, but you have to, no matter how difficult it is."[14] Hunnam was also considered for the role of Prince Nuada in del Toro's previous film, Hellboy II: The Golden Army.[15] Paul Michael Wyers plays Raleigh as a child. Idris Elba as Marshal Stacker Pentecost: Raleigh's commanding officer in Pan Pacific Defense Corps and former Jaeger pilot dying of radiation poisoning due to lax radiation shielding on the first Jaeger models. On selecting Elba, del Toro stated: "This is a movie where I have had to deal with more dialogue than ever, and the way I cast the movie was—who do I want to hear say these things? Who do I want Charlie Hunnam to go against? Who can really tell Charlie Hunnam 'sit down and listen'?"[13] In another interview, the director said: "I wanted to have Idris not be the blonde, square-jawed, Anglo, super hip marine that knows [everything]. I wanted somebody that could bring a lot of authority, but that you could feel the weight of the world on his shoulders. When I watched Luther, that's the essence of the character ... Luther is carrying literally the evils of the world on his shoulders. He's doing penance for all humanity ... Idris is one of those actors that is capable of embodying humanity, in almost like a Rodin sculpture-type, larger than life, almost like a Russian realism statue, you know, big hands, all the turmoil of humanity in his eyes. I wanted somebody that you could have doubts internally, and very few guys can do that."[16] To prepare for the role, Elba watched footage of politicians David Cameron and Barack Obama, as well as Russell Crowe in Gladiator and Mel Gibson in Braveheart.[17] Del Toro initially offered the role to Tom Cruise, who declined because of scheduling conflicts.[18] Rinko Kikuchi as Mako Mori: Raleigh's co-pilot who lost her family in a Kaiju attack and was adopted by Pentecost. Though Mori possesses a strength and fury that should serve well against the Kaiju, Pentecost is reluctant to use her, partly because of a fatherly bond and partly because he knows she is still fighting the terror of her childhood.[19] Del Toro stated: "I was very careful how I built the movie. One of the other things I decided was that I wanted a female lead who has the equal force as the male leads. She's not going to be a sex kitten, she's not going to come out in cutoff shorts and a tank top, and it's going to be a real earnestly drawn character."[20] Noting that the other actors were exhausted and "destroyed physically" by filming in the intensive Jaeger cockpit harnesses, del Toro said: "The only one that didn't break was Rinko Kikuchi, the girl. She never complained ... I asked Rinko her secret and she said 'I think of gummi bears and flowers.' I try to do that in my life now."[21] Mana Ashida plays Mako as a child.[22] Charlie Day as Dr. Newton 'Newt' Geiszler: A scientist studying the Kaiju. Day stated: "Certainly myself and Burn Gorman provide a little bit of much needed levity, it's a break from the monsters and the guys fighting. But then the character gets thrust into the story in a way that his life is seriously at risk and it becomes a little more action oriented and a little more horror movie-esque. So, he kinda bounces back between being humorous and also being real ... the rest of these guys, they look really good in their suits and they've got abs, they can kick and fight and punch. Newt is sort of the 'everyman' and he's flawed and he's arrogant."[23] Del Toro gave Geiszler the mentality of a celebrity chef, with tattoos and a "big personality".[24] According to the director, Day was cast based on his performance in an episode of It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia: "He comes out with a stick, and he has a monologue about what it is to hunt the rats in the basement. It was very funny, but he was coming from character. He was not doing big stuff, he was, like, really mourning and lamenting his job, you know, how inhuman it is. And I thought, 'This guy is great at shading and comedy.' There are moments in the movie where he delivers them both." Trek Buccino portrays Newt as a child.[25] Ron Perlman as Hannibal Chau: A black marketeer who makes a living dealing Kaiju organs. Perlman stated, "I actually think this character was designed to be played by another ethnicity other than myself. And somewhere along the way, [del Toro] had the notion, 'Wouldn't it be interesting to turn this guy into more of an invention.' So, in other words, somebody takes on a persona that completely sounds like he's someone else and acts like he's someone else but he's really, you know, as you see me. That added a dimension to the larger-than-life aspect of the character ... I'm playing somebody very close to my own origins. But a completely made-up persona ... which makes him even more full of shit. And I think that's the charm of the guy—that he's kind of elusive, hard to pin down."[26] Pacific Rim marks Perlman's fifth appearance in a del Toro film. The director stated: "I think the moment you have a guy that is called Hannibal Chau and Ron shows up, and he's from Brooklyn and he's been selling black market organs, you know the whole story ... That's all I need to know. If it's any other actor, there's a lot more explaining to do. But when Ron comes in with that look, you can make your own story and it'll be as compelling as anything I can invent. You do a little weightlifting with the audience."[16] The bird tattoos on Chau's fingers indicate his past as a gangster.[27] In the film, Chau states he took the name from his favorite historical figure and his second-favorite Szechuan restaurant in Brooklyn.[21] Del Toro drew inspiration from Burt Lancaster's performance in Elmer Gantry when writing the character.[28] Robert Kazinsky as Chuck Hansen: An Australian Jaeger pilot considered the finest soldier left in the Resistance. He and his father Herc pilot Striker Eureka, "the strongest and the fastest" Jaeger with eleven Kaiju kills, and make up the Resistance's "go-to team".[29] Kazinsky, a fan of science-fiction, was initially drawn by the film's concept, "My immediate reaction was 'Holy crap, that's cool.' In the hands of somebody else, you might sit there and go, 'Well, this might be terrible,' but with del Toro doing it, you kind of go, 'This is going to be amazing.'".[30] Reflecting on his experience in the film, Kazinsky said in an interview, "The most fun I have ever had in my entire life was Pacific Rim, playing Chuck was incredibly fun."[31] Max Martini as Hercules "Herc" Hansen: Chuck's father and co-pilot. Kazinsky stated Martini hated the fact that he was cast as Chuck's father, being only 13 years Kazinsky's senior. However, Kazinsky said they developed a bond while filming, "Because we were working so tight together, we would finish and then we would go out for dinner every night and we would go to the gym together on days off we had ... The emotional scene toward the end with the father-son parting, it was very easy for me to play because I had grown to actually genuinely love Max as a man and as a friend." Kazinsky revealed that Herc and Chuck's pet bulldog was del Toro's idea and said, "The dog's name was Max, ironically, and we ended up using Max for so many things. The story was that Herc and Chuck have difficulty communicating, that they communicated via the dog, and all the love that they couldn't show each other they would show the dog."[30] The role was originally written for Ron Perlman, but del Toro decided the scenes between Perlman's Herc and Hunnam's Raleigh "might start to feel like Sons of Anarchy 2.0".[32] Clifton Collins Jr. as Tendo Choi: Chinese-American Jaeger technician. Collins described his character as the "brains" behind the Jaegers.[33] Burn Gorman as Dr. Hermann Gottlieb: A scientist studying the Kaiju alongside Geiszler. According to del Toro, Gottlieb is a "tweed-wearing, English, phlegmatic introvert that never leaves the lab". The modest Gottlieb resents Geiszler's arrogance and radical behavior; the duo echo the film's theme of incompatible people functioning together when the time comes.[24] Drew Adkins portrays Gottlieb as a child. Diego Klattenhoff as Yancy Becket: Raleigh's older brother and co-pilot. Klattenhoff joined the project to work with del Toro. Describing his character, Klattentoff stated: "This is a guy who is looking out for his very eager, younger brother and they were enabled with this gift that gave them the opportunity to kind of save the world. Or help, at least."[34] Tyler Stevenson plays Yancy as a child. Additional Jaeger pilots include Charles Luu, Lance Luu and Mark Luu as the Wei Tang triplets (China), and Robert Maillet and Heather Doerksen as Sasha and Alexis Kaidanovsky (Russia). Joe Pingue portrays Captain Merrit, the captain of a fishing boat caught in a battle between Jaeger and Kaiju. Santiago Segura plays an aide to Hannibal Chau.[35] Brad William Henke and Larry Joe Campbell portray members of an Alaskan construction team that Raleigh joins after retiring from the Pan Pacific Defense Corps. Robin Thomas, Julian Barnes, and David Richmond-Peck portray U.N. representatives from the United States, Great Britain, and Canada, respectively. Sebastian Pigott appears as a Jaeger engineer and Joshua Peace appears as an officer, Jonathan Foxon appears as a frantic civilian. David Fox plays an old man on a beach, while Jane Watson portrays Raleigh and Yancy's mother in a flashback sequence.[36][37][better source needed] Producer Thomas Tull makes a cameo appearance.[38] Ellen McLain makes a vocal appearance as the A.I of the Gipsy Danger, a nod to her role as GLaDOS in the Portal game series.[39][40] Themes[edit] In the film, a Jaeger's neural load is too much for a single pilot to handle alone, meaning they must first be psychically linked to another pilot—a concept called "drifting". When pilots drift, they quickly gain intimate knowledge of each other's memories and feelings, and have no choice but to accept them; del Toro found this concept's dramatic potential compelling. The director expressed his intention that the empathy metaphors extend to real life: The pilots' smaller stories actually make a bigger point, which is that we're all together in the same robot [in life] ... Either we get along or we die. I didn't want this to be a recruitment ad or anything jingoistic. The idea of the movie is just for us to trust each other, to cross over barriers of color, sex, beliefs, whatever, and just stick together. Del Toro acknowledged this message's simplicity, but said he would have liked to have seen adventure films with similar morals when he was a child.[28] The film's ten primary characters all have "little arcs" conducive to this idea; del Toro stated: "I think that's a great message to give kids ... 'That guy you were beating the shit out of ten minutes ago? That's the guy you have to work with five minutes later.' That's life ... We can only be complete when we work together." The director noted that Hellboy and The Devil's Backbone told the same message, though the latter conveyed it in a very different way.[41] The film centers on the relationship between Becket and Mori, but it is not a love story in a conventional sense. Both are deeply damaged human beings who have decided to suppress their respective traumas. While learning to pilot their Jaeger, they undergo a process of "opening up", gaining access to each other's thoughts, memories and secrets. Their relationship is necessarily one of respect and "perfect trust". Hunnam commented that the film is "a love story without a love story. It's about all of the necessary elements of love without arriving at love itself".[19][42] Both Becket and Mori have suffered profound personal tragedies; one of the script's central ideas is that two damaged people can metaphorically "become one", with their figurative missing pieces connecting almost like a puzzle.[43] Del Toro emphasized the characters' emotional intimacy by filming their training fight scene the way he would a sex scene.[44] Del Toro, a self-described pacifist, avoided what he termed "car commercial aesthetics" or "army recruitment video aesthetics", and gave the characters Western ranks including "marshal" and "ranger" rather than military ranks such as "captain", "major" or "general". The director stated: "I avoided making any kind of message that says war is good. We have enough firepower in the world."[20] Del Toro wanted to break from the mass death and destruction featured in contemporary blockbuster films, and made a point of showing the streets and buildings being evacuated before Kaiju attacks, ensuring that the destruction depicted is "completely remorseless". The director stated: I don't want people being crushed. I want the joy that I used to get seeing Godzilla toss a tank without having to think there are guys in the tank ... What I think is you could do nothing but echo the moment you're in. There is a global anxiety about how fragile the status quo is and the safety of citizens, but in my mind—honestly—this film is in another realm. There is no correlation to the real world. There is no fear of a copycat Kaiju attack because a Kaiju saw it on the news and said, "I'm going to destroy Seattle." In my case, I'm picking up a tradition. One that started right after World War II and was a coping mechanism, in a way, for Japan to heal the wounds of that war. And it's integral for a Kaiju to rampage in the city.[45] Writing for the Los Angeles Review of Books, Wai Chee Dimock connected the film's central theme of togetherness to its recurring image of missing shoes, stating the "utopian dream" driving the characters is that puny humans like us could be "together"—not only in the specific neural melding that must take place between the two Jaeger co-pilots but also, more generally speaking, in a fractal web of resemblance, filling the world with copies of ourselves at varying orders of magnitude and with varying degrees of re-expression, beginning with the shoes on our feet.[46] Production[edit] Development[edit] In February 2006, it was reported that Guillermo del Toro would direct Travis Beacham's fantasy screenplay Killing on Carnival Row, but the project never materialized.[47] Beacham conceived Pacific Rim the following year. While walking on the beach near Santa Monica Pier, the screenwriter imagined a giant robot and a giant monster fighting to the death. "They just sort of materialized out of the fog, these vast, godlike things." He later conceived the idea that each robot had two pilots, asking "what happens when one of those people dies?" Deciding this would be "a story about loss, moving on after loss, and dealing with survivor's guilt", Beacham commenced writing the film.[48] On May 28, 2010, it was reported that Legendary Pictures had purchased Beacham's detailed 25-page film treatment, now titled Pacific Rim.[49] On July 28, 2010, it was reported that del Toro would next direct an adaptation of H. P. Lovecraft's At the Mountains of Madness for Universal Studios, with James Cameron producing.[50] When del Toro met with Legendary Pictures to discuss the possibility of collaborating with them on a film, he was intrigued by Beacham's treatment—still a "very small pitch" at this point.[51] Del Toro struck a deal with Legendary: while directing At the Mountains of Madness, he would produce and co-write Pacific Rim; because of the films' conflicting production schedules, he would direct Pacific Rim only if At the Mountains of Madness were cancelled.[52] Tom Cruise was attached to star in the Lovecraft adaptation.[13] On March 7, 2011, it was reported that Universal would not proceed with At the Mountains of Madness because del Toro was unwilling to compromise on the $150 million budget and R rating.[53][54] The director later reflected, "When it happened, this has never happened to me, but I actually cried that weekend a lot. I don't want to sound like a puny soul, but I really was devastated. I was weeping for the movie."[55] The project collapsed on a Friday, and del Toro signed to direct Pacific Rim the following Monday.[13] Del Toro spent a year working with Beacham on the screenplay, and is credited as co-writer. He introduced ideas he had always wished to see in the genre, such as a Kaiju birth and a Kaiju attack seen from a child's perspective.[44] The script also received an uncredited rewrite from Neil Cross, who previously created the Idris Elba-starring drama series Luther and wrote the del Toro-produced horror film Mama.[56] Patrick Melton and Marcus Dunstan were enlisted to perform uncredited rewrites when their spec script Monstropolis caught the filmmaker's attention.[57] Drew Pearce also carried out uncredited work on the script.[58] Filming[edit] Filming began on November 14, 2011,[59] and continued in Toronto into April 2012.[60] Del Toro gave an update after the second week on filming finished.[61] The film was referred to as Silent Seas and Still Seas during production.[62] Del Toro had never shot a film in less than 115 days, but had only 103 to shoot Pacific Rim. In order to achieve this, del Toro scheduled a splinter unit that he could direct early in the day, before main unit, and on his off-days. The director worked 17 to 18 hours a day, seven days a week, for much of the schedule. Del Toro took a new approach to directing actors, allowing "looser" movements and improvisation; the director maintained tight control over the production: "Everything, 100% goes through me sooner or later. I do not delegate anything. Some people like it, some people don't, but it has to be done that way."[63] The film was shot using Red Epic cameras.[64] At first Guillermo del Toro decided not to shoot or convert the film to 3D, as the effect would not work due to the sheer size of the film's robots and monsters, explaining I didn't want to make the movie 3D because when you have things that big ... the thing that happens naturally, you're looking at two buildings lets say at 300 feet [away], if you move there is no parallax. They're so big that, in 3D, you barely notice anything no matter how fast you move ... To force the 3D effects for robots and monsters that are supposed to be big you are making their [perspective] miniaturized, making them human scale.[65] It was later announced that the film would be converted to 3D, with the conversion taking 40 weeks longer than most. Del Toro said: "What can I tell you? I changed my mind. I'm not running for office. I can do a Romney."[66] Del Toro cut approximately an hour of material from the film. The unused footage explored the characters and their arcs in greater detail, but the director felt it was necessary to strike a balance, stating: "We cannot pretend this is Ibsen with monsters and giant robots. I cannot pretend I'm doing a profound reflection on mankind." Each character's arc was edited down to its minimal requirements.[41] The director wanted to keep the film around two hours, particularly for younger viewers. Alejandro González Iñárritu and Alfonso Cuarón helped with the editing; Iñárritu removed ten minutes of footage, while Cuarón removed "a few minutes" and rearranged several scenes.[67] Iñárritu and Cuarón receive a "special thanks" in the film's end credits, as do James Cameron and David Cronenberg.[68] Design[edit] Del Toro drew inspiration from Francisco Goya's The Colossus, and hoped to evoke the same "sense of awe" with the film's battles.[51] Del Toro envisioned Pacific Rim as an earnest, colorful adventure story, with an "incredibly airy and light feel", in contrast to the "super-brooding, super-dark, cynical summer movie". The director focused on "big, beautiful, sophisticated visuals" and action that would satisfy an adult audience, but has stated his "real hope" is to introduce the Kaiju and mecha genres to a generation of children.[55] While the film draws heavily on these genres, it avoids direct references to previous works. Del Toro intended to create something original but "madly in love" with its influences, instilled with "epic beauty" and "operatic grandeur".[69] The ending credits dedicate the film to Ray Harryhausen and Ishirō Honda, who helped to establish the giant monster genre with films such as The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms and Godzilla, respectively.[70] The film was to honor the Kaiju and mecha genres while creating an original stand-alone film, something "conscious of the heritage, but not a pastiche or an homage or a greatest hits of everything". The director made a point of starting from scratch, without emulating or referencing any previous examples of those genres. He cautioned his designers not to turn to films like Gamera, Godzilla, or The War of the Gargantuas for inspiration, stating: "I didn't want to be postmodern, or referential, or just belong to a genre. I really wanted to create something new, something madly in love with those things. I tried to bring epic beauty to it, and drama and operatic grandeur."[69][71] Rather than popular culture, he drew inspiration from works of art such as The Colossus and George Bellows's boxing paintings.[51][72] The film's designers include Wayne Barlowe (who is the primary designer of the Kaiju), Oscar Chichoni, monster sculptors David Meng and Simon Lee, and Hellboy II and The Hobbit designer Francisco Ruiz Velasco.[51] Del Toro has acknowledged that some designs created for his cancelled At the Mountains of Madness adaptation may have been used in Pacific Rim.[44] Approximately one hundred Kaiju and one hundred Jaegers were designed, but only a fraction of these appear in the film; every week the filmmakers would "do an American Idol" and vote for the best.[5] In designing Kaiju, the film's artists frequently drew inspiration from nature rather than other works. The director commented: "Kaijus are essentially outlandish in a way, but on the other hand they come sort of in families: you've got the reptilian Kaiju, the insect Kaiju, the sort of crustacean Kaiju ... So to take an outlandish design and then render it with an attention to real animal anatomy and detail is interesting."[6] Del Toro avoided making the Kaiju too similar to any Earth creatures, instead opting to make them otherworldly and alien.[73] Del Toro called the film's Kaiju "weapons", stating that they are "the cleaning crew, the cats sent into the warehouse to clean out the mice." Certain design elements are shared by all the Kaiju; this is intended to suggest that they are connected and were designed for a similar purpose.[52] Each Kaiju was given a vaguely humanoid silhouette to echo the man-in-suit aesthetic of early Japanese Kaiju films.[7] While del Toro's other films feature ancient or damaged monsters, the Kaiju lack scars or any evidence of prior culture, indicating that they are engineered creations rather than the result of an evolutionary system.[73] Knifehead, the first Kaiju to appear in the film, is a tribute to the plodding kaiju of 1960s Japanese films, and is intended to look almost like a man in a rubber suit; its head was inspired by that of a goblin shark.[41] Leatherback, the bouncer-like Kaiju which spews electro-magnetic charges, is a favorite of del Toro, who conceived it as a "brawler with this sort of beer belly"; the lumbering movements of gorillas were used as a reference.[74] The Kaiju Otachi homages the dragons of Chinese mythology. The director called it a "Swiss army knife of a Kaiju"; with almost 20 minutes of screen time, it was given numerous features so the audience would not tire of it. The creature moves like a Komodo dragon in water, sports multiple jaws and an acid-filled neck sack, and unfurls wings when necessary.[5] It is also more intelligent than the other Kaiju, employing eagle-inspired strategies against the Jaegers.[74] Onibaba, the Kaiju that orphans Mako Mori, resembles a fusion of a Japanese temple and a crustacean.[74] Slattern, the largest Kaiju, is distinguished by its extremely long neck and "half-horn, half-crown" head, which del Toro considered both demonic and majestic.[74] Gipsy Danger, the American Jaeger, was based on the shape of New York City's Art Deco buildings, such as the Chrysler Building and the Empire State Building, but infused with John Wayne's gunslinger gait and hip movements. Cherno Alpha, the Russian Jaeger, was based on the shape and paint patterns of a T-series Russian tank, combined with a giant containment silo to give the appearance of a walking nuclear power plant with a cooling tower on its head.[5] Crimson Typhoon, the three-armed Chinese Jaeger, is piloted by triplets and resembles a "medieval little warrior"; its texture evokes Chinese lacquered wood with golden edges.[74] Striker Eureka, the Australian Jaeger, is likened by del Toro to a Land Rover; the most elegant and masculine Jaeger, it has a jutting chest, a camouflage paint scheme recalling the Australian outback, and the bravado of its pilots.[74] The film's costumes were designed by Shane Mahan and Kate Hawley, who spent several months on the costumes of the Jaeger pilots. The Russian pilot suits are old-fashioned and echo cosmonaut space suits.[51] Visual effects[edit] Industrial Light & Magic was chosen to create the visual effects for Pacific Rim. Del Toro hired Oscar winners John Knoll and Hal T. Hickel, both known for their work on the Star Wars prequel trilogy and the Pirates of the Caribbean films. Legacy Effects co-owner Shane Mahan, known for creating the armored suits for Iron Man, was tasked with building the suits, helmets and conn-pods.[75] Oscar winner Clay Pinney, known for his work on Independence Day and Star Trek, was also brought on board. Hybride Technologies, a division of Ubisoft, and Rodeo FX also contributed to the visual effects.[76][77] Del Toro used classic art such as Hokusai's The Great Wave off Kanagawa as a reference for the film's ocean battles. Del Toro conceived the film as an operatic work: That was one of the first words I said to the entire team at ILM. I said, "This movie needs to be theatrical, operatic, romantic." We used a lot of words not usually associated with high-tech blockbusters ... We went for a very, very, very, very saturated color palette for the battle for Hong Kong. I kept asking John to tap into his inner Mexican and be able to saturate the greens and the purples and the pinks and the oranges. The classic Japanese woodblock print The Great Wave off Kanagawa by Hokusai was a common motif in the ocean battles; Del Toro recalled, "I would say 'Give me a Hokusai wave' ... we use the waves and weather in the movie very operatically."[78] The director asked that Knoll not necessarily match the lighting from shot to shot: "It's pretty unorthodox to do that, but I think the results are really beautiful and very artistically free and powerful, not something you would associate with a big sci-fi action movie." Del Toro considers the film's digital water its most exciting visual effect: "The water dynamics in this movie are technically beautiful, but also artistically incredibly expressive. We agreed on making the water become almost another character. We would time the water very precisely. I'd say 'Get out of the wave [on this frame].'"[78] The film also features extensive miniature effect shots provided by 32TEN Studios, under the supervision of ILM VFX Producer Susan Greenhow and ILM VFX Supervisors John Knoll and Lindy DeQuattro. Shot using RED Epic cameras on 3D rigs, the scenes produced by 32TEN involved the creation of a quarter-scale office building interior which was destroyed by the fist of a Jaeger robot which was on a separate pneumatically controlled rig, as well as a sequence which depicted several rows of seats in a soccer stadium being blown apart as a Jaeger lands in the stadium, which was created by using quarter-scale seats blown apart by air cannons. Additionally 32TEN provided several practical elements for ILM's compositing team including dust clouds, breaking glass and water effects.[79] Music[edit] Main article: Pacific Rim (soundtrack) Ramin Djawadi is the composer of the Pacific Rim score. The film's score was composed by Ramin Djawadi.[80] Del Toro selected Djawadi based on his works on Prison Break, Iron Man and Game of Thrones, stating: "His scores have a grandeur, but they have also an incredible sort of human soul." The director also stated that some Russian rap would be featured in the film.[81] The soundtrack was released on digital download from Amazon on June 18, 2013, and CD on June 25, 2013.[82] The physical version of the soundtrack was released on July 9, 2013, by WaterTower Music, three days before the theatrical release of the film itself.[83] Guest musicians Tom Morello and Priscilla Ahn also feature as soloists on the score.[83] Two songs appear in the film which are not included on the soundtrack are "Just Like Your Tenderness" by Luo Xiaoxuan, and the ending theme "Drift", performed by Blake Perlman featuring Rza.[84] The OST received mostly positive reviews. The Action Elite rated the album with a perfect five stars,[85] the Empire gave four,[86] while MSN and Filmtracks also gave the soundtrack four out of five stars.[87][88] On July 27, 2013, the soundtrack appeared at peak position number 7 on "US Billboard Top Soundtracks."[89] Marketing[edit] On November 28, 2012, the official film website premiered alongside two viral videos—one depicting the initial Kaiju attack as captured by a handheld camera.[90] Blueprints depicting the designs for the Jaeger machines were also released online.[90] On June 5, 2013, the graphic novel Pacific Rim: Tales from Year Zero was released. Written by Travis Beacham and featuring cover art by Alex Ross, Tales from Year Zero serves as an introductory prologue to the film, and is set twelve years before its events.[91][92] On June 18, Insight Editions published Pacific Rim: Man, Machines, and Monsters, an art book written by David S. Cohen. The book chronicles the film's production with concept art, photography, the cast and crew's accounts of the shoot, and a foreword by del Toro.[93] On July 2, a viral video was released in which Ron Perlman's character, Hannibal Chau, advertises his fictional Kaiju organ dealership, Kaiju Remedies.[94] On the day of the film's release, July 12, 2013, another viral video was released to promote the film. It involved the collaboration of the film studio (including del Toro himself) and the YouTube network Polaris (also known as The Game Station). It featured members of the YouTube network (such as the Game Grumps) as Jaeger pilots fighting Kaiju.[95] On July 16, a novelization by Alex Irvine was released.[96] NECA began selling action figures of the film's Kaiju and Jaegers.[97] Release[edit] Pacific Rim was initially expected to reach theaters in July 2012. However, Warner Bros. decided to postpone the film's release date to May 10, 2013. In March 2012, it was announced that the film would be released on July 12, 2013.[98] The film premiered in Mexico City on July 1, 2013.[99] Home media[edit] Pacific Rim became available for download on the iTunes Store and Vudu on October 1, 2013.[100] The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc in the United States on October 15, 2013, and in the United Kingdom and other countries on November 25, 2013.[101] A collector's edition was also available on the same date.[102] To help promote the home media release, Bryan Harley and Roque Rodriguez of Fresno, California, produced a "sweded" version of the film's Gipsy Danger vs. Otachi battle scene, after del Toro was impressed by the duo's "sweded" trailer released on YouTube in March 2013.[103] As of March 2014, Pacific Rim has sold 961,845 DVDs along with 1,427,692 Blu-ray Discs in the United States for $10,045,530 and $24,634,992 in revenue, respectively, for a total of $37,079,122.[104] Pacific Rim was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on October 4, 2016.[105] Reception[edit] Box office[edit] Pacific Rim grossed $101.8 million in North America, and has had a favorable international release, grossing $309.7 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $411.5 million.[4] The film grossed $3.6 million from Thursday night showings, 23 percent of which came from IMAX showings. It then faced competition from Grown Ups 2 and ultimately fell behind it on opening day, earning $14.6 million.[106] The film reached the #3 spot during the opening weekend with $37.2 million, behind Despicable Me 2 and Grown Ups 2. This is the highest-ever opening for a film by del Toro, surpassing Hellboy II: The Golden Army. Around 50 percent of tickets were in 3D, which makes it the second-highest 3D share of 2013, behind Gravity.[107] During its second weekend, the film dropped a steep 57% with a gross of $16 million, and during its third weekend, had dropped a further 52% with a gross of $7.7 million.[108][109] On July 22, 2013, it was reported that the film had reached #1 at the international box office over the weekend.[110] The film had a successful opening in China, grossing $45.2 million, until overtaken by The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies.[111] It was the largest opening in China for a Warner Bros. title, and the sixth-largest Chinese debut of all time for any Hollywood film.[112] On August 19, 2013, its gross crossed $100 million in China alone, becoming the sixth-highest-grossing American film ever in China.[113] It grossed a total of $114.3 million in the country, making China the largest market for the film.[114] In Japan, the film landed in the fifth position on opening weekend, with an initial earning of $3 million (behind World War Z's gross of $3.4 million).[115][116] In September 2013, Forbes highlighted Pacific Rim as "the rare English-language film in history to cross $400 million while barely crossing $100 million domestic".[9] Critical response[edit] Pacific Rim received generally positive reviews from critics. Review aggregation website Metacritic gives a rating of 65 out of 100 based on reviews from 48 critics, which indicates "generally favorable reviews".[117] The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 72% approval rating with an average rating of 6.61/10 based on 288 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "It may sport more style than substance, but Pacific Rim is a solid modern creature feature bolstered by fantastical imagery and an irresistible sense of fun."[118] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale.[119][120][121] The Daily Telegraph's Robbie Collin awarded the film five stars out of five, likening the experience of watching it to rediscovering a favorite childhood cartoon. He praised del Toro for investing his own affection for the genre and sense of artistry into the project in such a way that the viewer found themselves immersed in the film rather than watching from afar, noting the director had catered to younger and older audiences alike and expressed surprise that the film could rise above the sum of its parts.[122] Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter gave a positive review, describing the film as the sum of the potential every monster film had ever tried to fulfill.[123] Lou Lumenick of The New York Post gave the film four stars out of four, and said it had "no shortage of brains, brawn, eye candy, wit and even some poetry", praising the "clean and coherent" action sequences and the "terrific chemistry" between Hunnam and Kikuchi.[124] Drew McWeeny of HitFix highlighted other aspects of the film, paying particular attention to the production and art design. He also praised the cinematography for "perfectly capturing" the film, and described the score as "ridiculously cool".[125] Rolling Stone's Peter Travers called the film "the work of a humanist ready to banish cynicism for compassion", saying that del Toro "drives the action with a heartbeat".[126] Keith Uhlich of Time Out called the film "pure, pleasurable comic-book absurdity", and noted that del Toro had lent the proceedings a "plausible humanity" lacking in most of summer 2013's destruction-heavy blockbusters. He said the Kaijus' civilian victims make a "palpably personal impression", deeming one scene with Mako Mori "as mythically moving as anything in the mecha anime, like Neon Genesis Evangelion, that the director emulates with expert aplomb."[127] The Village Voice's Stephanie Zacharek called it "summer entertainment with a pulse", praising its "dumbly brilliant" action and freedom from elitism, but noted the story is predictable and suggested del Toro's time would be better spent on more visionary films.[128] Angela Watercutter of Wired called it the "most awesome movie of the summer", a "fist-pumping, awe-inspiring ride", and opined that its focus on spectacle rather than characterization "simply does not matter" in the summer blockbuster context.[38] Richard Roeper gave the film a B, commenting that either the Jaegers or Kaiju "can take down any of the Transformers."[129] Leonard Maltin gave the film two-and-a-half out of four stars, calling it "three-quarters of a really good movie that doesn't know when to quit."[130] The Guardian's Andrew Pulver was less enthusiastic, calling the film a mix of "wafer-thin psychodrama" and "plot-generator dialogue".[131] Time's Richard Corliss said the action was let down by "inert" drama, describing the film as "45 minutes of awesome encased in 90 minutes of yawnsome."[132] Justin Chang of Variety criticized it as loud and lacking the nuance and subtlety of del Toro's previous films.[133] The New Yorker's Anthony Lane's verdict read as "It is possible to applaud Pacific Rim for the efficacy of its business model while deploring the tale that has been engendered—long, loud, dark, and very wet. You might as well watch the birth of an elephant."[134] The San Francisco Chronicle's Mike LaSalle reacted extremely negatively by stating "If this is the best we can do in terms of movies—if something like this can speak to the soul of audiences—maybe we should just turn over the cameras and the equipment to the alien dinosaurs and see what they come up with ... Director Guillermo del Toro, who gave us Pan's Labyrinth not too many years ago, used to be known as an artistic and discerning filmmaker, despite his affection for blockbuster action and grotesqueness. But too often he gets lost in his computer ... Why go to the movies to look at somebody else's computer after looking at your own all week? ... The actors can't make Pacific Rim any better. They can only relieve some of the pain."[135] Slant Magazine's Ed Gonzalez, who said the film lacked poignancy, compared it to a video game: "a stylish but programmatic ride toward an inevitable final boss battle".[136] TheWrap's Alonso Duralde criticized the choice to set most battles at night or during the rain, feeling it detracted from the action, and said the comic relief actors—Day, Gorman, and Perlman—stole the film from the less interesting leads.[137] Jordan Hoffman of Film.com identified Hunnam as the weak link in the cast, calling him a "charisma black hole".[138] Giles Hardie of The Sydney Morning Herald was particularly critical of the film, awarding the action sequences "five IQ points out of five" as he described the film as an hour and twenty minutes of fight sequences vaguely connected by ten minutes of story.[139] Other response[edit] Director Rian Johnson praised the film,[140] as did Japanese game director Hideo Kojima, who called it the "ultimate otaku film" and stated he "never imagined [he] would be fortunate enough to see a film like this in [his] life".[141] Go Nagai, who pioneered the idea of mecha piloted from an interior cockpit, praised the film's fun and intense action, while game developer Fumito Ueda said its battle scenes surpassed memories of the tokusatsu films he saw as an impressionable child.[142] Science fiction author William Gibson called the film "A ravishing display of intelligent, often wonderfully witty visual design, every frame alive with coherent language, in the service of what is at heart a children's story ... A baroque that doesn't curdle, that never fetishizes itself."[143] Accolades[edit] Award Category Recipients Result ABFF Hollywood Awards Artist of the Year Idris Elba (also for Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom and Thor: The Dark World) Nominated Annie Award Outstanding Achievement, Animated Effects in a Live Action Production Won Outstanding Achievement, Character Animation in a Live Action Production Nominated British Academy Film Awards Best Special Visual Effects Nominated Critics' Choice Movie Award Best Visual Effects Nominated Denver Film Critics Society Best Science Fiction/Horror Film Nominated Empire Awards Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy Nominated Hollywood Film Awards Best Visual Effects John Knoll Won Las Vegas Film Critics Society Best Horror/Sci-Fi Film Won Saturn Award Best Science Fiction Film Nominated Best Director Guillermo del Toro Nominated Best Production Design Andrew Neskoromny and Carol Spier Nominated Best Editing Peter Amundson and John Gilroy Nominated Best Special Effects John Knoll, James E. Price, Clay Pinney and Rocco Larizza Nominated St. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association Best Visual Special Effects John Knoll Nominated Teen Choice Awards Summer Movie Action Nominated Visual Effects Society Outstanding Visual Effects in a Visual Effects-Driven Feature Motion Picture John Knoll, Susan Greenhow, Chris Raimo, Hal Hickel Nominated Outstanding Animated Character in a Live Action Feature Motion Picture Jakub Pistecky, Frank Gravatt, Cyrus Jam, Chris Havreberg for Kaiju - Leatherback Nominated Outstanding Created Environment in a Live Action Feature Motion Picture Johan Thorngren, Jeremy Bloch, David Meny, Polly Ing for "Virtual Hong Kong" Nominated Outstanding Virtual Cinematography in a Live Action Feature Motion Picture Colin Benoit, Nick Walker, Adam Schnitzer, Victor Schutz for "Hong Kong Ocean Brawl" Nominated Outstanding Models in a Feature Motion Picture David Fogler, Alex Jaeger, Aaron Wilson, David Behrens Nominated Legacy[edit] Named after the female character from the film, Mako Mori (played by Rinko Kikuchi), the Mako Mori test is a set of requirements designed to measure the level of gender equality in a film or TV show. Derived from the Bechdel test, it was born from the following observation: even though the film Pacific Rim gives a rather good representation of women, it fails the Bechdel test. The criterion of the Mako Mori test is as follows: there is at least one female character; with her own narrative arc; independent to that of a male character.[144][145] Sequel[edit] Main article: Pacific Rim: Uprising A sequel titled Pacific Rim: Uprising, directed by Steven S. DeKnight and produced by Del Toro, with Kikuchi, Day, and Gorman reprising their roles, and Universal Pictures taking the film distribution, was released on March 23, 2018.[146][147] Other media[edit] Video game[edit] Main article: Pacific Rim (video game) A single-player fighting video game based on the film was announced by the Australian Classification Board for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3. Published and developed by Yuke's, Pacific Rim: The Video Game was released along with the film on July 12, 2013.[148] The game received generally negative reviews.[149] Reliance Games developed a Pacific Rim tie-in game for smartphone platforms, such as iOS and Android devices;[citation needed] this version also received negative reviews.[150] Anime series[edit] Main article: Pacific Rim: The Black On November 8, 2018, Netflix announced an original anime series[151][152] that will expand upon the story of the first two live-action movies. On October 27, 2020, the anime was officially titled Pacific Rim: The Black, and will follow two siblings that are forced to pilot an abandoned Jaeger "across a hostile landscape in a desperate attempt to find their missing parents". The anime will be animated by Polygon Pictures, with Marvel Comics writer Craig Kyle and Greg Johnson serving as the showrunners.[153] The first season released on March 4, 2021.[154] See also[edit] Atlantic Rim – Its mockbuster counterpart Onibaba Notes[edit] ^ The name of the monsters comes from the Japanese word kaijū (怪獣, 'strange creature, monster'). Japanese lacks a plural form for its words, but it is often common for Japanese loanwords into English to receive English-style pluralization.[5][6][7] Travis Beacham has said that he believes both kaiju and kaijus to be correct within the film's universe, although he prefers the former.[8] ^ The name of the mechas comes from the German word Jäger ('hunter'). In German, the plural form for this word occurs in the definite article rather than as a suffix to the word itself (der Jäger is 'the hunter'; die Jäger is 'the hunters'). As this is an English-language movie, the film specifically uses the plural jaegers.[citation needed] References[edit] ^ "Pacific Rim (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. July 9, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim (EN)". Lumiere. Retrieved June 26, 2017. ^ Stewart, Andrew; Oldham, Stuart (June 26, 2013). "Is Pacific Rim Doomed to Be This Year's Battleship?". Variety. Retrieved June 26, 2018. ^ a b "Pacific Rim". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 15, 2021. ^ a b c d Sacks, Ethan (July 7, 2013). "The Kaijus and Jaegers of Guillermo del Toro's 'Pacific Rim' are modern updates on classic movie monsters like Godzilla". nydailynews.com. Retrieved July 7, 2013. ^ a b Mr. Beaks (August 24, 2011). "Guillermo Del Toro And Mr. Beaks Discuss DON'T BE AFRAID OF THE DARK, PACIFIC RIM And The Far-From-Used-Up Future Of AT THE MOUNTAINS OF MADNESS!". aintitcool.com. Ain't It Cool News. Retrieved July 1, 2013. ^ a b Woerner, Meredith (July 1, 2013). "Unbelievable Pacific Rim video reveals all of the Kaiju's secrets". io9.com. Retrieved July 1, 2013. ^ Beacham, Travis. "The grammar of Pacific Rim". the principle fantastic. Retrieved October 19, 2013. ^ a b Mendelson, Scott (September 2, 2013). "Pacific Rim And More Domestic 'Flops' That Became Global Hits". Forbes. Retrieved September 3, 2013. ^ Axinto, Jemarc (April 24, 2014). "Pacific Rim: In-depth study of the influence of Anime". The Artifice. Retrieved June 25, 2018. ^ Schwerdtfeger, Conner (January 3, 2018). "How Much Guillermo Del Toro Was Involved With Pacific Rim 2". Cinema Blend. Retrieved June 25, 2018. ^ "Total Guide to Pacific Rim". ^ a b c d Weintraub, Steve 'Frosty' (June 19, 2013). "Guillermo del Toro Talks Getting Back in the Director's Chair, the Evolution of the Script, Creating the World on a Giant Scale, and More on the Set of PACIFIC RIM". collider.com. Retrieved June 20, 2013. ^ Radish, Christina (July 16, 2012). "Comic-Con: Guillermo Del Toro and Charlie Hunnam Talk PACIFIC RIM, Giving the Robots a Personality, Ghost Stories, PROMETHEUS, and More". collider.com. Retrieved June 26, 2013. ^ Graham, Jamie (June 7, 2012). "Guillermo del Toro talks Pacific Rim". Total Film. Retrieved June 9, 2012. ^ a b Nicholson, Max (June 20, 2013). "IGN Heads to the Set of Pacific Rim". Retrieved June 24, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim interview with Idris Elba". Retrieved July 7, 2013. ^ "Del Toro: Hunnam can date daughters". belfasttelegraph.com. July 17, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. ^ a b McWeeny, Drew (July 6, 2013). "Rinko Kikuchi on how trauma forms character in Pacific Rim". hitfix.com. Retrieved July 7, 2013. ^ a b Howell, Peter (July 5, 2013). "Pacific Rim's Guillermo del Toro is a monster-loving pacifist". thestar.com. Retrieved July 5, 2013. ^ a b Kline, Doug (April 4, 2013). "GUILLERMO DEL TORO TALKS PACIFIC RIM ROBOTS, MONSTERS, CAST, AND MORE!". geekexchange.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2013. Retrieved July 7, 2013. ^ "Ashida Mana to make her Hollywood debut in 'Pacific Rim'". December 13, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2013. ^ Weintraub, Steve 'Frosty' (June 19, 2013). "Charlie Day Talks How He Got Involved with the Project, Bringing Levity to the Story, the Giant Sets, and More on the Set of PACIFIC RIM". collider.com. Retrieved June 20, 2013. ^ a b Julian, Mark (June 29, 2013). "Guillermo del Toro On Pacific Rim". youtube.com. YouTube. Retrieved June 30, 2013. ^ "IGN Heads to the Set of Pacific Rim". ign.com. June 20, 2013. Retrieved July 26, 2014. ^ Weintraub, Steve 'Frosty' (June 19, 2013). "Ron Perlman Talks Developing His Own Character, Practical Effects vs. CG, His Relationship with Guillermo del Toro, & More on the Set of PACIFIC RIM". collider.com. Retrieved June 20, 2013. ^ Shamsul, Jayeeta (July 14, 2013). "Pacific Rim: Ron Perlman's New Direction in Life". guardianlv.com. Retrieved July 20, 2013. ^ a b Russo, Tom (July 6, 2013). "Pacific Rim is the heartfelt project from del Toro". bostonglobe.com. Retrieved July 7, 2013. ^ Radish, Christina (July 6, 2013). "Rob Kazinsky Talks TRUE BLOOD Season 6, His Character's Relationship with Sookie, Getting Naked on the Show, PACIFIC RIM, and More". collider.com. Retrieved July 6, 2013. ^ a b McIntyre, Gina (July 6, 2013). "'True Blood' actor Robert Kazinsky talks genre, 'Pacific Rim' role". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 15, 2013. ^ O'Connor, Shannon. "Rob Kazinsky Talks Siren, Pacific Rim and True Blood". Entertainment Monthly. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. ^ Brown, Phil (July 29, 2013). "Talking to ... Guillermo del Toro". TORO Magazine. Archived from the original on September 15, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim Clifton Collins Jr Interview". Flicks. July 9, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim: Diego Klattenhoff "Yancy Becket" On Set Interview". Screen Slam. July 1, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. ^ "Del Toro casts Perlman, Segura in Pacific Rim". globalpost.com. June 30, 2013. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved June 30, 2013. ^ "IMDb Resume for Jane Watson (VI)". IMDb. Retrieved September 16, 2015. ^ Pacific Rim (2013) – Full cast and crew ^ a b Watercutter, Angela (July 10, 2013). "Pacific Rim Is Literally the Most Awesome Movie of the Summer". wired.com. Retrieved July 10, 2013. ^ Del Toro Explains GLaDOS Voice in Pacific Rim - IGN, retrieved 2020-04-13 ^ "Del Toro got Valve's permission to use GlaDOS' voice in Pacific Rim". Engadget. Retrieved 2020-04-13. ^ a b c Mr. Beaks (July 8, 2013). "Mr. Beaks Talks PACIFIC RIM, World Building And Gargantuas With Guillermo del Toro And Travis Beacham! Part One Of Two!". aintitcool.com. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ Outlaw, Kofi (August 2012). "Charlie Hunnam Talks Love and Psychic Bonds in Pacific Rim". screenrant.com. Retrieved July 7, 2013. ^ Murray, Rebecca. "Director Guillermo del Toro Discusses Pacific Rim". movies.about.com. Retrieved June 20, 2013. ^ a b c Fear, David (July 9, 2013). "TONY Q&A: Pacific Rim's Guillermo del Toro". Time Out. Retrieved July 10, 2013. ^ Turek, Ryan (July 8, 2013). "Shock Interview: Guillermo del Toro on the Development, Destruction and Family-Friendly Pacific Rim". shocktillyoudrop.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Dimock, Wai Chee (July 27, 2013). "Pacific Rim: Guillermo del Toro's Fractal Shoes". Los Angeles Review of Books. Retrieved July 28, 2013. ^ Cullin, Liam (February 9, 2006). "Guillermo Del Toro Directing Carnival Row". empiremovies.com. Retrieved July 5, 2013. ^ "Monsters in the Mist" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2013. ^ Fleming, Mike (May 28, 2010). "Legendary Pictures Re-Teams With Clash Of The Titans Scribe On Pacific Rim". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 12, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2012. ^ Fleming Jr, Mike (July 28, 2010). "Guillermo Del Toro And James Cameron Ready To Climb 'Mountains Of Madness'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 21, 2013. ^ a b c d e Scheidt, Dave (July 11, 2012). "Exclusive Sneak Peak of the Costumes From Guillermo del Toro's Pacific Rim and Interview". The Huffington Post. Retrieved July 11, 2012. ^ a b Vespe, Eric (June 30, 2013). "Quint reports on the latest from Legendary Pictures! Pacific Rim, Mass Effect, Warcraft, Seventh Son, Godzilla and more! Plus a photo tour of the Kubrick Exhibit!". aintitcool.com. Ain't It Cool News. Retrieved July 1, 2013. ^ Fleming Jr, Mike (March 7, 2011). "Competition For Guillermo Del Toro's Next Picture: Legendary Preps 'Pacific Rim'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 21, 2013. ^ Fleming Jr, Mike (March 9, 2011). "Q&A: Guillermo Del Toro On Why He Will Next Direct Pacific Rim After At The Mountains Of Madness Fell Apart". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 21, 2013. ^ a b McIntyre, Gina. "Guillermo del Toro edges toward greater success with Pacific Rim". Hero Complex – movies, comics, pop culture. Los Angeles Times. ^ Kit, Boris (February 29, 2012). "Luther Creator Neil Cross Set to Grow Ghost House's Day of the Triffids Adaptation". hollywoodreporter.com. Retrieved April 21, 2013. ^ Kit, Boris (October 7, 2012). "Pacific Rim Writers Tapped for God of War Adaptation (Exclusive)". hollywoodreporter.com. Retrieved April 21, 2013. ^ "'Pacific Rim' Production Update From Guillermo del Toro". Screenrant. Retrieved August 31, 2013. ^ "Guillermo del Toro gives Update on PACIFIC RIM – Production has Begun". geektyrant. November 20, 2011. Retrieved February 20, 2012. ^ "Productions currently filming in Toronto" (PDF). toronto.ca. Toronto: Toronto Film and Television Office. January 26, 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 27, 2012. Retrieved February 19, 2012. ^ Turek, Ryan (November 29, 2011). "Guillermo Del Toro Offers Pacific Rim Update". Shock Till You Drop. Retrieved December 19, 2011. ^ Bettinger, Brendan. "New Video and Photos from the PACIFIC RIM Set Show How Guillermo del Toro Turned Toronto Into Tokyo". Collider.com. Retrieved June 27, 2013. ^ Cohen, David S. (May 29, 2013). "Inside Pacific Rim with Guillermo del Toro". variety.com. Retrieved May 30, 2013. ^ "Guillermo del Toro Talks PACIFIC RIM, Why They Used the RED EPIC & Didn't Do 3D; Reveals Blu-ray Will Have 30 Minutes of Deleted Scenes". Collider. ^ Shaefer, Sandy. "Guillermo del Toro: Pacific Rim Is Not Japanese Monster Movie Homage; No 3D". Screenrant. ^ Lesnick, Silas. "Guillermo del Toro Talks The Strain and Pacific Rim's 3D Conversion". Shock Till You Drop. ^ Cruz, Gilbert (July 10, 2013). "Pacific Rim's Guillermo del Toro on 3-D, Long Movies, and Mexican Matinees". vulture.com. Retrieved July 11, 2013. ^ Longshore, James (July 16, 2013). "Film review: Pacific Rim – Sit in the back". Romania-Insider.com. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2014. ^ a b Castro, Adam-Troy (July 17, 2012). "Why Del Toro warned Pacific Rim designers never to watch Godzilla". blastr.com. Retrieved July 1, 2013. ^ Johnson, Scott (July 13, 2013). "Pacific Rim After The Credits Spoiler". Comicbook.com. Retrieved July 27, 2014. ^ Clark, Noelene (August 2, 2012). "Guillermo del Toro wants Pacific Rim Kaiju to 'start from scratch'". herocomplex.latimes.com. Retrieved July 1, 2013. ^ Coyle, Jake (July 2, 2013). "Guillermo Del Toro's Pacific Rim Brings Back The Monster Movie". huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved July 3, 2013. ^ a b Anders, Charlie Jane (July 8, 2013). "Why Pacific Rim Doesn't Look Like Any Movie You've Ever Seen Before". io9.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ a b c d e f della Cava, Marco R. (July 9, 2013). "Pacific Rim: A monster challenge for special effects". usatoday.com. Retrieved July 11, 2013. ^ PACIFIC RIM Behind The Scenes: The Pilot Suits - Legacy Effects. YouTube. July 17, 2013. Retrieved September 16, 2015. ^ "Hybride Delivers VFX for Guillermo del Toro's Pacific Rim". itbusinessnet.com. August 1, 2013. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved August 2, 2013. ^ "Rodeo FX Once Again Teams with ILM to Deliver Innovative and "Incredibly Realistic" VFX for "Pacific Rim"". shootonline.com. July 30, 2013. ^ a b Cohen, David S. (May 29, 2013). "Pacific Rim Visual Effects Get Operatic Twist". variety.com. Retrieved June 14, 2013. ^ "32TEN Studios Provides Practical Effects for Pacific Rim". anw.com. July 15, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. ^ "Ramin Djawadi to Score Guillermo Del Toro's 'Pacific Rim'". filmmusicreporter.com. February 27, 2012. Retrieved July 24, 2014. ^ Weintraub, Steve 'Frosty' (August 8, 2012). "Guillermo del Toro Talks PACIFIC RIM Soundtrack and Collectables". collider.com. Retrieved June 26, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim on Amazon". ^ a b "'Pacific Rim' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. Retrieved June 26, 2013. ^ Vancheri, Barbara (July 12, 2013). "Actor gets choice role in Pacific Rim". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved July 14, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim Movie Score (2013) Review". The Action Elite. July 2, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2014. ^ Graydon, Danny (July 15, 2013). "Pacific Rim". Empire. Retrieved July 25, 2014. ^ Yang, Sherman (July 21, 2013). "Pacific Rim: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". MSN. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2014. ^ "Filmtracks: Pacific Rim (Ramin Djawadi)". Filmtracks.com. July 6, 2013. Retrieved July 25, 2014. ^ "Soundtracks: Jul 27, 2013". Billboard. Retrieved July 25, 2014. ^ a b "Pan Pacific Defense Corps". Panpacificdefense.com. Retrieved May 3, 2013. ^ Casey, Dan (March 30, 2013). "Wondercon: Pacific Rim: Tales From Year Zero Alex Ross Cover Revealed « Nerdist". Nerdist.com. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2013. ^ PacRim (December 24, 2012). "Pacific Rim Le film: Merchandising/collectibles". Pacificrimfilm.blogspot.com. Retrieved May 3, 2013. ^ Cohen, David S. (June 18, 2013). Pacific Rim: Man, Machines, and Monsters [Hardcover]. ISBN 978-1608871827. ^ "Ron Perlman Has Your Pacific Rim Kaiju Remedies Right Here!". dreadcentral.com. July 2, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2013. ^ "Youtube: Pacific Rim – Training Day". Maker Studios. July 12, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2013. ^ Irvine, Alex (2013). Pacific Rim: The Official Movie Novelization: Alexander Irvine: 9781781166789: Amazon.com: Books. ISBN 978-1781166789. ^ Picard, Chris (June 7, 2013). "Exclusive: First Look at Finished NECA Pacific Rim Figures!". Scified.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013. ^ "Release Schedule – NEW DATES & CHANGES". Box Office Mojo. March 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2012. ^ "A Week In Movies: Pacific Rim Launches". July 6, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013. ^ "New Releases for the Week of Oct 1". vudu.com. October 2, 2013. Retrieved October 10, 2013. ^ Picard, Chris (September 5, 2013). "Own Pacific Rim on BluRay and DvD October 15th!". Scified.com. Archived from the original on September 7, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim Collector's Edition (Blu-ray 3D + Blu-ray + DVD +UltraViolet Combo Pack) (2013)". ^ Tehee, Joshua (October 15, 2013). "Fresno Swede Fest founders help pitch 'Pacific Rim' DVD". The Fresno Bee. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2013. ^ Pacific Rim at The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved February 15, 2021. ^ Pacific Rim 4K Blu-ray, retrieved 2018-06-14 ^ Ray Subers (July 11, 2013). "Forecast: 'Pacific Rim' Goes to War With 'Grown Ups 2' This Weekend". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 1, 2021. ^ "Weekend Box Office Results for May 24-26, 2013". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 26, 2013. ^ Subers, Ray (July 21, 2013). "Weekend Report: 'Conjuring' Haunts First With Record Opening". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 23, 2015. ^ Subers, Ray (July 28, 2013). "Weekend Report: 'Wolverine' Bleeds, But Still Easily Leads". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 23, 2015. ^ Finke, Nikki (July 22, 2013). "Pacific Rim #1 Internationally Over Weekend". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved July 23, 2013. ^ Nancy Tartaglione (January 25, 2015). "'Hobbit' Storms China; 'Sniper' Takes Out More Records: International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 26, 2015. ^ McClintock, Pamela (August 4, 2013). "Box Office Report: Pacific Rim Scores Massive $45.2 Million China Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 4, 2013. ^ "Weekend Box Office: 'The Butler' Opens To $25m, 'Kick-Ass 2', 'Jobs', And 'Paranoia' Crash". Forbes. August 19, 2013. Retrieved August 19, 2013. ^ Bai Shi (Beijing Review) (February 9, 2014). "Hollywood Takes a Hit". english.entgroup.cn. EntGroup Inc. Retrieved February 10, 2014. ^ Schilling, Mark (August 14, 2013). "Pacific Rim Fails to Wow Auds". Variety. Retrieved August 14, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim Japan Box Office". Box Office Mojo. August 15, 2013. Retrieved August 15, 2013. ^ Pacific Rim at Metacritic. Red Ventures. Retrieved February 15, 2021. ^ "Pacific Rim". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 15, 2021. ^ Finke, Nikki (14 July 2013). "'Pacific Rim' #3 As 'Grown-Ups 2' Edged By #1 'Despicable Me 2' For Domestic Weekend". Deadline Hollywood. ^ Pamela McClintock (2013). "Box Office Report: 'Pacific Rim' Lags; 'Grown Ups 2' and 'Despicable Me 2' Vie for No. 1". The Hollywood Reporter. Mirroring strong reviews, Pacific Rim received an A- CinemaScore. ^ "CinemaScore". cinemascore.com. ^ Collin, Robbie (July 8, 2013). "Pacific Rim, review". telegraph.com. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ McCarthy, Todd (July 7, 2013). "Pacific Rim: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ Lumenick, Lou (July 9, 2013). "Pacific Rim baddies are big, but the heroes are better". Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ McWeeny, Drew (July 8, 2013). "Review: Guillermo Del Toro's Pacific Rim is an eccentric and emotional thrill". hitfix.com. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ Travers, Peter (July 11, 2013). "Peter Travers' Three-Star Review of Pacific Rim". rollingstone.com. Retrieved July 11, 2013. ^ Uhlich, Keith (July 8, 2013). "Pacific Rim: movie review (PG-13)". Time Out. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Zacharek, Stephanie (July 8, 2013). "Pacific Rim: Building a Better Blockbuster". villagevoice.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Roeper, Richard (July 12, 2013). "Pacific Rim Review". Reelz. Archived from the original on July 16, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2013. ^ Maltin, Leonard (July 12, 2013). "Pacific Rim Review". Reelz. Archived from the original on July 16, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2013. ^ Pulver, Andrew (July 8, 2013). "Pacific Rim – review". guardian.co.uk. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ Corliss, Richard (July 9, 2013). "Pacific Rim: Transformers Transcended". entertainment.time.com. Time. Retrieved July 10, 2013. ^ Chang, Justin (July 7, 2013). "Film Review: Pacific Rim". variety.com. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ Lane, Anthony (July 22, 2013). "Grim Tidings". The New Yorker. Retrieved July 23, 2015. ^ LaSalle, Mick (July 11, 2013). "'Pacific Rim' review: Humans don't deserve to win". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved July 23, 2015. ^ "Pacific Rim – Film Review". slantmagazine.com. July 8, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Duralde, Alonso (July 8, 2013). "Pacific Rim Review: There Be Monsters in Here Somewhere". thewrap.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Hoffman, Jordan (July 8, 2013). "Review: Pacific Rim". film.com. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Hardie, Giles (July 9, 2013). "Pacific Rim is an all-action monster with no tale". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved July 9, 2013. ^ Woerner, Meredith (February 4, 2013). "Pacific Rim gets a rave review from Rian Johnson, plus some stunning new images". io9.com. Retrieved June 30, 2013. ^ "Hideo Kojima Reviews Pacific Rim In Eight Tweets". July 5, 2013. Retrieved July 8, 2013. ^ "Metal Gear's Shinkawa Draws Pacific Rim Poster & Japan's Creators Laud Film". animenewsnetwork.com. July 10, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2013. ^ Gibson, William (July 20, 2013). "Pacific Rim, over 140 characters". tweetlonger.org. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2013. ^ Romano, Aja (August 18, 2013). "The Mako Mori Test: 'Pacific Rim' inspires a Bechdel Test alternative". The Daily Dot. Retrieved January 1, 2021. ^ Paraboo, Krystal (2014-01-28). "The Bechdel & Mako Mori Test". Women in Film and Television Vancouver Blog. Retrieved 2020-05-23. ^ "Pacific Rim 2: Steven S. DeKnight to Direct". Collider. March 23, 2016. ^ "'Pacific Rim 2' Gets 2018 Release Date". ^ "Pacific Rim game revealed". GameSpot. ^ "Pacific Rim for Xbox360". Metacritic. Retrieved August 7, 2013. ^ "Pacific Rim for iPhone". Metacritic. Retrieved August 7, 2013. ^ Ramos, Dino-Ray (8 November 2018). "Netflix Unveils 'Pacific Rim', 'Altered Carbon' & More In New Lineup Of Anime Originals". Deadline. Retrieved 8 November 2018. ^ "NETFLIX UNVEILS 17 NEW ORIGINALS FROM ASIA". Netflix Media Center. Retrieved 8 November 2018. ^ "Netflix Teases Pacific Rim: The Black Anime Series for 2021". Anime News Network. Retrieved 27 October 2020. ^ "Video: "Pacific Rim: The Black" - Date Announce - Netflix". TheFutonCritic.com. Retrieved 1 February 2021. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Official website Pacific Rim at IMDb Pacific Rim title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Pacific Rim at AllMovie Pacific Rim at Box Office Mojo v t e Pacific Rim Films Pacific Rim (2013) Pacific Rim: Uprising (2018) Television Pacific Rim: The Black (2021) Music Pacific Rim: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Pacific Rim: Uprising – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Video games Pacific Rim See also Travis Beacham Guillermo del Toro Mako Mori test v t e Guillermo del Toro Filmography Unrealized projects Awards and nominations Films Directed Doña Lupe (short; 1985) Geometria (short; 1987) Cronos (1993) Mimic (1997) The Devil's Backbone (2001) Blade II (2002) Hellboy (2004) Pan's Labyrinth (2006) Hellboy II: The Golden Army (2008) Pacific Rim (2013) Crimson Peak (2015) The Shape of Water (2017) Pinocchio (2021) Nightmare Alley (2021) Written Don't Be Afraid of the Dark (2010; also produced) The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012) The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug (2013) The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies (2014) Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark (2019; story/also produced) The Witches (2020; also produced) Novels The Strain (2009) The Fall (2010) The Night Eternal (2011) Trollhunters (2015) The Shape of Water (2018) Pan's Labyrinth (2019) Television "Treehouse of Horror XXIV" (2013; opening sequence) The Strain (2014–17) "Night Zero" Tales of Arcadia Trollhunters (2016–18) 3Below (2018–19) Wizards (2020) 10 After Midnight (TBA) Video games Hellboy: The Science of Evil (2008) P.T. (2014) Trollhunters: Defenders of Arcadia (2020) Sundown (canceled) Insane (canceled) Silent Hills (canceled) Related articles Cha Cha Cha Films Mirada Studios The Hobbit (film series) The Strain (franchise) Film portal United States portal