For other uses, see Pallas (Greek mythology). Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Aquatic deities Amphitrite Ceto Glaucus Nereus Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Tethys Thetis Triton Nereids Naiads Oceanids Potamoi Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurae Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Limnades Lampads Meliae Melinoë Naiads Napaeae Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides v t e In Greek mythology, Pallas (/ˈpæləs/; Ancient Greek: Παλλάς) was the daughter of Triton, son of Poseidon and messenger of the seas. Mythology[edit] After Athena was born fully armed from Zeus' forehead, Triton, acting as a foster parent to the goddess, raised her alongside his own daughter, Pallas. The sea god taught both girls the arts of war. During an athletics festival, Pallas and Athena fought with spears in a friendly mock battle in which the victor would be whoever managed to disarm her opponent. At the beginning of the fight, Athena got the upper hand, until Pallas took over. Before she could win, Zeus, who was in attendance, fearing to see his own daughter lose, distracted Pallas with the Aegis, which she had once shown interest in. Pallas, stunned in awe, stood still as Athena, expecting her to dodge, impaled Pallas, accidentally. Out of sadness and regret, she created the palladium, a statue in the likeness of Pallas, and wrapped the aegis, which she had feared, about the breast of it, and set it up beside Zeus and honored it.[1] Later, Athena took on the title Pallas as tribute to her late friend.[citation needed] This story about Athena and Pallas inspired a yearly festival in Libya dedicated to the goddess. A passage by Herodotus recounts this custom:[2] "Next to these Machlyes are the Auseans; these and the Machlyes, separated by the Triton, live on the shores of the Tritonian lake. The Machlyes wear their hair long behind, the Auseans in front. They celebrate a yearly festival of Athena, where their maidens are separated into two bands and fight each other with stones and sticks, thus (they say) honoring in the way of their ancestors that native goddess whom we call Athena. Maidens who die of their wounds are called false virgins. Before the girls are set fighting, the whole people choose the fairest maid, and arm her with a Corinthian helmet and Greek panoply, to be then mounted on a chariot and drawn all along the lake shore. With what armor they equipped their maidens before Greeks came to live near them, I cannot say; but I suppose the armor was Egyptian; for I maintain that the Greeks took their shield and helmet from Egypt." References[edit] ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus. Bibliotheca, 3.12.3. ^ Herodotus. The Histories, 4.180.1-4. Translated by A. D. Godley. Cambridge. Harvard University Press. 1920. External links[edit] Pallas from the Theoi Project