Not to be confused with Pantheon (mythical creature). This article is about the mythical creature. For other uses, see Panther (disambiguation). Ancient Greek art depicting Dionysus riding a panther A Panther is a creature in ancient legend that resembles a big cat with a multicoloured hide. Under medieval belief, after feasting, the panther will sleep in a cave for a total of three days. After this period ends, the panther roars, in the process emitting a sweet smelling odor. This odor draws in any creatures who smell it (the dragon being the only creature immune),[1] they are eaten by the panther, and the cycle begins again. The ancient Greeks believed the panther was one of the favored mounts of the god Dionysus. Other names for this creature are pantera, pantere, and love cervere. Contents 1 Illustration 2 Heraldry 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Illustration[edit] Heraldry from Raglan Castle, Wales, United Kingdom, featuring an example of a non-feline panther[2] Usually depicted as a type of cat, the panther was at times depicted in other forms. It was depicted as a donkey, as a composite creature with a horned head, long neck and a horse's body, and as a host of other forms.[1] (The word "panther", in Greek, could be interpreted as "every wild beast", supporting the idea of a composite creature.) This was mostly because those involved did not know what a panther should look like;[1] but, in some instances, this was due to cultural influences. In Germany in particular, the panther is often depicted in heraldry as a creature with four horns, cow's ears and a fiery red tongue. An example of the former is the flag and coat of arms of the city of Cres, Croatia.[3] Heraldry[edit] A panther dog cat as described in medieval bestiaries and used in heraldry In heraldry the panther is commonly used in a form known as the Panther Incensed. In this form, the panther is depicted with flames coming from its mouth and ears, representing the panther's sweet odour.[1] The heraldic panther is usually shown with coloured spots (semée of roundels), which are frequently blue and red. The arms of the Worshipful Company of Dyers, however, have as supporters two panthers "… incensed Gules crowned Or and semée of Roundels Gules, Azure, Vert, Purpure and Sable" (with red flames, a gold crown and red, blue, green, purple and black spots). The panther was used by Henry VI of England as his badge and by other members of the House of Lancaster. A panther which is all silver (argent) is seen in the coat of arms of the Austrian province of Styria. See also[edit] Cath Palug Jaguars in Mesoamerican cultures Tepeyollotl Underwater panther Werecat Were-jaguar References[edit] ^ a b c d "Panther". The Medieval Bestiary. 2011. Retrieved 2017-11-07. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2006-11-20. Retrieved 2006-11-04.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Raglan Castle ^ Željko Heimer (2016). "Cres (Town, Primorje-Gorski Kotar County, Croatia)". Flags of the World. Retrieved 2017-11-07. External links[edit] Media related to Panthers in heraldry Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons The use of the panther as a symbol in tattoo designs v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources