Collection of gods of a particular religion or mythos For other uses, see Pantheon (disambiguation). Look up pantheon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Illustration of various deities associated with polytheistic pantheons from William Cooke's The Pantheon - or, fabulous history of the heathen gods, goddesses, heroes, &c. Mythology Albanian Arabian Armenian Australian Austronesian Aztec Amazigh Baltic (Latvian - Lithuanian - Prussian) Basque Bantu Buddhist Catalan Cantabrian Celtic Christian Chinese Egyptian English Estonian Finnish French Georgian mythology Germanic (Frankish - Norse) Greek Guanche Guarani Hindu Hittite Hungarian Inca Irish mythology Islamic Japanese Jewish Korean Kangleicha Lusitanian Maasai Malagasy Maya Mbuti Mesopotamian Micronesian Mongol Native American Ossetian Persian Philippine Polynesian Roman Proto-Indo-European Romanian Scottish Slavic Tibetan Turkic Uralic Vietnamese Welsh See also Folklore Comparative religion Religion and mythology Symbolism Theology List of mythologies v t e A pantheon is the particular set of all gods of any individual polytheistic religion, mythology, or tradition.[1] Contents 1 Significance 2 Evolution of pantheons 3 Extension of the concept into structures and celebrities 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading Significance[edit] The word, pantheon derives from Greek πάνθεον pantheon, literally "(a temple) of all gods", "of or common to all gods" from πᾶν pan- "all" and θεός theos "god". A pantheon of gods is a common element of polytheistic societies, and the nature of a society's pantheon can be considered a reflection of that society: A pantheon is an overview of a given culture's gods and goddesses and reflects not only the society's values but also its sense of itself. A pantheon directed by a thunderbolt wielding autocrat might suggest a patriarchy and the valuing of warrior skills. A pantheon headed by a great-mother goddess could suggest a village-based agricultural society. To confront the pantheon of the Egyptians is to confront a worldview marked by a sense of death and resurrection and the agricultural importance of the cycles of nature. The Greek pantheon is a metaphor for a pragmatic view of life that values art, beauty, and the power of the individual, and that is somewhat skeptical about human nature.[2] Some well-known historical polytheistic pantheons include the Sumerian gods and the Egyptian gods, and the classical-attested pantheon which includes the ancient Greek religion and Roman religion.[citation needed] Post-classical polytheistic religions include Norse Æsir and Vanir, the Yoruba Orisha, the Aztec gods, and many others. Today, most historical polytheistic religions are referred to as "mythology".[3] Evolution of pantheons[edit] Scholars such as Jaan Puhvel, J. P. Mallory, and Douglas Q. Adams have reconstructed aspects of the ancient Proto-Indo-European religion, from which the religions of the various Indo-European peoples derive, and that this religion was an essentially naturalist numenistic religion.[citation needed] An example of a religious notion from this shared past is the concept of *dyēus, which is attested in several distinct religious systems.[citation needed] In many civilizations, pantheons tended to grow over time.[citation needed] Deities first worshipped as the patrons of cities or places came to be collected together as empires extended over larger territories. Conquests could lead to the subordination of the elder culture's pantheon to a newer one, as in the Greek Titanomachia, and possibly also the case of the Æsir and Vanir in the Norse mythos.[citation needed] Cultural exchange could lead to "the same" deity being renowned in two places under different names, as seen with the Greeks, Etruscans, and Romans, and also to the cultural transmission of elements of an extraneous religion into a local cult, as with worship of the ancient Egyptian deity Osiris, which was later followed in ancient Greece. Max Weber's 1922 opus Economy and Society discusses tendency in the ancient Greek philosophers to interpret gods worshiped in the pantheons of other cultures as "equivalent to and so identical with the deities of the moderately organized Greek pantheon".[4] In other instances, however, national pantheons were consolidated or simplified into fewer gods, or into a single god with power over all of the areas originally assigned to a pantheon.[citation needed] For example, in the ancient Near East during the first millennium BCE, Syrian and Palestinian tribes worshiped much smaller pantheons than had been developed in Egypt and Mesopotamia.[5] Weber also identified the link between a pantheon of gods and the development of monotheism, proposing that the domination of a pantheon by a particular god within that pantheon was a step towards followers of the pantheon seeing that god as "an international or universal deity, a transnational god of the entire world".[4] The first known instance of a pantheon being consolidated into a single god, or discarded in favor of a single god, was with the development of the short-lived practice of Atenism in ancient Egypt, with that role being accorded to the sun god.[6] A similar process is thought to have taken place with respect to the Israelite deity Yahweh, who, "as a typical West Semitic deity... would have four or five compatriot gods in attendance as he became the national high god".[5] The concept of a pantheon of gods has been widely imitated in Twentieth-century fantasy literature and role-playing games like Dungeons & Dragons. These uses tend to borrow heavily from historical patterns. In these contexts, it is considered important for the writer to construct pantheon of gods that fits the genre, where the characteristics of the gods are in balance so that none of them is able to overwhelm the story, and so that the actions of the characters are not overwhelmed by the machinations of the gods.[7] Extension of the concept into structures and celebrities[edit] A pantheon in its sense as a "temple", this one built in 2nd-century Rome In order to avoid the difficulty of giving an exhaustive list of deities when devoting a temple or sacred building, a structure explicitly dedicated to "all deities" also came to be referred to as a "Pantheon".[8] The best known of such structures is the Pantheon of Rome, first built by Marcus Agrippa as part of a complex created by him on his own property in the Campus Martius in 29–19 BC.[9] The building standing today was constructed on the same site around 126 CE. It was dedicated to "all gods" as a gesture embracing the religious syncretism in the increasingly multicultural Roman Empire, with subjects worshipping gods from many cultures and traditions. The building was later renovated for use as a Christian church in 609 under Pope Boniface IV.[10] [T]he relation between the building and the primary reference point of the term 'pantheon', the pantheon of the gods, has always been a matter of the greatest uncertainty. By the sixteenth century these two aspects, the building and the grouping of gods, had become merged, to the extent that the building in Rome became the principal model for subsequent 'pantheons'.[8] Since the 16th century, "pantheon" has also been used in a secular sense to refer to the set of a society's exalted persons—initially including heroic figures, and later extending to celebrities, generally.[11] Lord Byron drew this connection after viewing the busts of famous historical figures in the Roman Pantheon, writing in Childe Harold's Pilgrimage of how he wished to be at the center of an English Pantheon, and thereby associated with divinity.[12] The Pantheon "thus imbues the modern with the aura of the divine", and "models the interplay of ancient and modern forms of fame".[12] This trend continued into modern times, with the word "pantheon" 'of or for the gods' being reflected in the journalistic meme that refers to financial titans as "Masters of the Universe". For example: Francis Ford Coppola has been described as a member of "that revered pantheon of independent movie directors, which broke the standard Hollywood studio mould as the 1960s expired".[13] See also[edit] Lists of deities List of pantheons Notes[edit] ^ "pantheon". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Christopher R. Fee, Gods, Heroes, & Kings: The Battle for Mythic Britain (2004), p. 13. ^ Eugenie C. Scott, Evolution Vs. Creationism: An Introduction (2009), p. 58. ^ a b Max Weber, The Sociology of Religion (1922), p. 23. ^ a b Robert Karl Gnuse, No Other Gods: Emergent Monotheism in Israel (1997), p. 200. ^ Robert Karl Gnuse, No Other Gods: Emergent Monotheism in Israel (1997), p. 167. ^ William Sims Bainbridge, eGods: Faith versus Fantasy in Computer Gaming (2013), p. 57. ^ a b Edmund Thomas, "From the pantheon of the gods to the Pantheon of Rome", in Matthew Craske, ed., Pantheons: Transformations of a Monumental Idea (2004), p. 11. ^ Dio, Cassius. "Roman History". p. 53.23.3. ^ John the Deacon, Monumenta Germaniae Historia (1848) 7.8.20, quoted in MacDonald, William L. (1976). The Pantheon: Design, Meaning, and Progeny. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 139. ISBN 0-674-01019-1. ^ Matthew Craske and Richard Wrigley, "Introduction", in Matthew Craske, ed., Pantheons: Transformations of a Monumental Idea (2004), pp. 1–2. ^ a b Clara Tuite, Lord Byron and Scandalous Celebrity (2015), pp. 140–141. ^ Simon Warner, Text and Drugs and Rock 'n' Roll: The Beats and Rock Culture (2013), p. 452. Further reading[edit] Bouwers, Eveline G. (2012), Public Pantheons in Revolutionary Europe. Comparing Cultures of Remembrance, c. 1790–1840. PalgraveMacmillan, ISBN 978-0-230-29471-4. Wrigley, Richard & Craske, Matthew (2004), Pantheons: Transformations of a Monumental Idea. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., ISBN 0-7546-0808-5. v t e Lists of mythological figures By geography Afghan African Albanian Arabian Armenian Australian Aboriginal Aztec Balkan Basque Batak Buddhist Canaanite Celtic Chinese Egyptian Estonian Etruscan Georgian Germanic Greek Guanche Haudenosaunee Hawaiian Hebridean Hindu Hittite Indonesian Inuit Irish Japanese Komi Korean Lakota Lithuanian Māori Māʻohi Maya Mesopotamian Micronesian Mycenaean Native American Ossetian Persian Philippine Roman Sami Samoan Slavic Turkic Tuvaluan Vainakh Yoruba By association Agriculture Art Chaos Chthonic Death Earth Fate and Time Fertility Fire Health Hunting King of the Gods Kingship Knowledge Law and Justice Light Liminal and Psychopomps Luck Love and Lust Magic and Prophecy Moon Nations Nature Night Rain Sky Smithing Sun Thunder Tree Trickery Vegetation War Water Weather Wind Portal Category v t e Religion Major religious groups and denominations1 Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Samaritanism Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites/Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelders Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheranism Methodism Holiness Nondenominational Pentecostalism/Charismatic Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric Independent Catholicism Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students/Jehovah's Witnesses British Israelism Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunni Ash'ari Maturidi Traditionalist theology Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shia Twelver Zaidiyyah Isma'ilism Alawis Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavia Quranism Non-denominational list Others Bábism Azali Baháʼí Druze Ali-Illahism Mandaeism Rastafari Dharmic Hinduism Vaishnavism/Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Siddhantism Kashmir Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan/Zen/Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Others Ayyavazhi Jainism Digambara Śvētāmbara Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Mazdans Zoroastrianism Yazidism Yarsanism Indo-European Armenian Baltic Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism Italo-Roman Kalash Ossetian Romanian Slavic Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Mordvin Sámi Udmurt Altaic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Chinese Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Japanese Shinto list Shugendō Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Austroasiatic Vietnamese Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Momolianism Javanese Kejawèn Karo Pemena Malaysian Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan African Traditional Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Berber Guanche church Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinani San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Native American Abenaki Anishinaabe Blackfoot Californian Miwok Ohlone Pomo Cherokee Chilote Choctaw Creek Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Hopi Iroquois Longhouse Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lakota Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Midewiwin Muisca Native American Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Tsimshian Ute Zuni Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Inuit Papuan Siberian Recent Anthroposophy Brahmoism Discordianism Eckankar Falun Gong Fourth Way Goddess Japanese Jediism Meivazhi Modekngei Neopaganism Reconstructionism Wicca list Neoshamanism New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Satanism Scientology Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga Transcendental Meditation UFO religion Raëlism Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Note: 1 The main source: Eliade, Mircea, ed. (1987). The Encyclopedia of Religion. 1–16. New York: MacMillan. Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Harappan Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Mesopotamian Sumerian Babylonian Semitic Canaanite Punic Yahwism Arabian Somali Hurrian Urartu Etruscan Basque Georgian Vainakh Proto-Indo-European Proto-Indo-Iranian Vedic Iranian Hittite Armenian Paleo-Balkan Albanian Illyrian Thracian Dacian Greek Mysteries Orphism Gnosticism Hermeticism Greco-Buddhism Roman Imperial cult Gallo-Roman Mithraism Manichaeism Mazdakism Scythian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Celtic Baltic Slavic Finnish Hungarian Ainu Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Cook Islands Rapa Nui Tongan Inca Olmec Zapotec Fuegian Selk'nam Guanche Jamaican Maroon Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Clergy Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Ethnic Faith Fire Folk religion God Meditation Monasticism monk nun Mysticism Mythology Nature Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual liturgy sacrifice Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Truth Water Worship Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Evolutionary origin Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Theology Theories Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clergy monasticism ordination Conversion evangelism missionary proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom pluralism syncretism toleration universalism Fundamentalism Growth Happiness Homosexuality Minorities National church National religiosity levels Populations Religiocentrism Schism Science State Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence persecution terrorism war Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Humanistic Judaism Irreligion by country LaVeyan Satanism Objectivism Secular humanism Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Index Outline Timeline Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Mass gatherings New religious movements Organizations Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Category Portal