American funk band most prominent during the 1970s Not to be confused with Funkadelic or Parliament-Funkadelic. Parliament Background information Origin Plainfield, New Jersey, U.S. Genres Funk R&B psychedelic soul[1] Years active 1968–1970, 1974–1980, 2018 Labels Casablanca (1974-1980) Invictus (1968-1970) C Kunspyruhzy (2018) Def Jam (2021-present) Associated acts The Parliaments Funkadelic Bootsy's Rubber Band Past members George Clinton Ray Davis Clarence "Fuzzy" Haskins Calvin Simon Grady Thomas Billy Bass Nelson Eddie Hazel Tawl Ross Tiki Fulwood Mickey Atkins Bernie Worrell Bootsy Collins Cordell Mosson Rodney "Skeet" Curtis Garry Shider Prakash John Tyrone Lampkin Glenn Goins Michael Hampton Michael Clip Payne Debbie Wright Gary "Muddbone" Cooper Jerome Brailey Fred Wesley Maceo Parker Michael Brecker Randy Brecker Rick Gardner Reunald "Renny" Jones Jeanette Washington Mallia Franklin- Queen of Funk Dawn Silva Lynn Mabry Ron Ford Shirley Hayden Greg Thomas Larry Heckstall Walter "Junie" Morrison Robert "P-Nut" Johnson Ruth Copeland Warning: Page using Template:Infobox musical artist with unknown parameter "background" (this message is shown only in preview). Parliament was an American funk band formed in the late 1960s by George Clinton as part of his Parliament-Funkadelic collective. More commercial and less rock-oriented than its sister act Funkadelic, Parliament drew on science-fiction and outlandish performances in their work.[2] The band scored a number of Top 10 hits, including the million-selling 1976 single "Give Up the Funk (Tear the Roof off the Sucker)," and Top 40 albums such as Mothership Connection (1975). Contents 1 History 2 Discography 3 References 4 External links History[edit] Parliament was originally the Parliaments, a doo-wop vocal group based at a Plainfield, New Jersey barbershop. The group was formed in the late 1950s and included George Clinton, Ray Davis, Fuzzy Haskins, Calvin Simon, and Grady Thomas. Clinton was the group leader and manager. The group scored a hit single in 1967 with "(I Wanna) Testify" (co-written by Clinton) on Revilot Records. To capitalize on this chart success, Clinton formed a touring band, featuring teenage barbershop employee Billy Nelson on bass and his friend Eddie Hazel on guitar, with the lineup eventually rounded out by Tawl Ross on guitar, Tiki Fulwood on drums, and Mickey Atkins on organ. During a contractual dispute with Revilot, Clinton temporarily lost the rights to the name "The Parliaments", and signed the ensemble to Westbound Records as Funkadelic, which Clinton positioned as a funk-rock band featuring the five touring musicians with the five Parliaments singers as uncredited guests. With Funkadelic as a recording and touring entity in its own right, in 1970 Clinton relaunched the singing group, now known as Parliament, at first featuring the same ten members. Clinton was now the leader of two different acts, Parliament and Funkadelic, which featured the same members but were marketed as creating two different types of funk. The Parliament album entitled Osmium was released on Invictus Records in 1970, and was later reissued on CD with non-album tracks as both Rhenium and First Thangs. Osmium featured a mostly psychedelic soul sound that was more similar to the Funkadelic albums of the period than to the later Parliament albums. The song "The Breakdown" was released separately as a single, and reached #30 on the R&B charts in 1971. Due to continuing contractual problems and the fact that Funkadelic releases were more successful at the time, Clinton temporarily abandoned the name Parliament (which he revived in 1974). Following Osmium, the lineup of Parliament-Funkadelic began going through many changes and was expanded significantly, with the addition of important members such as keyboardist Bernie Worrell in 1970, singer/guitarist Garry Shider in 1971, and bassist Bootsy Collins (recruited from the James Brown backing band) in 1972. Dozens of singers and musicians would contribute to future Parliament-Funkadelic releases. Clinton relaunched Parliament in 1974 and signed the act to Casablanca Records. Parliament, now augmented by the Horny Horns (also recruited from James Brown's band) was positioned as a smoother R&B-based funk ensemble with intricate horn and vocal arrangements, and as a counterpoint to the guitar-based funk-rock of Funkadelic. By this point, Parliament and Funkadelic were touring as a combined entity known as Parliament-Funkadelic or simply P-Funk (which also became the catch-all term for George Clinton's rapidly growing stable of funk artists). The album Up for the Down Stroke was released in 1974, with Chocolate City following in 1975. Both performed strongly on the Billboard R&B charts and were moderately successful on the Pop charts. Parliament began its period of greatest mainstream success with the concept album Mothership Connection (1975), the lyrics of which launched much of the P-Funk mythology. The subsequent albums The Clones of Dr. Funkenstein (1976), Funkentelechy vs. the Placebo Syndrome (1977), and Motor Booty Affair (1978) all reached high on both the R&B and Pop charts, while Funkadelic was also experiencing significant mainstream success. Parliament scored the #1 R&B singles "Flash Light" in 1977 and "Aqua Boogie" in 1978. The rapidly expanding ensemble of musicians and singers in the Parliament-Funkadelic enterprise, as well as Clinton's problematic management practices, began to take their toll by the late 1970s. Original Parliaments members Fuzzy Haskins, Calvin Simon, and Grady Thomas, who had been with Clinton since the barbershop days in the late 1950s, departed acrimoniously in 1977, after disputes over Clinton's management. Other important group members like singer/guitarist Glenn Goins and drummer Jerome Brailey left Parliament-Funkadelic in 1978 after disputes over Clinton's management. Two further Parliament albums, Gloryhallastoopid (1979) and Trombipulation (1980) were less successful than the albums from the group's prime 1975-1978 period. In the early 1980s, with legal difficulties arising from the multiple names used by multiple groups, as well as a shakeup at Casablanca Records, George Clinton dissolved Parliament and Funkadelic as recording and touring entities. However, many of the musicians in later versions of the two groups remained employed by Clinton. Clinton continued to release new albums regularly, sometimes under his own name and sometimes under the name George Clinton & the P-Funk All-Stars. The P-Funk All-Stars continued to record and tour into the 1990s and 2000s, and regularly perform classic Parliament songs. Parliament reformed in January 2018 and released the song "I'm Gon Make U Sick O'Me", which features the rapper Scarface.[3] This was the first new Parliament release in 38 years. Clinton also announced the title of a new Parliament album, Medicaid Fraud Dogg, which was released on May 22, 2018.[4] Most of the 23 tracks on the album were written by Clinton in collaboration with his son, Tracey Lewis. Guest musicians on the album include former long-time James Brown collaborators Fred Wesley and Alfred "Pee Wee" Ellis. Discography[edit] Main article: Parliament discography References[edit] Liner notes to Music For Your Mother by Rob Bowman, 1992. ^ Pilchak, Angela M. (2005). Contemporary Musicians. 49. Gale. p. 77. ISBN 978-0-7876-8062-6. ^ Bush, John. "Parliament -Biography & History". AllMusic. Retrieved 26 January 2018. ^ Kreps, Daniel (17 January 2018). "Hear Parliament's First New Song in Decades 'I'm Gon Make U Sick O'Me'". rollingstone.com. ^ "George Clinton's Parliament Release First New Album in 38 Years: Listen to 'Medicaid Fraud Dogg'". billboard.com. External links[edit] The Motherpage. History of Parliament/Funkadelic (at the P-Funk portal NewFunkTimes.com). Parliament discography at Discogs v t e George Clinton Studio albums Computer Games You Shouldn't-Nuf Bit Fish Some of My Best Jokes Are Friends Skeletons in the Closet The Cinderella Theory Hey, Man, Smell My Finger Dope Dogs T.A.P.O.A.F.O.M. How Late Do U Have 2BB4UR Absent? George Clinton and His Gangsters of Love Live albums The Mothership Connection – Live from Houston Live at the Beverly Theater Mothership Connection Newberg Session Singles "Atomic Dog" "Do Fries Go with That Shake?" "If Anybody Gets Funked Up (It's Gonna Be You)" George Clinton Family Series albums Go Fer Yer Funk Plush Funk P Is the Funk Testing Positive 4 the Funk A Fifth of Funk The Best Related Funkadelic (discography) P-Funk (members) Parliament-Funkadelic The Parliaments Parliament v t e Parliament-Funkadelic Jerome "Bigfoot" Brailey George Clinton Bootsy Collins Ray Davis Ramon "Tiki" Fulwood Glenn Goins Michael Hampton Clarence "Fuzzy" Haskins Eddie Hazel Walter "Junie" Morrison Cordell "Boogie" Mosson "Billy Bass" Nelson Garry Shider Calvin Simon Grady Thomas Bernie Worrell Parliament discography Osmium Up for the Down Stroke Chocolate City Mothership Connection The Clones of Dr. Funkenstein Live: P-Funk Earth Tour Funkentelechy vs. the Placebo Syndrome Motor Booty Affair Gloryhallastoopid Trombipulation Medicaid Fraud Dogg Funkadelic discography Funkadelic Free Your Mind... and Your Ass Will Follow Maggot Brain America Eats Its Young Cosmic Slop Standing on the Verge of Getting It On Let's Take It to the Stage Tales of Kidd Funkadelic Hardcore Jollies One Nation Under a Groove Uncle Jam Wants You Connections & Disconnections The Electric Spanking of War Babies Live: Meadowbrook, Rochester, Michigan – 12th September 1971 By Way of the Drum Toys U.S. Music with Funkadelic First Ya Gotta Shake the Gate George Clinton and Parliament-Funkadelic Computer Games Urban Dancefloor Guerillas You Shouldn't-Nuf Bit Fish Some of My Best Jokes Are Friends R&B Skeletons in the Closet The Mothership Connection – Live from Houston The Cinderella Theory Live at the Beverly Theater Hey, Man, Smell My Finger Dope Dogs Mothership Connection Newberg Session T.A.P.O.A.F.O.M. Live 1976–1993 How Late Do U Have 2BB4UR Absent? George Clinton and His Gangsters of Love Live...Capitol Theatre 1978 Bootsy Collins Stretchin' Out in Bootsy's Rubber Band Ahh... The Name Is Bootsy, Baby! Bootsy? Player of the Year This Boot Is Made for Fonk-N Ultra Wave The One Giveth, the Count Taketh Away What's Bootsy Doin'? Jungle Bass Blasters of the Universe Lord of the Harvest Keepin' dah Funk Alive 4-1995 Fresh Outta 'P' University Live in Louisville 1978 Play with Bootsy Live in Concert 1998 Live in Oklahoma 1976 Christmas Is 4 Ever Tha Funk Capital of the World Eddie Hazel Game, Dames and Guitar Thangs Rest in P The Horny Horns A Blow for Me, a Toot to You Say Blow by Blow Backwards The Final Blow Bernie Worrell All the Woo in the World Funk of Ages Pieces of Woo: The Other Side Blacktronic Science Free Agent: A Spaced Odyssey The Brides of Funkenstein Funk or Walk Never Buy Texas from a Cowboy Live at the Howard Theatre Parlet Pleasure Principle Invasion of the Booty Snatchers Play Me or Trade Me Clarence "Fuzzy" Haskins A Whole Nother Thang (1976) Radio Active (1978) A Whole Nother Radio Active Thang (1994) Ruth Copeland Self Portrait (1970) I Am What I Am (1971) Take Me to Baltimore (1976) Mutiny Mutiny on the Mamaship (1979) Funk Plus the One (1980) A Night Out With the Boys (1983) Aftershock 2005 (1996) Other spinoffs Quazar (1978) Sweat Band (1980) Federation of Tackheads (1985) Lifestyles of the Roach and Famous (1988) Out of the Dark (1993) Heavy Metal Funkason (1998) Filmography PCU Parliament-Funkadelic: One Nation Under a Groove George Clinton: The Mothership Connection Related articles Parliament Funkadelic House Guests Godmoma Kiddo Original P The Pacemakers The Parliaments Zapp List of P-Funk members Pedro Bell Armen Boladian Bridgeport Music Children of Production Bill Laswell Overton Loyd P-Funk P-Funk Earth Tour P-Funk Mothership P-Funk mythology P-Funk projects Uncle Jam Records Category v t e Parliament George Clinton Ray Davis Clarence "Fuzzy" Haskins Calvin Simon Grady Thomas Billy Bass Nelson Eddie Hazel Tawl Ross Tiki Fulwood Mickey Atkins Bernie Worrell Bootsy Collins Cordell Mosson Rodney "Skeet" Curtis Garry Shider Prakash John Tyrone Lampkin Glenn Goins Michael Hampton Debbie Wright Gary "Muddbone" Cooper Jerome Brailey Fred Wesley Maceo Parker Michael Brecker Randy Brecker Rick Gardner Reunald "Renny" Jones Jeanette Washington Dawn Silva Lynn Mabry Ron Ford Shirley Hayden Greg Thomas Larry Heckstall Walter "Junie" Morrison Robert "P-Nut" Johnson Studio albums Osmium (First Thangs/Rhenium) Up for the Down Stroke Chocolate City Mothership Connection The Clones of Dr. Funkenstein Funkentelechy Vs. the Placebo Syndrome Motor Booty Affair Gloryhallastoopid Trombipulation Medicaid Fraud Dogg Live albums Live: P-Funk Earth Tour Live 1976–1993 Compilations Parliament's Greatest Hits The Best Nonstop Mix Compilation Tear the Roof Off 1974–1980 20th Century Masters – The Millennium Collection: The Best of Parliament Gold The Casablanca Years: 1974–1980 Singles "Up For The Down Stroke" "Testify" "Chocolate City" "Do That Stuff" "Tear The Roof Off The Sucker (Give Up The Funk)" "Mothership Connection (Star Child)" "Do That Stuff" "Dr. Funkenstein" "Fantasy Is Reality" "Bop Gun (Endangered Species)" "Flashlight" "Funkentelechy" "Aqua Boogie (A Psychoalphadiscobetabioaquadoloop)" "Party People" Related Discography v t e Funkadelic George Clinton Ray Davis Clarence "Fuzzy" Haskins Calvin Simon Billy Bass Nelson Eddie Hazel Tawl Ross Tiki Fulwood Mickey Atkins Bernie Worrell Grady Thomas Harold Beane Garry Shider Bootsy Collins Catfish Collins Cordell "Boogie" Mosson Prakash John Tyrone Lampkin Ron Bykowski Leon Patillo Jimmy Calhoun Gary Bronson Michael Hampton Glenn Goins Jerome Brailey Dawn Silva Walter Morrison Rodney Curtis Mallia Franklin Larry Fratangelo DeWayne McKnight David Spradley Studio albums Funkadelic Free Your Mind... and Your Ass Will Follow Maggot Brain America Eats Its Young Cosmic Slop Standing on the Verge of Getting It On Let's Take It to the Stage Hardcore Jollies Tales of Kidd Funkadelic One Nation Under a Groove Uncle Jam Wants You Connections & Disconnections The Electric Spanking of War Babies By Way of the Drum First Ya Gotta Shake the Gate Live albums Live: Meadowbrook, Rochester, Michigan – 12th September 1971 Compilation albums Music for Your Mother: Funkadelic 45s Motor City Madness: The Ultimate Funkadelic Westbound Compilation The Whole Funk & Nothing but the Funk: Definitive Funkadelic 1976–1981 Toys Singles "Get Off Your Ass and Jam" "One Nation Under a Groove" "(Not Just) Knee Deep" "The Electric Spanking of War Babies" Related Discography "Let's Take It to the Stage" Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125