Nymphs of Greek mythology connected with wells and springs, specifically those that the mythical horse Pegasus created by striking the ground with his hooves "Pegasis" redirects here. For the mythical winged horse, see Pegasus. Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Aquatic deities Amphitrite Ceto Glaucus Nereus Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Tethys Thetis Triton Nereids Naiads Oceanids Potamoi Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurae Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Limnades Lampads Meliae Melinoë Naiads Napaeae Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides v t e Pegasides (Greek: Πηγασίδες, singular: pegasis) were nymphs of Greek mythology connected with wells and springs,[1] specifically those that the mythical horse Pegasus created by striking the ground with his hooves.[2] Contents 1 The background 2 The Pegasides 3 Notes 4 References The background[edit] According to Greek mythological tradition the winged horse Pegasus was the son of Poseidon, sea and river god of the Greeks,[3] equivalent to the Roman Neptune.[4] The hero Bellerophon needed the untamed Pegasus to help him defeat the monster Chimera. Hence, while Pegasus was drinking at the spring Pirene in Corinth, Bellerophon caught him. Pegasus, startled, struck a rock with his hoof, creating the spring Hippocrene on Mount Helicon.[5] The Pegasides[edit] The name pegasides (plural form of the Greek feminine adjective pegasis) literally means "originating from or linked with Pegasus".[6] Hence, in poetry, the waters and streams of Hippocrene and other springs that arose from the hoofprints of Pegasus are called pegasides.[7][3] The Muses are likewise called pegasides[8] because the spring Hippocrene was sacred to them.[6][3] Nymphs in general, if associated with springs and brooks, may be called pegasides:[9] thus pegasis, the singular form, is applied by the Roman poet Ovid as a by-name or adjective to the nymph Oenone, daughter of the river-god Cebrenus.[10][2] Pegasis is used by the Greek author Quintus Smyrnaeus as the name of a nymph who had sex with the Trojan prince Emathion and gave birth beside the river Granicus to Atymnius. The latter was eventually killed by Odysseus in the Trojan War.[11][12] The spring Hippocrene, haunt of mythological Pegasides Mount Helicon where Pegasus created the spring Hippocrene Pegasus and Bellerophon by Gustave Moreau, 19th century Notes[edit] ^ Gardner, James (1858-60); p. 639. ^ a b Lemprière, John; Anthon, C. (1825); p. 530. ^ a b c Walford, Edward (1897); p. 77, vol 33. ^ Anthon, Charles (1857); p. 989. ^ Adam, Alexander (1816); p. 394. ^ a b Smith, William (1849); p. 165. ^ Ovid, Tristia 3.7.15: "the stream of Pegasus" in the English translation; Martial, Epigrams 9.58.6. ^ Ovid, Heroides 15.27: "the daughters of Pegasus" in the English translation; Propertius, Poems 3.1.19: "Pegasid Muses" in the English translation. ^ Smith, William (1858); p 534. ^ Ovid, Heroides 5.3: "the fountain-nymph Oenone" in the English translation; Pegasis Oenone in the Latin text. ^ Quintus Smyrnaeus, The Fall of Troy 3.300–302. ^ Parada, Carlos (1997) s.v. "Nymphs: Pegasis". References[edit] Adam, Alexander (1816). A Summary of Geography and History, both Ancient and Modern: with an Abridgment of the Fabulous History of Mythology of the Greeks. London: Cadell & Davies. OCLC 751291898. Anthon, Charles (1857). A classical dictionary: containing an account of the principal proper names mentioned in ancient authors and intended to elucidate all the important points connected with geography, history, biography, mythology, and fine arts of the Greeks and Romans. New York: Harper & Brothers. OCLC 1395800. Erasmus, Desiderius (1993). Poems: Volume 85-86 (Collected Works of Erasmus). University of Toronto Press, Scholarly Publishing Division. p. 438. ISBN 0-8020-2867-5. Gardner, James (1858–60). The faiths of the world; an account of all religions and religious sects, their doctrines, rites, ceremonies, and customs. Edinburgh, London: A. Fullarton & Co. OCLC 4914490. Lemprière, John; Anthon, Charles (1825). A classical dictionary; containing a copious account of all the proper names mentioned in ancient authors ... New York: E. Duyckinck, G. Long Duyckinck. OCLC 5897265. Parada, Carlos (1997). Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology. Studies in Mediterranean Archaeology. 107. Coronet Books. ISBN 978-9170810626. Smith, William (1858). A classical dictionary of biography, mythology, and geography : based on the larger dictionaries. London: John Murray. OCLC 316433650. Walford, Edward; Cox, John C.; Apperson, George L. (1897). The Antiquary (1897). Cambridge University Press. OCLC 663459113. v t e Ancient Greek deities by affiliation Primordial deities Achlys Aether Aion/Chronos Ananke Chaos Erebus Eros/Phanes Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus/Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Fates Atropos Clotho Lachesis Titan deities Titanes (male) Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Oceanus Titanides (female) Dione Mnemosyne Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Children of Hyperion Eos Helios Selene Children of Coeus Asteria Leto Children of Crius Astraeus Pallas Perses Children of Iapetus Atlas Epimetheus Menoetius Prometheus Olympian deities Dodekatheon Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Theoi Olympioi Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Mousai (Muses) Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaea Antheia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelos Aquatic deities Sea Gods Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus The Ichthyocentaurs Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites The Nesoi Oceanus Phorcys Pontus/Thalassa Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Amalthea Asia Callirrhoe Ceto Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Zeuxo Nereides Amphitrite Arethusa Dynamene Galatea Galene Psamathe Thetis Potamoi Achelous Almo Alpheus Anapos Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Clitumnus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Rivers of the Underworld Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Sangarius Scamander Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Kleodora Melaina Tiasa Chthonic deities Theoi Chthonioi Angelos Gaia Hades Hecate The Lampads Macaria Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Erinyes (Furies) Alecto Megaera Tisiphone Earthborn Cyclopes Gigantes Hecatonchires Kouretes Meliae Telchines Typhon Apotheothenai Trophonius Triptolemus Orpheus Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Logoi Children of Nyx Achlys Apate Dolos Eleos Elpis Epiphron Eris Geras Hesperides Hybris Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Sophrosyne Thanatos Children of Phorcys Echidna The Graeae Deino Enyo Pemphredo The Gorgones Euryale Medusa Stheno The Sirenes Aglaopheme Leucosia Ligeia Molpe Parthenope Peisinoe Thelxiepeia Children of Thaumas The Harpiae Aello Celaeno Ocypete Podarge Iris Children of other gods Aergia Aidos Alala Aletheia Angelia Arete Astraea Caerus The Younger Charites Eucleia Eupheme Euthenia Philophrosyne Corus Deimos The Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Hymen Ersa Eupraxia Hedone Homonoia Iacchus The Litae Homonoia Peitho Phobos Tyche Others Adephagia Alala Alke Amechania Anaideia Alastor Apheleia The Arae Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eusebeia Gelos Heimarmene Homados Horme Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Other deities Sky The Anemoi The Astra Planeti Stilbon Hesperus Phosphorus Pyroeis Phaethon Phaenon Aura Chione The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Agriculture Aphaea Demeter Despoina Eunostus Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis The Anthousai Aristaeus Attis The Auloniads Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimeliades Hecaterus Leuce Ma The Maenades The Meliae The Napaeae The Nymphai Hyperboreioi The Oreads Adrasteia Echo Helice Iynx Nomia Oenone Pitys The Pegasides Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Alexiares and Anicetus Aphroditus Enyalius Palaestra