This article is about goddess in Greek Mythology. For the asteroid, see 118 Peitho. Peitho Personification of Persuasion Abode Mount Olympus Personal information Parents Tethys and Okeanus Siblings Oceanids and Potamoi Consort Hermes Equivalents Roman equivalent Suada or Suadela In Greek mythology, Peitho (Ancient Greek: Πειθώ, romanized: Peithō, lit. 'Persuasion') is the goddess who personifies persuasion and seduction. Her Roman equivalent is Suada or Suadela. She is typically presented as an important companion of Aphrodite. Her opposite is Bia, the personification of force.[1] As a personification, she was sometimes imagined as a goddess and sometimes an abstract force with her name used both as a common and proper noun.[2] There is evidence that Peitho was referred to as a goddess before she was referred to as an abstract concept, which is rare for a personification.[3] Peitho represents both sexual and political persuasion.[3] Contents 1 Mythology 1.1 Parentage and family 2 Cult and function 2.1 Cult within Athens 2.2 Cults within other Greek cities 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Mythology[edit] Peitho plays a limited role in mythology, mainly appearing with or as a companion of Aphrodite. A degraded fragment by Sappho may identify Peitho as an attendant of Aphrodite, although other possibilities are Hebe, Iris, or even Hekate.[4] Pindar characterizes Peitho, either as the abstract concept of persuasion or the goddess, as holding the "secret key to holy love", associating her with Aphrodite.[5] She is also described as the nurse of the baby Erotes, who are Aphrodite's children.[6] A fragment by Ibycus describes Aphrodite and Peitho, who is described as tendered eyed (aganoblepharos), nursing Euryalus among rose blossoms.[7] Nonnus gives her a role within the marriage of Kadmos and Harmonia, as she appears to Kadmos in the form of a mortal slave and covers Kadmos in a mist to lead him unseen through Samothrace to the palace of Electra, Harmonia's adoptive mother.[6] Peitho often appears on a 5th century epinetron by the Eretria Painter depicting Harmonia’s bridal preparations with Aphrodite, Eros, Persephone (Kore), Hebe, and Himeros as in attendance.[8] In art, she was also depicted in art at the weddings for Dionysus and Ariadne, Alkestis and Admetos, Thetis and Peleus, and at the union of Aphrodite and Adonis.[3] A hydria attributed to the Meidias Painter shows Peitho fleeing from the scene of the abduction of the Leukippidai by the Dioskuri, indicating either that she persuaded the women into eloping or that she does not condone the marriage by Athenian standards.[3] When Zeus ordered the creation of the first woman, Pandora, Peitho and the Charites placed golden necklaces around her neck, and the Horae (Seasons) crowned Pandora's head with spring flowers.[9] Extravagant jewelry, particularly necklaces, were viewed with suspicion in Ancient Greek literature, as they was typically seen as a way for women to seduce men, making the necklace a way to enhance Pandora’s sexual attractiveness and persuasive abilities.[10] In art, Peitho is often represented with Aphrodite during the abduction of Helen, symbolizing the forces persuasion and love at work during the scene.[11] Her presence at the event may be interpreted as either Paris needing persuasion to claim Helen as a prize for choosing Aphrodite, or Helen needing to be persuaded to accompany him to Troy, as Helen's level of agency became a popular topic of discussion in the 5th century.[10] Peitho's presence brings the question of whether mortals have the ability to resist her power or whether they are bound to her persuasive abilities.[10] Parentage and family[edit] Fragment depicting Peitho, Aphrodite, and Eros. This skyphos fragment may be the earliest known artistic representation of Peitho,[12] circa 490 B.C.E. (The Metropolitan Museum of Art). Peitho's ancestry is unclear, as various authors provide different identities for her parents. Hesiod in Theogony identifies Peitho as the daughter of the Titans Tethys and Okeanus, which would make her an Okeanid and the sister of notable goddesses such as Dione, Doris, and Metis.[13] Other sources, such as lyric poet Sappho, state she was the daughter of Aphrodite.[14] Aeschylus identifies her as the daughter of Aphrodite in Suppliant Women (Hiketides), but also describes her as the child of Ate in Agamemnon.[15][16] Nonnus in his Dionysiaca describes the Charites (Graces), an ensemble of goddesses of grace and charm, as including Peitho, Pasithea, and Aglaia, and all of them are identified as daughters of Dionysus.[17] The Hellenistic era elegiac poet Hermesianax also refers to Peitho as one of the Charites.[18] Alcman describes her as the daughter of Prometheia and the sister of Tyche and Eunomia.[19] Nonnus identifies Peitho as the wife of Hermes, the messenger of the gods.[20] However, commentary on Euripides' Orestes notes that Peitho is the first wife of Phoroneus, the primordial King of Argos, and the mother of Aegialeus and Apia.[21] An alternative Argive tradition describes her instead as the wife of Argos, Phoroneus's grandson.[3] The Byzantine encyclopedic text, Suda, states that the mother of Iynx was either Peitho or Ekho. Cult and function[edit] Cults dedicated to Peitho date to at least the early 5th century.[4] In her role as an attendant or companion of Aphrodite, Peitho was intimately connected to the goddess of love and beauty. Aphrodite and Peitho were sometimes conflated, more commonly in the later periods, with the name Peitho appearing in conjunction with or as an epithet of Aphrodite's name.[10] She is also identified with Tyche in Suppliant Women (Hiketides).[22] Peitho was associated with marriage, since a suitor or his father would negotiate with the father or guardian of a young woman for her hand in marriage and offer a bridal price in return for her. The most desirable women drew many prospective suitors, and persuasive skill often determined the suitor's success. Plutarch includes her on a list of five deities for new couples to pray to, also included are Zeus (Teleios), Hera (Teleia), Aphrodite, and Artemis.[23] A Roman relief depicting Peitho, circa 1st century B.C.E. (The Metropolitan Museum of Art). Peitho was an important figure for emphasising civic harmony, particularly in Athens and Argos, and harmony within interpersonal relationships.[24] Notably in Athens, the unification (synoikismos) of the city by Theseus was only possible with the intervention of both Aphrodite and Peitho to create democratic spirit and cooperation.[3] In Argos, she was paired with the early kings of the city, functioning as a civic unifier in a similar role as Harmonia, the first Queen of Thebes.[25] On a 4th century vase from Apulia, Peitho and Hermes are depicted together instructing Tripolemus to teach agriculture to mankind, indicating Peitho's role in creating harmony through civilization.[1] Plutarch outlines Peitho’s role in interpersonal harmony in Moralia, where he states that persuasion’s role within a marriage is so that spouses can achieve their wants without quarreling. In Eumenides, Athena thanks Peitho after convincing the Furies of her reasoning in acquitting Orestes and successfully defusing strife.[26] However, Peitho may be a destructive force when used for seduction or selfish personal gains, such as in Agamemnon where Clytemnestra curses Peitho for Paris’s stealing of Helen, and she uses persuasion convince Cassandra to enter the house in order to murder her. Cult within Athens[edit] Pausanias reports that after the unification (synoikismos) of Athens, Theseus set up a cult of Aphrodite Pandemos and Peitho on the south slope of Acropolis of Athens.[27] In recognition of this myth, both goddesses were worshipped in the Attic Aphrodisia Festival.[28] Peitho was worshipped independently as the goddess of both sexual and rhetorical persuasion in Athens from the 4th century into the Roman Imperial era, the time of Pausanias’s writing.[10][3] However, some scholars believe it is possible that worship dates to the 6th century, but there is not strong evidence for this assertion.[24] A votive inscription to Peitho was found at the site of the Temple of Aphrodite, reinforcing the link between these goddesses at Athens.[25] The Theatre of Dionysus had seat reserved for the priestess of Peitho.[10] Peitho was an important figure to Athenian rhetoricians in 5th century and was considered an important figure for human affairs, as persuasion was a major component to rhetoric. Rhetorician Isocrates notes in Section 249 of Antidosis that sacrifices are made to Peitho in the city annually.[2] Furthermore, comic poet Eupolis said that Peitho sat on the lips of Pericles for his persuasive skills.[1] Persuasion was considered essential for the democratic state's success.[28] Cults within other Greek cities[edit] Despite her connection to Aphrodite in Athens, Peitho was more commonly associated with Artemis in the Peloponnese, as the two goddesses either shared a temple at Argos or "Peitho" being used as an epithet for Artemis.[3] Peitho’s association with Artemis may have formed due to a shared with importance with adult development and the loss of sexual innocence.[29] At Argos, this temple was also shared with Hypermestra, who was acquitted in trial of a case brought by her father, as she was the only Danaid who did not murder her husband on her wedding night as per her father's orders.[25][4] With this association, Peitho is connected to persuasive speech generally as opposed to just seductive persuasion.[25] Pindar refers to courtesans and prostitutes in Corinth as "the servants of Peitho", however, he does not elaborate on whether there was any cults associated with Peitho in the city nor whether courtesans had a particular reverence for the goddess.[30] This passage has stirred debate among scholars one whether sacred prostitution was practiced in Greece.[29] Peitho was commonly shown wearing jewelry, fixing her clothing, holding jars of perfume, or looking into mirrors, traits that may be associated with hetairai.[29] In Sicyon, Peitho had a cult and a temple, which was connected to the cults of Artemis and Apollo.[4] According to a local cult practice recorded by Pausanias, during the festival of Apollo, seven boys and girls take the statues of Artemis and Apollo to the Sythas River and take them to the sanctuary of Peitho, after which they are returned to the Temple of Apollo.[31] The aetiological myth for this practice was that the citizens of Sicyon refused to purify the twin gods after the slaying of Python, and as a result a plague was sent to the city. Seven boys and girls went to the river to convince the gods to return, they were successful, indicating that even the gods are susceptible to the power of persuasion, and the sanctuary to Peitho was established at this spot.[4] There was no cult image to Peitho by the Roman Imperial Period, however, this does mean that one never existed.[4] According to Pausanias, in addition to the cults and sanctuaries dedicated to Peitho at Athens and Argos, there was an image decorating the throne at the Temple of Zeus at Olympia where Aphrodite, rising from the sea is greeted by Eros and crowned by Peitho.[32][33] In Megara, statues of Peitho and Paregoros (personification of soothing words) stood in the Temple of Aphrodite Praxis (of intercourse).[29] There is also evidence that Peitho had cults in Paros, Thasos, and Lesbos.[10] Notes[edit] ^ a b c North, Helen (1993). "Emblems of eloquence". Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. 137: 406–430. ^ a b Marsh, Charles (2015). "The Strange Case of the Goddess Peitho: Classical Antecedents of Public Relations Ambivalence Toward Persuasion". Journal of Public Relations Research. 27 (3): 229–243. doi:10.1080/1062726X.2015.1024249 – via Taylor & Francis Group. ^ a b c d e f g h Smith, Amy (2011). Polis and Personification in Classical Athenian Art. Leiden, Netherlands: BRILL. pp. 55–62. ISBN 9789004194175. ^ a b c d e f Breitenberger, Barbara (2007). "Peitho: the Power of Persuasion". Aphrodite and Eros: The Development of Greek Erotic Mythology. New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 117–135. ISBN 978-0-415-96823-2. ^ Pindar, Pythian 9, 35-39. ^ a b Nonnus, Dionysiaca, 3.84. ^ Ibycus, Fragment 288. ^ Neils, Jenifer (2004). Marconi, Clement (ed.). Greek Vases: Images, Contexts and Controversies. Boston, MA: BRILL. pp. 76. ISBN 978-90-04-13802-5. ^ Hesiod, Works and Days, 69-82. ^ a b c d e f g Stafford, Emma (1999). Plutarch's Advice to the Bride and Groom and A Consolation to His Wife: English Translations, Commentary, Interpretive Essays, and Bibliography. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. pp. 162–165. ISBN 978-0195120233. ^ Stafford, Emma (2013). "From the Gymnasium to the Wedding: Eros in Athenian Art and Cult". Erôs in Ancient Greece. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. p. 198. ISBN 9780199605507. ^ Rosenzweig, Rachel (2004). Worshipping Aphrodite: Art and Cult in Classical Athens. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0472113323. ^ Hesiod, Theogony, 346-349. ^ Sappho, Fragment 200. ^ Aeschylus, Suppliant Women, 1039. ^ Aeschylus, Agamemnon, 385. ^ Nonnus, Dionysiaca, 24.261. ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece, 9.35.5 ^ Alcman, Fragments 3 & 64. ^ Nonnus, Dionysiaca, 8.220 & 48.230. ^ Scholiast on Euripides, Orestes 920 ^ Aeschylus, Suppliant Women (Hiketides), Line 523. ^ Plutarch, Moralia (Ethika), Line 264b. ^ a b Rosenzweig, Rachel (2004). Worshipping Aphrodite: Art and Cult in Classical Athens. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp. 13–26. ISBN 978-0472113323. ^ a b c d Buxton, Richard (2010). Persuasion in Greek Tragedy: A Study of Peitho. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 29–37. ISBN 9780521136730. ^ Aeschylus, Eumenides, 825-829 ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece, 1.22.3. ^ a b Pala, Elisabetta (2010). "Aphrodite on the Akropolis: Evidence from Attic Pottery". Brill's Companion to Aphrodite. Leiden: Brill. pp. 195–216. ^ a b c d Burnett Pippin, Anne (2011). "Servants of Peitho: Pindar fr. 122". Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies. 51: 49–60. ^ Pindar, Eulogies Fragment 122. ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece, 2.7.8 ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece, 2.7.7 & 2.21.1. ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece, 5.11.8 References[edit] Grimal, Pierre (1996). Dictionnaire de la Mythologie Grecque Et Romaine. Wiley. p. 349. ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1. Hesiod, Theogony from The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Hesiod, Works and Days from The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, Cambridge, MA.,Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Nonnus of Panopolis, Dionysiaca translated by William Henry Denham Rouse (1863-1950), from the Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1940. Online version at the Topos Text Project. Nonnus of Panopolis, Dionysiaca. 3 Vols. W.H.D. Rouse. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1940-1942. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. North, Helen F. (1993). "Emblems of Eloquence". Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. 137 (3): 406–430. ISBN 978-1-4223-7018-6. Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio. 3 vols. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Smith, William; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, London (1873). "Peitho" 1. External links[edit] Look up Peitho in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Images of Political Personifications: Peitho (persuasion) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Classical religious forms Ancient Greek religion Gnosticism Paleo-Balkan mythology Hellenistic religion Orphism Pythagoreanism Mycenaean deities Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Samothracian Mysteries Main beliefs Ages of Man Apotheosis Euhemerism Eusebeia Greek Heroic Age Interpretatio graeca Monism Mythology Nympholepsy Paganism Paradoxography Polytheism Theism Texts/epic poems/odes Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Cyranides Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Ehoiai Greek Magical Papyri Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Interpretation of Dreams (Antiphon) Oneirocritica Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Telegony The golden verses of Pythagoras Theogony Works and Days Epic Cycle Theban Cycle Rites and practices Amphidromia Animal sacrifice Apotheosis Baptes Curse tablet Daduchos Delphinion Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Hymns Hero cult Heroon Hierophany Hierophant Hierophylakes Hieros gamos Hypsistarians Iatromantis Interpretatio graeca Kanephoros Kykeon Libations Mystagogue Nekyia Necromancy Necromanteion Nymphaeum Panegyris Pharmakos Prayers Orgia Sacrifices Temenos Thyia Temples Votive offerings Sacred places Oracles, sanctuaries, Necromanteion Aornum Delphi Didymaion Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros island Oracle of Menestheus Tegyra Mountain Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Cave of Zeus, Crete Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Achilles island Delos Diomedes island Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Others Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Mythical beings Dragons in Greek mythology Greek mythological creatures Greek mythological figures List of minor Greek mythological figures Deities Primordial deities Aether Aion Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Aquatic deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Potamoi Potamides Proteus Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Hermanubis Hermes Thanatos Achlys Angelos Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Macaria Melinoë Persephone Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Dolos Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Other major deities Azone Eileithyia The Erinyes Harmonia The Muses Nemesis Pan Unknown God Zelus Heroes/heroines Abderus Achilles Actaeon Aeneas Argonauts Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Mythical tribes Amazons Anthropophage Atlantians Bebryces Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Telchines Oracles/seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Delphic Sibyl Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyl Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Magic Apotropaic magic Greek Magical Papyri Pella curse tablet Philia Mythical realms Aethiopia Atlantis Erytheia Hyperborea Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Scheria Scythia Themiscyra Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Fields of Punishment Isles of the Blessed Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Ferryman Charon Charon's obol Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Animals, daemons and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Hade's cattle Mythological wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Cranes-Pygmies war Gigantomachy Indian War (it is described at Dionysiaca) Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Mythological and religious objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Ara Baetylus Caduceus Cornucopia Dragon's teeth Diipetes Galatea Golden apple Golden Fleece Gorgoneion Greek terracotta figurines Harpe Ichor Lotus tree Minoan seals Moly Necklace of Harmonia Omphalos Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos (Winged helmet) Philosopher's stone Ring of Gyges Rod of Asclepius Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thymiaterion Thyrsus Trident Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of Fortune Wheel of fire Xoanon Symbols Arkalochori Axe Labrys Ouroboros Owl of Athena Mythological powers Divination Eidolon Eternal youth Evocation Fortune-telling Immortality Language of the birds Nympholepsy Magic Ornithomancy Shamanism Shapeshifting Weather modification Storage containers, cups, vases Amphora Calathus Chalice Ciborium Cotyla Hydria Hydriske Kalpis Kantharos Kernos Kylix Lebes Lekythos Loutrophoros Oenochoe Pelike Pithos Skyphos Stamnos Urn Musical Instruments Aulos Barbiton Chelys Cithara Cochilia Crotalum (Castanets) Epigonion Kollops Lyre Pan flute Pandura Phorminx Psaltery Salpinx Sistrum Tambourine Trigonon Tympanum Water organ Games Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Festivals/feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Vessels Argo Phaeacian ships Modern offshoot religions Discordianism Gaianism Feraferia Hellenism Modern popular culture Greek mythology in popular culture