This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish. (December 2009) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Piuchén]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|es|Piuchén}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. The Peuchen (also known as Piuchen, Pihuchen, Pihuychen, Pihuichen, Piguchen, or Piwuchen) is a creature from the Mapuche mythology and Chilote mythology pertaining to southern Chile, a much feared shapeshifting creature that can instantly change into animal form. It has often been described as gigantic flying snake which produced strange walking sounds, while its gaze could paralyse an intended victim and permit it to suck its blood. It has often been reported as the cause of sucking blood your meat. The creature can be eliminated by a machi (Mapuche herbal healer). See also[edit] Colo Colo Basilisco Chilote Chonchon Chupacabra Notes[edit] References[edit] Martinez Vilches, Oscar (1992). Chiloe Misterioso: Turismo, Mitologia Chilota, leyendas (in Spanish). Chile: Ediciones de la Voz de Chiloe. p. 179. ISBN 0-19-451308-4. This Argentina-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This Chile-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article relating to a myth or legend from South America is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a legendary creature is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e