Auxiliary sciences of history Soviet and Ukrainian medals from the Historical Museum of the Donetsk police Phaleristics, from the Greek mythological hero Phalerus (Greek: Φάληρος, Phaleros) via the Latin phalera ('heroics'), sometimes spelled faleristics, is an auxiliary science of history and numismatics which studies orders, fraternities, and award items, such as medals, ribbons, and other decorations. The subject includes orders of chivalry (including military orders), orders of merit, and fraternal orders. These may all in turn be official, national, state entities, or civil, religious, or academic-related ones. The field of study also comprises comparative honour systems, and thus in a broader sense also history (art history), sociology, and anthropology. In terms of objects, these include award items such as medals and their accessories, ribbon bars, badges, pins, award certificate documentation, etc., and phaleristics may also designate the field of collecting related items.[1] Although established as a scientific sub-discipline of history, phaleristics usually studies orders and decorations "detached from their bodies".[2] King George VI loved the study of phaleristics, going to the extent of personally overseeing his uniform designs and ribbon placements. He is known to have designed a few British military decorations for the Royal Navy.[3] The Russian phalerist Julius Iversen studied orders and medals in the 19th century. References[edit] ^ José Vicente de Bragança. "Phaleristics". Phaleristics Academy of Portugal. Retrieved 16 November 2012. ^ Ralph Winkle (2007). Der Dank des Vaterlandes: eine Symbolgeschichte des Eisernen Kreuzes 1914 bis 1936 (in German) (1. Aufl ed.). Essen. p. 18. ISBN 978-3-89861-610-2. ^ Bradford, Sarah (1990). The Reluctant King: The Life & Reign of George VI, 1895–1952. St. Martin's Press. OCLC 1036822389. v t e Phaleristics Auxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders, decorations, and medals Distinctions (Lists) By conferee Founts of honour* States and their national/public/official authorities Dynasties heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families Private Ecclesiastical Organisations Commercial (Self-styled order) By type Orders Order of chivalry Military order Colonial order Order of merit Royal family order Titles (Styles, Post-nominal By function Grand master Chancellor Treasurer Assessor Bailiff Prior Chaplain Master of ceremonies Grand Cross/Grand Cordon Commander Officer Hospitaller Knight/Dame Postulant Squire Page Jurisdictions Charter Bailiwick Chapter Commandery Obedience Grand Lodge Lodge Others, by field Military (List) List of highest Campaign medal Law enforcement Civilian (List) Society Peace Intellectual freedom Human rights Law Humanitarianism Politics Volunteer Literature Poetry Art History Music Architecture Theatre Film Science Religions Ecclesiastical Sports Scouting Beauty By insignia (Named after people) For wearing (decorations) Formal Collar Grand Cross/Grand Cordon with sash Medal Necklet Medal bar Medal ribbon Other Rosette Award pin Lapel pin Collar pin Tie pin Badge Heraldic Pilgrim Ring Button Campaign Service Prizes Trophy Plaquette Rosette Money Prizes known as the Nobel of a field Ceremonies and events Accolade Vigil Feoffment Passage fee Festival Vow Collar day Related organisations Fraternity Fraternal order Confraternity Secret society Guild Learned society Fellowship Honor society Hereditary society Club Gentlemen's club International Commission for Orders of Chivalry Related concepts Numismatics Heraldry Vexillology Service flag Battle honour Campaign streamer Nobility Order of precedence Honorary degree Devotional medal Awareness ribbon * = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions Category:Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125