This article is about haunted vehicles. For a vehicle which causes a traffic accident without physical contact, see Phantom vehicle (insurance). "Ghost car" redirects here. For usage referring to an unmarked police car, see Police car § Functional types. For custom car usage for a hypothetical model, see Custom car § Language. For navigation guide, see Automotive head-up display. A "haunted truck" at a Halloween event A phantom vehicle is a purportedly ghostly or haunted vehicle in ghostlore, common in urban legends and entertainment. The stories often describe vehicles that operate with no visible driver. Contents 1 Examples of phantom vehicles 1.1 Cars and trucks 1.2 Trains 1.3 Aeroplanes 2 See also 3 References Examples of phantom vehicles[edit] Cars and trucks[edit] In 1982, two people in Lanikai, Hawaii reported seeing a mysterious black car which disappeared and reappeared again a second later.[1] A 1960s car that had bumper stickers; the witness passed the car but it mysteriously reappeared ahead of the witness's car at several stoplights. Also the witness noticed that the driver was a man in his teens and that he never turned his head and he never moved the steering wheel when the man drove around the "dead man's curve" the witness said.[2] 2004, In Cape Town, South Africa, a Renault Mégane[3] sedan mysteriously rolled up an embankment and hit a fence, although the handbrake was engaged and the engine was off. Some say the car was "jumping".[4] December 2002, Brisbane England, The Surrey Ghost Car, anonymous caller reported seeing a car swerve off the highway and crash, when the police arrive they could tell the body had been in the car for months, the car most likely crashed in July 2002. 2018 A dashcam recorded video footage of a supposed ghost car causing a massive crash and pile up in Singapore. In the mid-1980s, three people in a sedan reported seeing a gray van heading straight towards them. Then suddenly the van vanished.[5] The Curse of "Little Bastard": the 1955 Porsche 550 Spyder in which James Dean died is said to be cursed after the accidents in which it has been later involved.[6] In Germany, a car mysteriously started up by itself and rammed a wall.[7] In 2000, an eyewitness claimed that an old truck started up by itself and blinked at him as he walked past an old house.[8] Early 1980s - a British motorist crashed his car in order to avoid a truck that suddenly appeared coming straight towards him and then vanished.[9] The curved road at the junction of St. Marks Road and Cambridge Gardens in Ladbroke Grove was reported to be haunted by a phantom bus with a route marker "7" which caused numerous accidents, one of which was fatal. The reports subsided when the area of road was straightened.[10] Trains[edit] Main article: Ghost train (folklore) Silverpilen (Silver Arrow) is a Stockholm Metro train which features in several urban legends alleging sightings of the train's "ghost".[11] The St. Louis Ghost Train, better known as the St. Louis Light, is visible at night along an old abandoned rail line between Prince Albert and St. Louis, Saskatchewan.[12] A phantom funeral train is said to run regularly from Washington, D.C. to Springfield, Illinois, around the time of the annual anniversary of Abraham Lincoln's death, stopping watches and clocks in surrounding areas as it passes.[13] Aeroplanes[edit] In 1997, eyewitnesses from the eastern USA claimed they saw a single-engine aeroplane crash. But when the coast guard searched the waters off Connecticut, they could not find any wreckage or bodies. Also none of the airports reported any planes missing.[14] The Dark Peak area of Derbyshire, England has been the location of many sightings of alleged ghost planes, often described as a WWII-era Douglas C-47 Skytrain. Motorcycles In 2011, An eyewitness reported seeing a black motorcycle start up by itself and flash its headlight at him. In Paris, a man spotted and filmed a motorcycle allegedly driving by itself with no rider visible. Construction Vehicles In a small Rhode Island neighborhood, a dump truck parked on the street allegedly started by itself, and flashed its headlights. Witnesses reported seeing the wheel chocks vanish into thin air, and allegedly spotted the truck driving away. See also[edit] Boy Scout Lane Clinton Road (New Jersey) Ghost rockets List of ghost ships Haunted highway Vanishing hitchhiker References[edit] ^ "Ghost Car In Lanikai". Castle of Spirits. Archived from the original on 2016-03-13. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ "Ghost Car in Broad Daylight Afternoon". Castle of Spirits. Archived from the original on 2017-02-02. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ 'Ghost car' mystery revealed http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/Ghost-car-mystery-revealed-20041213-2 ^ Carin Smith (21 November 2004). "'Haunted' car goes haywire". News24. Somerset West. Archived from the original on 8 December 2004. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ "The Ghost Car". Your True Tales. October 2003. p. 22. ^ Curse of James Dean Archived 2005-12-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Wreck ignition for 'ghost car' that started on its own". Cape Times. Kempten, Germany. 7 November 2005. Archived from the original on 27 April 2006. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ The Old Rusty Ghost truck ^ "Coventry and Warwickshire - Places - Spooky tales to chill your spine". BBC Online. 10 September 2003. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ Jeffrey, Martin. "The Ghost Bus of Ladbroke Grove". Haunted Britain. Mystery magazine. Archived from the original on 3 February 2009. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ af Klintberg, Bengt, Råttan i pizzan. Stockholm: Norstedts Förlag, 1992. ISBN 91-1-893831-0 ^ Yanko, Dave. "Mystery Solved?". Virtual Saskatchewan. Retrieved 21 November 2010. ^ "Abe Lincoln's Ghost Train". HallowFreaks. Archived from the original on 5 October 2006. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ Phantom Plane Crashes v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category