Legendary Native American creature This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article is missing information about the legend's history, legend, variations, and popular culture. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (March 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Coordinates: 38°53′52″N 90°11′56″W﻿ / ﻿38.897833°N 90.199°W﻿ / 38.897833; -90.199 Piasa A modern reproduction of the "Piasa Bird", on the bluffs of the Mississippi River in Alton. Wings were not described in Marquette's 1673 account. Grouping Cryptid Sub grouping Thunderbird Other name(s) Paillissa Piasa Bird Piesa Country United States Region Illinois The Piasa (/ˈpaɪ.əsɔː/ PY-ə-saw) or Piasa Bird is a Native American dragon depicted in one of two murals painted by Native Americans on bluffs (cliffsides) above the Mississippi River. Its original location was at the end of a chain of limestone bluffs in Madison County, Illinois at present-day Alton, Illinois. The original Piasa illustration no longer exists; a newer 20th-century version, based partly on 19th-century sketches and lithographs, has been placed on a bluff in Alton, Illinois, several hundred yards upstream from its origin. The location of the present-day mural is at 38.898055, -90.19915. The limestone rock quality on the new site is unsuited for holding an image, and the painting must be regularly restored. The original site of the painting was a high-quality (6–8 foot thick) layer of lithographic limestone, which was predominantly quarried away in the late 1870s by the Mississippi Lime Company.[1][2] Contents 1 History 1.1 Murals 1.2 Discovery 1.3 John Russell account 1.4 Origin Story 2 See also 3 References 4 Notes 5 External links History[edit] Murals[edit] The original mural was created prior to the arrival of any European explorers in the region, and possibly before 1200 CE.[citation needed] The location of the image was at a river-bluff terminus of the American Bottoms floodplain. It may have been an older iconograph from the large Mississippian culture city of Cahokia, which began developing about 900 CE. Cahokia was at its peak about 1200 CE, with 20,000 to 30,000 residents. It was the largest prehistoric city north of Mexico and a major chiefdom. Icons and animal pictographs, such as falcons, thunder-birds, bird men, and monstrous snakes were common motifs of the Cahokia culture. The Piasa creature may have been painted as a graphic symbol to warn strangers traveling down the Mississippi River that they were entering Cahokian territory.[citation needed] A Thunderbird petroglyph at Washington State Park in Missouri An Alton Evening Telegraph newspaper article of May 27, 1921 stated that seven smaller painted images, believed to be of archaic American Indian origin, were found in the early 20th century about 1.5 miles upriver from the ancient Piasa creature's location. These pictures were carved and painted in rocks located in the Levis Bluffs area by George Dickson and William Turk in 1905.[citation needed] Four of these paintings were of "an owl, a sun circle, a squirrel, and a piece showing two birds or some kind of animals in a contest", the other three paintings were of "a great animal, perhaps a lion, and another an animal about as large as a coyote".[citation needed] These paintings were photographed by Prof. William McAdams and were to be placed in his book Records of Ancient Races in the Mississippi Valley: being an account of some of the pictographs, sculptured hieroglyphs, symbolic devices, emblems and traditions of the prehistoric races of America, with some suggestions as to their origin, William McAdams, C. R. Barns Publishing Co., 1887. {available on Google Books}. These seven archaic American Indian paintings were lost in transit to the Missouri Historical Society c. 1922. Other Native American carved petroglyphs of a similar time period and region as the Piasa monster are carved into the rocks at Washington State Park in Missouri about 60 miles southwest of the current Piasa image.[citation needed] The 1797-1798 map of French explorer Nicolas De Finiels' shows the cliffs above the Piasa labeled as Hauteurs De Paillisa (source archives Versailles, France "Carte d'une Partie Du Cours Du Mississippi"). (Partial source: See Costa 2005: 297) An earlier 1778 map titled "A new map of the western parts of Virginia, Pennsylvania, Maryland and North Carolina; comprehending the river Ohio, and all the rivers, which fall into it; part of the river Mississippi, the whole of the Illinois River, ... Author Hutchins, Thomas, 1730-1789" clearly shows the place name "PIASAS" where the present day City of Alton is located and bounded by the Wood River to the east. (this map is one of the earliest documented references for the word Piasa).[3] Discovery[edit] Underwater panther, a common mythological monster in Mississippian art[citation needed] In 1673,[4] Father Jacques Marquette saw the painting on a limestone bluff overlooking the Mississippi River while exploring the area. He recorded the following description: "While skirting some rocks, which by their height and length inspired awe, we saw upon one of them two painted monsters which at first made us afraid, and upon which the boldest savages dare not long rest their eyes. they are as large as a calf; they have horns on their heads like those of a deer, a horrible look, red eyes, a beard like a tiger's, a face somewhat like a man's, a body covered with scales, and so long a tail that it winds all around the body, passing above the head and going back between the legs, ending in a fish's tail. green, red, and black are the three colors composing the picture. Moreover, these two monsters are so well painted that we cannot believe that any savage is their author; for good painters in France would find it difficult to reach that place conveniently to paint them. Here is approximately the shape of these monsters, as we have faithfully copied it." The French cartographer Jean-Baptiste-Louis Franquelin compiled a map titled ″The Mississippi″ in about the year 1682, from Louis Jolliet′s description of his 1673 journey with Father Marquette.[5] A creature similar to the ″Underwater panther″ pictured here is sketched on the map east of the Missouri River and south of the Illinois River. As in Marquette′s description the animal is wingless with no resemblance to a bird. Later French explorers, like St. Cosme, reported that by 1699 the series of images were badly worn due to the habits of the local Indians to "discharge their weapons" at the images as they passed. Author A. D. Jones, in his book "Illinois and the West" c. 1838, also describes the ravages of weapons (firearms) upon the images, and further refers to the paintings as being named "Piasua".[citation needed] This original was the largest Native American painting ever found in North America.[citation needed] John Russell account[edit] Restored Piasa Bird carving along the Mississippi River near the junction with the Illinois River. The monster depicted in the mural was first referred to as the "Piasa Bird" in an article published c. 1836 by John Russell of Bluffdale, Illinois. John Russell was an imaginative professor of Greek and Latin at Shurtleff College, Upper Alton, Illinois.[citation needed] The article was entitled "The Tradition of The Piasa" and Russell claimed the origin of the word to be from a nearby stream: "This stream is the Piasa. Its name is Indian, and signifies, in the Illini, "The Bird That Devours Men." (The original Piasa Creek ran through the main ravine in downtown Alton, and was completely covered by huge drainage pipes around 1912.) According to the story published by Russell, the creature depicted by the painting was a huge bird that lived in the cliffs. Russell claimed that this creature attacked and devoured people in nearby Indian villages shortly after the corpses of a war gave it a taste for human flesh. The legend claims that a local Indian chief, named Chief Ouatoga, managed to slay the monster using a plan given to him in a dream from the Great Spirit. The chief ordered his bravest warriors to hide near the entrance of the Piasa Bird's cave, which Russell also claimed to have explored.[6] Ouatoga then acted as bait to lure the creature out into the open. As the monster flew down toward the Indian chief, his warriors slew it with a volley of poisoned arrows. Russell claimed that the mural was painted by the Indians as a commemoration of this heroic event.[citation needed] Some sources report that this account was simply a story created by John Russell. In the book Records of Ancient Races in the Mississippi Valley ... Chapter 2, 1887 by W. McAdams, the author says he contacted John Russell and Russell admitted the story was fabricated. The bird imagery is not reported in Father Marquette's description, which makes no mention of wings. It is also possible that Marquette's description and Russell's account were both accurate for their respective times. The image may have been repainted at some point between 1673 and 1836 to revise its appearance and iconography.[citation needed] When contemporary historians, folklorists, and tourism promoters are looking for a narrative description of the story behind the Piasa "Bird", they often rely on Russell's account. This colorful version of the tale can be adapted to allow a wide range of interpretation and allow other cities and counties to claim promotional rights to the legend.[citation needed] Origin Story[edit] Esarey, Costa, Wood, et al[7] now link the Underwater Panther to the Piasa both iconographically and phonetically to proper legend. "Payiihsa" is a "small supernatural being" and "pai'ssa" was referenced in an early explorer's list of supernatural beings. The "Payiihsa" often bear large feet with 4 or 6 toes and are referenced frequently in pottery and rock art symbolism along with the symbolism of the underwater panther. (To complicate matters, the term "Piasa" was applied in the 1970's to any symbolism matching the "protean super theme" of underwater panthers.) Costa's research in 2005 led to a Miami-Illinois Indian's tale of the malevolent twin dwarves (the "Payiihsaki"), the underwater panther, and the supernatural culture hero known as the Illinois Trickster, "Wissa Katch Akwa" who encounter a French trader. This legend of the Payiihsaki and the cliff art of underwater panther, as misinterpreted by Russell and others, is now believed by Esarey to be the origin of Russell's story of the Piasa. See also[edit] Piasa Bird Historic Site marker. Alton, Illinois Underwater Panther Manticore Chimera Teratorn Thunderbird (mythology) Horned Serpent References[edit] Costa, David J. "Culture-Hero and Trickster Stories", in: Brian Swann, ed., Algonquian Spirit. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 2005. O'Conner, Mallory McCane. Lost Cities of the Ancient Southeast, Gainesville, Florida: The University Press of Florida, 1995. ISBN 0-8130-1350-X Armstrong, Perry A. (1887). The Piasa: or, The Devil among the Indians. Morris, Illinois: E. B. Fletcher, printer. p. 48. Russell, John (July 1848). "The Piasa: An Indian Tradition of Illinois". The Evangelical Magazine and Gospel Advocate. Utica, New York. p. 18. Esarey, Duane; Vincas Steponaitis; Michael McCafferty; David Costa (15 January 2015). "Untangling the Piasa's Tale: A Revised Interpretation of Illinois' Most Famous Rock Art". Illinois State Archaeological Survey / East Central Illinois Archaeological Society (ECIAS). Notes[edit] ^ Mississippi Lime Co. records ^ Karl Shuker (1995). Dragons: A Natural History. ISBN 0-684-81443-9. ^ "Redirect URL". illinois.edu.[permanent dead link] ^ Marquette, Jacques. Journal. The Jesuit Relations: Natives and Missionaries in Seventeenth-Century North America. Allan Greer, ed. Bedford/St. Martin's: Boston, New york, p. 205. ^ Franquelin, Jean Baptiste Louis, and Louis Joliet. The Mississippi. [1682] Map. https://www.loc.gov/item/2002626428/ located in the Library of Congress, Washington DC. ^ Steiger, Brad (1991). "Giant Birds, Beasts, and Human Skeletons of Great Size". Beyond Belief. Scholastic. pp. 38–39. ISBN 0-590-44252-X. ^ Esarey, Duane; Vincas Steponaitis; Michael McCafferty; David Costa (15 January 2015). "Untangling the Piasa's Tale: A Revised Interpretation of Illinois' Most Famous Rock Art". Illinois State Archaeological Survey / East Central Illinois Archaeological Society (ECIAS). External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Piasa Bird. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) "Piasa Bird" and picture, Alton, Illinois History of Piasa Bird painting "History of the Piasa Bird", Prairie Ghosts "Piasa Legend", Piasa Birds "Flight of the Piasa" by Dr. Raymond Scott Edge, 2007, ISBN 978-0-9794737-0-8 v t e Pre-Columbian North America Periods Lithic Archaic Formative Classic Post-Classic Archaeological cultures Adena Alachua Ancient Beringian Ancestral Pueblo (Anasazi) Baytown Belle Glade Buttermilk Creek Complex Caborn-Welborn Calf Creek Caloosahatchee Clovis Coles Creek Comondú Deptford Folsom Fort Ancient Fort Walton Fremont Glacial Kame Glades Hohokam Hopewell List of Hopewell sites La Jolla Las Palmas Leon-Jefferson Maritime Archaic Mississippian List of Mississippian sites Mogollon Monongahela Old Cordilleran Oneota Paleo-Arctic Paleo-Indians Patayan Plano Plaquemine Poverty Point Red Ocher Safety Harbor Culture Santa Rosa-Swift Creek St. Johns Steed-Kisker Tchefuncte Troyville Weeden Island Archaeological sites Angel Mounds Anzick Clovis burial Bandelier National Monument Bastian Benson Blue Spring Shelter The Bluff Point Stoneworks Brewster Cahokia Candelaria Cave Casa Grande Chaco Canyon Coso Rock Art District Crystal River Archaeological State Park Cuarenta Casas Cueva de la Olla Eaker El Fin del Mundo El Vallecito Effigy Mounds National Monument Etowah Indian Mounds Eva Folsom Site Fort Ancient Fort Center Fort Juelson Four Mounds Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument Glenwood Grimes Point Holly Bluff Site Hopewell Culture National Historical Park Horr's Island Huápoca Key Marco Kimball Village Kincaid Mounds Kolomoki Mounds Lake Jackson Mounds L'Anse aux Meadows Lynch Quarry Site Marksville Marmes Rockshelter Meadowcroft Rockshelter Mesa Verde Moaning Cavern Moorehead Circle Morrison Mounds Moundville Mummy Cave Nodena Site Ocmulgee National Monument Old Stone Fort Orwell Site Paquime Parkin Park Pinson Mounds Portsmouth Earthworks Poverty Point Pueblo Bonito Recapture Canyon Rock Eagle Rock Hawk Rosenstock Village Site Russell Cave National Monument Salmon Ruins Serpent Mound Sierra de San Francisco Spiro Mounds SunWatch Taos Pueblo Toltec Mounds Town Creek Indian Mound Turkey River Mounds Upward Sun River site Velda Mound West Oak Forest Earthlodge Windover Winterville Wupatki National Monument Human remains Anzick-1 Arlington Springs Man Buhl Woman Kennewick Man La Brea Woman Leanderthal Lady Melbourne Man Minnesota Woman Peñon woman Spirit Cave mummy Vero man Miscellaneous Aridoamerica Black drink Ceremonial pipe Chanunpa Chunkey Clovis point Container Revolution Eastern Agricultural Complex Eden point Effigy mound Falcon dancer Folsom point Green Corn Ceremony Horned Serpent Kiva Medicine wheel Metallurgy Mi'kmaq hieroglyphic writing Mound Builders N.A.G.P.R.A. Norse colonization of North America Oasisamerica Piasa Projectile point Southeastern Ceremonial Complex Stickball Three Sisters agriculture Thunderbird Underwater panther Water glyphs Related Genetic history Pre-Columbian era