Dungeons & Dragons fictional campaign setting For the video game adaptation, see Planescape: Torment. Planescape Designer(s) David "Zeb" Cook Publisher(s) TSR, Inc. Wizards of the Coast Publication date 1994 Genre(s) Fantasy System(s) Dungeons & Dragons Planescape is a campaign setting for the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game, originally designed by Zeb Cook.[1] The Planescape setting was published in 1994.[2] As its name suggests, the setting crosses and comprises the numerous planes of existence, encompassing an entire cosmology called the Great Wheel, as originally developed in the original 1987 Manual of the Planes by Jeff Grubb. This includes many of the other Dungeons & Dragons worlds, linking them via inter-dimensional magical portals. Contents 1 Development 2 Reception 3 Cosmology 3.1 Outer Planes 4 Sigil 5 Factions 5.1 The Faction War 6 Sects 7 Rules 7.1 Rule-of-Three 7.2 Unity of Rings 7.3 Center of All 8 Published material 8.1 Boxed sets 8.2 Accessories 8.3 Adventures 8.4 Video game 8.5 Collectible card game 8.6 Novels 8.6.1 Blood Wars Trilogy 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Development[edit] Planescape is an expansion of ideas presented in the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Dungeon Master's Guide (First Edition) and the original Manual of the Planes. When Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition was published, a decision was made not to include angelic or demonic creatures, and so the cosmology was largely ignored. However, fan demand for a 2nd Edition Manual of the Planes was strong enough to justify its expansion into a full-fledged campaign setting, and so in 1994 Planescape was released.[citation needed] David "Zeb" Cook developed Planescape when he was assigned to create "a complete campaign world (not just a place to visit), survivable by low-level characters, as compatible with the old Manual of the Planes as possible, filled with a feeling of vastness without overwhelming the referee, distinct from all other TSR campaigns, free of the words "demon" and "devil" and explainable to Marketing in 25 words or less".[3] For inspiration, Cook listened to Pere Ubu, Philip Glass and Alexander Nevsky, read The Dictionary of the Khazars, Einstein's Dreams, and The Narrow Road to the Deep North, and for fun at "Bad Movie Nights", watched such films as Naked Lunch and Wolf Devil Woman.[3] Cook came up with the idea that everything would revolve around factions, and that those factions would be ideas taken to the extreme. He also felt that Sigil came about because it was natural, because the planes needed a crossroads, and that the campaign needs a center which could be both a place for adventure and a place to hide, where characters could get to and from it quickly. Cook decided to adapt the Manual of the Planes because the older material made survival on the planes too difficult or complex; he ignored anything that complicated gameplay, which left the "descriptions of twisted and strange creations".[3] Cook conceived of the look for the setting from images such as "the gloomy prisons of Piranesi's Le Carceri etchings, and Brian Froud's illustrations and surrealist art", and Dana Knutson was assigned to draw whatever Cook wanted. "Before any of us knew it, [Knutson] drew the Lady of Pain. I'm very fond of the Lady of Pain; she really locks up the Planescape look. We all liked her so much that she became our logo.[3] Reception[edit] The Planescape Campaign Setting boxed set won the 1994 Origins Award and has received critical acclaim for its unique visual aspects, especially the work of artists Tony DiTerlizzi, Robh Ruppel, and Dana Knutson.[4] Pyramid magazine reviewer Scott Haring said Planescape is "the finest game world ever produced for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons. Period."[1] Haring described the writing as "wonderful," also saying that it "has got one of the most distinctive graphic looks I've seen in any game product" and that the "unusual drawings remind [him] a little of Dr. Seuss."[1] Trenton Webb of British RPG magazine Arcane called Planescape "the premier AD&D world", noting its hallmark as "a bizarre juxtaposition of legend and nightmare".[5] Game designer Rick Swan said that the original Manual of the Planes had in a sense been "reincarnated as the Planescape setting ... TSR's most ambitious campaign world to date. Abandoning the straightforward but dry approach of the Manual, the Planescape set reads less like a textbook and more like a story. Characters take precedence over game systems, high adventure supplants the physics lessons."[6] Curtis D. Carbonell, in the book Dread Trident: Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Modern Fantastic, wrote "Planescape's sophistication marked it as D&D's answer to its own simplistic medieval-European-inspired fantasy settings, [...]. Planescape channeled the Weird before China Miéville brought the 'new weird' genre into focus [...]. With Planescape, we have an attempt by an AD&D game setting to add layers of intellectual complexity to a game often driven by much more simplistic mechanism. The greatest commerce isn't loot, treasure, magic items, etc.; it is belief so strong it can shape reality".[7]:99 Cosmology[edit] An artistic representation of the grand design of the Planes The Dungeons & Dragons cosmology as reflected in Planescape consists of a number of planes, which can be divided into the following regions:[1] The Inner Planes (representing planes of elemental nature, such as Water, Earth, Fire, and Air, as well as the Positive and Negative energy planes) The Ethereal Plane The Prime Material Plane The Astral Plane The Outer Planes (representing alignments and the primary domains of the various deities, where their petitioners spend their afterlives) Planescape "solidified the Great Wheel cosmology that began in 1e and would later be reinstated in 5e as the dominant of three theoretical models".[7]:98 Outer Planes[edit] The Outer Planes consist of: the Abyss, Acheron, Arborea, Arcadia, Baator, Beastlands, Bytopia, Carceri, Elysium, Gehenna, Gray Waste of Hades, Limbo, Mechanus, Mount Celestia, the Outlands, Pandemonium, and Ysgard. Sigil[edit] Main article: Sigil (city) Sigil, the "City of Doors", is located atop the Spire in the Outlands. It has the shape of a torus, and the city itself is located on the inner surface of the ring. There is no sky, simply an all-pervasive light that waxes and wanes to create day and night. Sigil cannot be entered or exited save via portals. Although this makes it quite safe from any would-be invader, it also makes it a prison of sorts for those not possessing a portal key. Thus, many call Sigil "The Bird Cage" or "The Cage." Though Sigil is commonly held to be located "at the center of the planes" (where it is positioned atop the infinitely tall Spire), some argue that this is impossible since the planes are infinite in all dimensions, and therefore there can never truly be a center to any or all of them. Curiously, from the Outlands, one can see Sigil atop the supposedly infinite Spire. Factions[edit] A view of the Spire and Sigil from Outlands Main article: Faction (Planescape) Within Sigil there are philosophy-derived factions. Before the event known as the Faction War, the groups controlled the political climate of Sigil. Each of these factions is based on one particular belief system; one faction's beliefs make them enemies while others make them allies. There are fifteen factions in total. The Faction War[edit] Main article: Faction War In 1998, TSR published Faction War, an adventure that effectively closed the book on Planescape, as it was then ending the product line. The culmination of several adventures leading up to that point, the Faction War brought an end to the factions' control of the city. Instigated by the power-hungry Duke Rowan Darkwood, factol of the Fated, in a bid to dethrone the Lady and rule Sigil himself, the war spread throughout the city before the Lady of Pain, with the aid of a group of adventurers (the players' characters), intervened. Sects[edit] Sects are in many ways identical to the Factions, differing in that they are not based in Sigil. Sects are often highly specific to the particular planes they originate from, though historically many of the Factions were once Sects and some Sects were once Factions. Rules[edit] There are three principles (or heuristics) governing the world of Planescape: the Rule-of-Three, the Unity of Rings, and the Center of the Multiverse.[8] Rule-of-Three[edit] The first principle, the Rule-of-Three, says simply that things tend to happen in threes.[9] The principles which govern the planes are themselves subject to this rule. Unity of Rings[edit] The second principle is the Unity of Rings, and notes that many things on the planes are circular, coming back around to where they started. This is true geographically as well as philosophically.[citation needed] Center of All[edit] The third principle (fitting neatly into the Rule-of-Three above) is the Center of All, and states that there is a center of everything—or, rather, wherever a person happens to be is the center of the multiverse... From their own perspective, at least. As most planes are functionally infinite, disproving anyone's centricity would be impossible. In Planescape, this is meant philosophically just as much as it is meant in terms of multiversal geography.[10] The fact that anywhere could be the center of the multiverse in this view also implies that nowhere can be said to be the de facto true and only center. This sparks a lot of arguments and violence since some people believe the City of Doors to be the center due to its uncommon number of portals to other planes and position in the Outlands and some factions also claim different centers, each with their own significance. Published material[edit] The campaign setting was followed by a series of expansions detailing the Planes of Chaos (by Wolfgang Baur and Lester W. Smith), the Planes of Law (by Colin McComb and Baur), and the Planes of Conflict (by McComb and Dale Donovan). Other expansions and adventures followed, as listed below. Upon the release of 3rd Edition, Planescape, along with most other settings, were discontinued, although fan sites such as planewalker.com were allowed to continue to use the material and update it to the new edition. The 3rd Edition Manual of the Planes, the 3.5 Edition Dungeon Master's Guide, and the 2004 Planar Handbook also used the general layout of the planes and some of the details from the setting, including Sigil, but these are not part of the Planescape line. Similar material has surfaced in 4th Edition rulebooks, as the Dungeon Master Guide 2 includes a section on Sigil. The 5th Edition Player's Handbook also contains a section explaining the planes and Sigil. The series had a small number of novels. The novels were not generally well received.[citation needed] In 1995, Planescape won the Origins Award for Best Graphic Presentation of a Roleplaying Game, Adventure, or Supplement of 1994.[4] Boxed sets[edit] 2600 Planescape Campaign Setting 2603 Planes of Chaos 2607 Planes of Law 2610 A Player’s Primer to the Outlands 2615 Planes of Conflict 2621 Hellbound: The Blood War Accessories[edit] Planescape Conspectus 2609 In the Cage: A Guide to Sigil 2611 The Factol’s Manifesto 2620 The Planewalker's Handbook 2623 On Hallowed Ground 2624 Uncaged: Faces of Sigil 2625 A Guide to the Astral Plane 2630 Faces of Evil: The Fiends 2633 A Guide to the Ethereal Plane 2634 The Inner Planes 2602 Planescape Monstrous Compendium Appendix 2613 Planescape Monstrous Compendium Appendix II 2635 Planescape Monstrous Compendium Appendix III The Planescape Sketchbook Adventures[edit] 2601 The Eternal Boundary 2604 Well of Worlds 2605 In the Abyss 2606 The Deva Spark 2608 Fires of Dis 2614 Harbinger House 2619 Something Wild 2626 Doors to the Unknown 2628 The Great Modron March 2629 Faction War 2631 Dead Gods 2632 Tales From the Infinite Staircase Video game[edit] Main article: Planescape: Torment The setting was featured in the computer game Planescape: Torment, which portrayed the Planescape world (specifically Sigil, the Outlands, Baator, Carceri, and the Negative Energy Plane). It is now a cult game[11] and was out of print until its DVD re-release as a budget title in 2009.[12] It was released as a download on GOG.com in 2010 and soon became the "second most wanted game" on the site.[13] An enhanced edition by BeamDog was released on April 11, 2017.[14] Marketed as a spiritual successor to Planescape: Torment, Torment: Tides of Numenera was released in February 2017. The game takes inspiration from the previous game but is not itself based in the Planescape setting. Collectible card game[edit] Main article: Blood Wars Card Game TSR published a collectible card game based on the Planescape setting called Blood Wars. The game featured major locations, personalities, and features of the Planescape setting and also introduced new creatures that were added to the role playing game setting as part of subsequent products. Novels[edit] Fire and Dust (1996), by James Alan Gardner, a rejected title that the author has since published as a free online manuscript. [1] Pages of Pain (December 1997), by Troy Denning, ( ISBN 0-7869-0508-5) Torment (October 1999), by Ray Vallese and Valerie Vallese, ( ISBN 0-7869-1527-7) Torment is based on an early script of Planescape: Torment. Blood Wars Trilogy[edit] Blood Hostages (January 1996), by J. Robert King, ( ISBN 0-7869-0473-9)[15] Abyssal Warriors (June 1996), by J. Robert King, ( ISBN 0-7869-0501-8)[15] Planar Powers (August 1997), by J. Robert King, ( ISBN 0-7869-0532-8)[15] Planar Powers won the Origins Awards for Best Game-Related Novel of 1997.[16] See also[edit] Multiverse References[edit] ^ a b c d Scott Haring; Andrew Hartsock (August 1994). "Pyramid Pick: Planescape". Pyramid. Steve Jackson Games. #8. Retrieved 2008-02-26. ^ "The History of TSR". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on 2008-09-24. Retrieved 2005-08-20. ^ a b c d Alloway, Gene (May 1994). "Feature Review: Planescape". White Wolf. White Wolf Publishing (43): 36–38. ^ a b "1994 Origins Award for Best Graphic Presentation of a Roleplaying Game, Adventure, or Supplement of 1994". Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts & Design. Archived from the original on 2009-05-06. ^ Webb, Trenton (March 1996). "Games Reviews". Arcane. Future Publishing (4): 73. ^ Swan, Rick (July 1994). "Role-playing Reviews". Dragon. Lake Geneva, Wisconsin: TSR (#207): 51–52. ^ a b Carbonell, Curtis D. (2019). "Chapter 3: Dungeons and Dragons Multiverse". Dread Trident: Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Modern Fantastic. Liverpool: Oxford University Press. pp. 98–100. ISBN 978-1-78962-468-7. OCLC 1129971339. ^ "Planescape: Torment glossary". ^ "Planescape:Torment - The Glossary". Retrieved 2007-10-02. ^ Planescape Campaign Setting pg.3 ^ "The Escapist : Planescape: Torment". ^ "Plane Scape Torment (PC DVD): Amazon.co.uk: PC & Video Games". ^ Planescape Torment Game at GOG.com: Computer Game ^ "Planescape: Torment: Enhanced Edition". planescape.com. Retrieved 2017-03-30. ^ a b c Kenson, Stephen (March 1999). "Profiles: J. Robert King". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#257): 120. ^ "Origins Award Winners (1998)". Academy of Adventure Gaming, Arts & Designs. Archived from the original on November 5, 2007. External links[edit] Planescape at Curlie The Unity of Rings: comic including basic information on Planescape Planescape Survival Guide: Ongoing Planescape webcomic (since 2005) The Acaeum's All Things Planar: Planescape collector's product list and forums Planescape Collector's Guide: an expanded, reasonably comprehensive guide to products released for the Planescape setting v t e Planescape Setting Faction Sigil Tiefling Publications Modules Dead Gods The Deva Spark Die Vecna Die! Doors to the Unknown The Eternal Boundary Expedition to the Demonweb Pits Faction War Something Wild Novels Abyssal Warriors Blood Hostages Sourcebooks A Guide to the Astral Plane Hellbound: The Blood War On Hallowed Ground Planes of Chaos Planes of Conflict Planes of Law Planescape Campaign Setting The Planewalker's Handbook Uncaged: Faces of Sigil In other media Blood Wars Warlord's Tactical Manual Planescape: Torment v t e Torment games Entries Planescape: Torment Torment: Tides of Numenera Characters The Nameless One Morte Annah-of-the-Shadows Settings Planescape Faction Sigil Numenera Companies Interplay Entertainment Black Isle Studios inXile Entertainment People Chris Avellone David "Zeb" Cook Monte Cook Brian Fargo Colin McComb v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond