For the genus of moths, see Poena (moth). In Greek mythology, Poena (also Poine) is the spirit of punishment[1] and the attendant of punishment to Nemesis,[2] the goddess of divine retribution. Her Roman equivalent may have been Ultio. The Latin word poena, "pain, punishment, penalty", gave rise to English words such as subpoena and pain.[3] The original word is the Ancient Greek poinḗ (ποινή), also meaning penalty. Poena was also treated as a host of spirits called poenai that were similar in nature to the Erinyes. References[edit] ^ Atsma, Aaron. "Poine". Theoi Project. Retrieved 2013-04-08. ^ Irwin, Patrick. "Nemesis". University of Oxford. Archived from the original on 2010-10-02. Retrieved 2013-04-08. ^ Harper, Douglas. "Penal - Etymology". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 2013-04-08. External links[edit] LacusCurtius – Poena v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities (Dii Consentes) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Liber Libertas Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Venus Veritas Vesta Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Victoria Terra Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Metamorphoses Fasti Propertius Apuleius The Golden Ass Varro Res divinae Concepts and practices Religion in ancient Rome Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Pomerium Temples Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism See also Glossary Greek mythology Etruscan religion Myth and ritual Roman polytheism (List) Classical mythology Conversion to Christianity Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism This article relating to an Ancient Roman myth or legend is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article relating to a Greek deity is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e