Collection of Old Norse poems The title page of Olive Bray's English translation of Codex Regius entitled Poetic Edda depicting the tree Yggdrasil and a number of its inhabitants (1908) by W. G. Collingwood. Part of a series on the Norse people Extent of Norse language in 900 AD: Western Norse in red and Eastern Norse in orange. Scandinavia History History Nordic Stone Age Nordic Bronze Age Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Germanic Iron Age Migration Period Viking Age Norse–Gaels Normans Christianization Old Norse religion Gods Æsir Vanir Jötunn Sigurd Sigmund Völundr Vættir Elves Light elves Dark elves Dvergr Einherjar Fenrir Hel (being) Dís Norns Valkyries Jörmungandr Ask and Embla Cosmology Ásgarðr Vanaheimr Miðgarðr Vígríðr Bifröst Fólkvangr Ginnungagap Helheim Múspellsheimr Niflheimr Mímisbrunnr Hvergelmir Urðarbrunnr Yggdrasill Valhalla Jötunheimr Rituals and worship Blót Seiðr Norse funeral Yule Walpurgis Night Midsummer Hörgr Heathen hofs Vé Gothi Calendar Runic magic Völva Galdr Death in Norse paganism Society Norse law Earl Thrall Félag Thing Mead hall Holmgang Old Norse Nithing pole Nīþ Ergi Berserker Events Æsir–Vanir War Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Wild Hunt Sources Poetic Edda Prose Edda Tyrfing Cycle Völsung Cycle Saga Runestones WikiProject Norse history and culture v t e The Poetic Edda is the modern name for an untitled collection of Old Norse anonymous poems, which is distinct from the Prose Edda written by Snorri Sturluson. Several versions exist, all primarily of text from the Icelandic medieval manuscript known as the Codex Regius, which contains 31 poems.[1] The Codex Regius is arguably the most important extant source on Norse mythology and Germanic heroic legends. From the early-19th century onwards it has had a powerful influence on later Scandinavian literatures - not only through its stories, but also through the visionary force and the dramatic quality of many of the poems. It has also become an inspiring model for many later innovations in poetic meter, particularly in Nordic languages, offering many varied examples of terse, stress-based metrical schemes that lack any final rhyme but instead use alliterative devices and strongly-concentrated imagery. Poets who have acknowledged their debt to the Codex Regius include Vilhelm Ekelund, August Strindberg, J. R. R. Tolkien, Ezra Pound, Jorge Luis Borges, and Karin Boye. Codex Regius was written during the 13th century, but nothing was known of its whereabouts until 1643, when it came into the possession of Brynjólfur Sveinsson, then Bishop of Skálholt. At the time, versions of the Edda were known in Iceland, but scholars speculated that there once was another Edda, an Elder Edda, which contained the pagan poems that Snorri quotes in his Edda. When Codex Regius was discovered, it seemed that the speculation had proved correct, but modern scholarly research has shown that the Edda was likely written first and that the two were, at most, connected by a common source.[2] Brynjólfur attributed the manuscript to Sæmundr the Learned, a larger-than-life 12th century Icelandic priest. Modern scholars reject that attribution, but the name Sæmundar Edda is still sometimes associated with both the "Codex Regius" and versions of "Poetic Edda" using it as a source. Bishop Brynjólfur sent Codex Regius as a present to the Danish king - hence the name given to the codex: Latin: codex regius, lit. 'royal book'. For centuries it was stored in the Royal Library in Copenhagen, but in 1971 it was returned to Iceland. Because air travel at the time was not entirely trustworthy with such precious cargo, it was transported by ship, accompanied by a naval escort.[3] Contents 1 Composition 1.1 Authorship 1.2 Date 1.3 Location 2 Editions and inclusions 2.1 Mythological poems 2.1.1 In Codex Regius 2.1.2 Not in Codex Regius 2.2 Heroic lays 2.2.1 In Codex Regius 2.2.2 Not in Codex Regius 2.3 English translations 3 Allusions and quotations 4 See also 5 References 5.1 Sources 6 Bibliography 6.1 Original text 6.2 Original text with English translation 6.3 English translation only 6.4 Commentary 7 External links Composition[edit] The Eddic poems are composed in alliterative verse. Most are in fornyrðislag, while málaháttr is a common variation. The rest, about a quarter, are composed in ljóðaháttr. The language of the poems is usually clear and relatively unadorned. Kennings are often employed, though they do not arise as frequently, nor are they as complex, as those found in skaldic poetry. Authorship[edit] Like most early poetry, the Eddic poems were minstrel poems, passed orally from singer to singer and from poet to poet for centuries. None of the poems are attributed to a particular author, though many of them show strong individual characteristics and are likely to have been the work of individual poets. While scholars have speculated on hypothetical authors, firm and accepted conclusions have never been reached. Date[edit] Accurate dating of the poems has long been a source of scholarly debate. Firm conclusions are difficult to reach; lines from the Eddic poems sometimes appear in poems by known poets. For example, Eyvindr skáldaspillir composed in the latter half of the 10th century, and he uses a couple of lines in his Hákonarmál that are also found in Hávamál. It is possible that he was quoting a known poem, but it is also possible that Hávamál, or at least the strophe in question, is the younger derivative work. The few demonstrably historical characters mentioned in the poems, such as Attila, provide a terminus post quem of sorts. The dating of the manuscripts themselves provides a more useful terminus ante quem. Individual poems have individual clues to their age. For example, Atlamál hin groenlenzku is claimed by its title to have been composed in Greenland, and seems so by some internal evidence. If so, it can be no earlier than about 985, since there were no Scandinavians in Greenland until that time. In some cases, old poems may have been interpolated with younger verses or merged with other poems. For example, stanzas 9–16 of Völuspá, the "Dvergatal" or "Roster of Dwarfs", is considered by some scholars to be an interpolation. Location[edit] The problem of dating the poems is linked with the problem of determining where they were composed. Iceland was not settled until approximately 870, so anything composed before that time would necessarily have been elsewhere, most likely in Scandinavia. More recent poems, on the other hand, are likely Icelandic in origin. Scholars have attempted to localize individual poems by studying the geography, flora, and fauna to which they refer. This approach usually does not yield firm results. For example, there are no wolves in Iceland, but we can be sure that Icelandic poets were familiar with the species. Similarly, the apocalyptic descriptions of Völuspá have been taken as evidence that the poet who composed it had seen a volcanic eruption in Iceland – but this is hardly certain. Editions and inclusions[edit] The cover of Lee M. Hollander's Poetic Edda. Some poems similar to those found in Codex Regius are also included in some editions of the Poetic Edda. Important manuscripts include AM 748 I 4to, Hauksbók and Flateyjarbók. Many of the poems are quoted in Snorri's Edda, but usually only in bits and pieces. What poems are included in an edition of the Poetic Edda depends on the editor. Those not in Codex Regius are sometimes called Eddica minora, from their appearance in an edition with that title edited by Andreas Heusler and Wilhelm Ranisch in 1903. English translators are not consistent on the translations of the names of the Eddic poems or on how the Old Norse forms should be rendered in English. Up to three translated titles are given below, taken from the translations of Bellows, Hollander, and Larrington with proper names in the normalized English forms found in John Lindow's Norse Mythology and in Andy Orchard's Cassell's Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend. Mythological poems[edit] In Codex Regius[edit] Völuspá (Wise-woman's prophecy, The Prophecy of the Seeress, The Seeress's Prophecy) Hávamál (The Ballad of the High One, The Sayings of Hár, Sayings of the High One) Vafþrúðnismál (The Ballad of Vafthrúdnir, The Lay of Vafthrúdnir, Vafthrúdnir's Sayings) Grímnismál (The Ballad of Grímnir, The Lay of Grímnir, Grímnir's Sayings) Skírnismál (The Ballad of Skírnir, The Lay of Skírnir, Skírnir's Journey) Hárbarðsljóð (The Poem of Hárbard, The Lay of Hárbard, Hárbard's Song) Hymiskviða (The Lay of Hymir, Hymir's Poem) Lokasenna (Loki's Wrangling, The Flyting of Loki, Loki's Quarrel) Þrymskviða (The Lay of Thrym, Thrym's Poem) Völundarkviða (The Lay of Völund) Alvíssmál (The Ballad of Alvís, The Lay of Alvís, All-Wise's Sayings) Not in Codex Regius[edit] Baldrs draumar (Baldr's Dreams) Gróttasöngr (The Mill's Song, The Song of Grotti) Rígsþula (The Song of Ríg, The Lay of Ríg, The List of Ríg) Hyndluljóð (The Poem of Hyndla, The Lay of Hyndla, The Song of Hyndla) Völuspá in skamma (The short Völuspá, The Short Seeress' Prophecy, Short Prophecy of the Seeress) - This poem, sometimes presented separately, is often included as an interpolation within Hyndluljóð. Svipdagsmál (The Ballad of Svipdag, The Lay of Svipdag) – This title, originally suggested by Bugge, actually covers two separate poems. These poems are late works and not included in most editions after 1950: Grógaldr (Gróa's Spell, The Spell of Gróa) Fjölsvinnsmál (Ballad of Fjölsvid, The Lay of Fjölsvid) Hrafnagaldr Óðins (Odins's Raven Song, Odin's Raven Chant). (A late work not included in most editions after 1900). Gullkársljóð (The Poem of Gullkár). (A late work not included in most editions after 1900). Heroic lays[edit] After the mythological poems, Codex Regius continues with heroic lays about mortal heroes, examples of Germanic heroic legend. The heroic lays are to be seen as a whole in the Edda, but they consist of three layers: the story of Helgi Hundingsbani, the story of the Nibelungs, and the story of Jörmunrekkr, king of the Goths. These are, respectively, Scandinavian, German, and Gothic in origin. As far as historicity can be ascertained, Attila, Jörmunrekkr, and Brynhildr actually existed, taking Brynhildr to be partly based on Brunhilda of Austrasia, but the chronology has been reversed in the poems. In Codex Regius[edit] The Helgi Lays Helgakviða Hundingsbana I or Völsungakviða (The First Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane, The First Lay of Helgi the Hunding-Slayer, The First Poem of Helgi Hundingsbani) Helgakviða Hjörvarðssonar (The Lay of Helgi the Son of Hjörvard, The Lay of Helgi Hjörvardsson, The Poem of Helgi Hjörvardsson) Helgakviða Hundingsbana II or Völsungakviða in forna (The Second Lay of Helgi Hundingsbane, The Second Lay of Helgi the Hunding-Slayer, A Second Poem of Helgi Hundingsbani) The Niflung Cycle Frá dauða Sinfjötla (Of Sinfjötli's Death, Sinfjötli's Death, The Death of Sinfjötli) (A short prose text.) Grípisspá (Grípir's Prophecy, The Prophecy of Grípir) Reginsmál (The Ballad of Regin, The Lay of Regin) Fáfnismál (The Ballad of Fáfnir, The Lay of Fáfnir) Sigrdrífumál (The Ballad of The Victory-Bringer, The Lay of Sigrdrífa) Brot af Sigurðarkviðu (Fragment of a Sigurd Lay, Fragment of a Poem about Sigurd) Guðrúnarkviða I (The First Lay of Gudrún) Sigurðarkviða hin skamma (The Short Lay of Sigurd, A Short Poem about Sigurd) Helreið Brynhildar (Brynhild's Hell-Ride, Brynhild's Ride to Hel, Brynhild's Ride to Hell) Dráp Niflunga (The Slaying of The Niflungs, The Fall of the Niflungs, The Death of the Niflungs) Guðrúnarkviða II (The Second Lay of Gudrún or Guðrúnarkviða hin forna The Old Lay of Gudrún) Guðrúnarkviða III (The Third Lay of Gudrún) Oddrúnargrátr (The Lament of Oddrún, The Plaint of Oddrún, Oddrún's Lament) Atlakviða (The Lay of Atli). The full manuscript title is Atlakviða hin grœnlenzka, that is, The Greenland Lay of Atli, but editors and translators generally omit the Greenland reference as a probable error from confusion with the following poem. Atlamál hin groenlenzku (The Greenland Ballad of Atli, The Greenlandish Lay of Atli, The Greenlandic Poem of Atli) The Jörmunrekkr Lays Guðrúnarhvöt (Gudrún's Inciting, Gudrún's Lament, The Whetting of Gudrún.) Hamðismál (The Ballad of Hamdir, The Lay of Hamdir) Not in Codex Regius[edit] Several of the legendary sagas contain poetry in the Eddic style. Its age and importance is often difficult to evaluate but the Hervarar saga, in particular, contains interesting poetic interpolations. Hlöðskviða (Lay of Hlöd, also known in English as The Battle of the Goths and the Huns), extracted from Hervarar saga. The Waking of Angantýr, extracted from Hervarar saga. English translations[edit] The Elder or Poetic Edda has been translated numerous times, the earliest printed edition being that by Cottle 1797 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFCottle1797 (help), though some short sections had been translated as early as the 1670s. Some early translators relied on a Latin translation of the Edda, including Cottle.[4] Opinions differ on the best way to translate the text, on the use or rejection of archaic language, and the rendering of terms lacking a clear English analogue. However Cottle's 1797 translation is considered very inaccurate.[4] A comparison of the second and third verses (lines 5–12) of the Voluspa is given below : Ek man jǫtna ár of borna, þás forðum mik fœdda hǫfðu ; níu mank hęima, níu ívíði, mjǫtvið mæran fyr mold neðan. Ár vas alda þars Ymir byggði, vasa sandr né sær, né svalar unnir ; jǫrð fansk æva né upphiminn ; gap vas ginnunga, ęn gras hvęrgi. (Jónsson 1932) harv error: no target: CITEREFJónsson1932 (help) (unchanged orthography) The Jötuns I remember early born, those who me of old have reared. I nine worlds remember, nine trees, the great central tree, beneath the earth. There was in times of old, where Ymir dwelt, nor sand nor sea, nor gelid waves ; earth existed not, nor heaven above, 'twas a chaotic chasm, and grass nowhere, (Thorpe 1866) harv error: no target: CITEREFThorpe1866 (help) I remember the Giants born of yore, who bred me up long ago. I remember nine Worlds, nine Sibyls, a glorious Judge beneath the earth. In the beginning, when naught was, there was neither sand nor sea nor the cold waves, nor was earth to be seen nor heaven above. There was a Yawning Chasm [chaos], but grass nowhere, (Vigfússon & Powell 1883) harv error: no target: CITEREFVigfússonPowell1883 (help) † I remember of yore   were born the Jötuns, they who aforetime   fostered me : nine worlds I remember,   nine in the Tree, the glorious Fate Tree   that springs 'neath the Earth. 'Twas the earliest of times   when Ymir lived ; then was sand nor sea   nor cooling wave, nor was Earth found ever,   nor Heaven on high, there was Yawning of Deeps   and nowhere grass : (Bray 1908) harv error: no target: CITEREFBray1908 (help) I remember yet   the giants of yore, Who gave me bread   in the days gone by ; Nine worlds I knew,   the nine in the tree With mighty roots   beaneath the mold. Of old was the age   when Ymir lived ; Sea nor cool waves   nor sand there were ; Earth had not been,   nor heaven above, But a yawning gap,   and grass nowhere. (Bellows 1923) harv error: no target: CITEREFBellows1923 (help) I call to mind the kin of etins which long ago did give me life. Nine worlds I know, the nine abodes of the glorious world-tree the ground beneath. In earliest times did Ymir live: was nor sea nor land nor salty waves, neither earth was there nor upper heaven, but a gaping nothing, and green things nowhere. (Hollander 1962) harv error: no target: CITEREFHollander1962 (help) I tell of Giants from times forgotten. Those who fed me in former days: Nine worlds I can reckon, nine roots of the Tree. The wonderful Ash, way under the ground When Ymir lived long ago Was no sand or sea, no surging waves. Nowhere was there earth nor heaven above. But a grinning gap and grass nowhere. (Auden & Taylor 1969) harv error: no target: CITEREFAudenTaylor1969 (help) I remember giants   of ages past, those who called me   one of their kin; I know how nine roots   form nine worlds under the earth   where the Ash Tree rises. Nothing was there   when time began, neither sands nor seas   nor cooling waves, Earth was not yet,   nor the high heavens, but a gaping emptiness   nowhere green. (Terry 1990) harv error: no target: CITEREFTerry1990 (help) I, born of giants, remember very early those who nurtured me then; I remember nine worlds, I remember nine giant women, the mighty Measuring-Tree below the earth. Young were the years when Ymir made his settlement, there was no sand nor sea nor cool waves; earth was nowhere nor the sky above, chaos yawned, grass was there nowhere. (Larrington 1996) harv error: no target: CITEREFLarrington1996 (help) I remember giants born early in time, who long ago had reared me Nine worlds I remember, nine wood-ogresses, glorious tree of good measure, under the ground. It was early in the ages when Ymir made his dwelling: There was not sand nor sea nor chill waves. Earth was not to be found nor above it heaven: a gulf was there of gaping voids and grass nowhere, (Dronke 1997) harv error: no target: CITEREFDronke1997 (help) I recall those giants, born early on, who long ago brought me up; nine worlds I recall, nine wood-dwelling witches, the famed tree of fate down under the earth. It was early in ages when Ymir made his home, there was neither sand nor sea, nor cooling waves; no earth to be found, nor heaven above: a gulf beguiling, nor grass anywhere. (Orchard 2011) harv error: no target: CITEREFOrchard2011 (help) I remember being reared by Jotuns, in days long gone. If I look back, I recall nine worlds, nine wood-witches, that renowned tree of fate below the Earth Ymir struck camp when time began. No land, sand or sea folding on itself, no sky, earth or grass swaying atop its girth, only the cavern of chaos's gaping gulf. (Dodds 2014) harv error: no target: CITEREFDodds2014 (help) I remember giants born early in time those nurtured me long ago; I remember nine worlds, I remember nine giant women, the mighty Measuring-Tree below the earth. Early in time Ymir made his settlement, there was no sand nor sea nor cool waves; earth was nowhere nor the sky above, a void of yawning chaos, grass was there nowhere (Larrington 2014) harv error: no target: CITEREFLarrington2014 (help) I remember the giants born so long ago; in those ancient days they raised me. I remember nine worlds, nine giantesses, and the seed from which Yggdrasil sprang. It was at the very beginning, it was Ymir's time, there was no sand, no sea, no cooling waves, no earth, no sky, no grass, just Ginnungagap. (Crawford 2015) harv error: no target: CITEREFCrawford2015 (help) † The prose translation lacks line breaks, inserted here to match those in the Norse verse given in the same work. Allusions and quotations[edit] As noted above, the Edda of Snorri Sturluson makes much use of the works included in the Poetic Edda, though he may well have had access to other compilations that contained the poems and there is no evidence that he used the Poetic Edda or even knew of it. The Volsungasaga is a prose version of much of the Niflung cycle of poems. Due to several missing pages (see Great Lacuna) in the Codex Regius, the Volsungasaga is the oldest source for the Norse version of much of the story of Sigurð. Only 22 stanzas of the Sigurðarkviðu survive in the Codex Regius, plus four stanzas from the missing section which are quoted in the Volsungasaga. J. R. R. Tolkien, a philologist and de facto Professor of Old Norse familiar with the Eddas, utilized concepts in his 1937 fantasy novel The Hobbit, and in other works: The Misty Mountains derive from the úrig fiöll in the Skírnismál.[5] The names of his Dwarves derive from the Dvergatal in the Völuspá.[6] His Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún is a verse retelling or reconstruction of the Nibelung poems from the Edda (see Völsunga saga), composed in the Eddaic fornyrðislag metre. See also[edit] Part of a series on Old Norse Dialects Old West Norse (Old Icelandic Old NorwegianGreenlandic Norse) Old East Norse (Old Danish Old Swedish) Old Gutnish Use Orthography Runic alphabet (Younger Futhark Medieval) Latin alphabet Grammar Phonology Morphology Literature Poetry (alliterative verse) Sagas (of Icelanders) Edda (Poetic Edda Prose Edda) First Grammatical Treatise Ancestors Proto-Indo-European Proto-Germanic Proto-Norse Descendants Danish Faroese Greenlandic Norse (extinct) Icelandic Norn (extinct) Norwegian Swedish English words of Old Norse origin v t e Old Norse poetry Norse mythology References[edit] ^ John Lindow (17 October 2002). Norse Mythology: A Guide to Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs. Oxford University Press. pp. 11–. ISBN 978-0-19-983969-8. ^ Acker, Paul; Larrington, Carolyne (2002), The Poetic Edda: Essays on Old Norse Mythology ^ Dodds, Jeramy (27 October 2014). The Poetic Edda. p. 12. ISBN 9781770563858. ^ a b Larrington, Carolyne (2007), Clark, David; Phelpstead, Carl (eds.), "Translating the Poetic Edda into English" (PDF), Old Norse Made New, Viking Society for Northern Research, pp. 21–42 ^ Shippey, Tom (2003), The Road to Middle-earth, Houghton Mifflin, Ch. 3 pp. 70–71, ISBN 0-618-25760-8 ^ Ratecliff, John D. (2007), "Return to Bag-End", The History of The Hobbit, HarperCollins, 2, Appendix III, ISBN 978-0-00-725066-0 Sources[edit] Anderson, Rasmus B. (1876), Norse Mythology: Myths of the Eddas, Chicago: S.C. Griggs and company; London: Trubner & Co., Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific, ISBN 1-4102-0528-2 , Reprinted 2003 Björnsson, Árni, ed. (1975), Snorra-Edda, Reykjavík. Iðunn Magnússson, Ásgeir Blöndal (1989), Íslensk orðsifjabók, Reykjavík Lindow, John (2001), Norse Mythology: A Guide to the Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs, Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-515382-0 Orchard, Andy (1997), Cassell's Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend, London: Cassell, ISBN 0-304-36385-5 Briem, Ólafur, ed. (1985), Eddukvæði, Reykjavík: Skálholt Tolkien, J.R.R. (1988), Tolkien, Christopher (ed.), The Return of the Shadow, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, p. 240 Bibliography[edit] In reverse chronological order Original text[edit] Neckel, Gustav; Kuhn, Hans, eds. (1983) [1914], Edda: Die Lieder des Codex Regius nebst verwandten Denkmälern I: Text , web-text Titus: Text Collection: Edda Helgason, Jón, ed. (1951–1952), "Eddadigte", Nordisk Filologi, Copenhagen: Munksgaard, A: 4 and 7-8 Reissued as Helgason, Jón, ed. (1955), Eddadigte, Copenhagen: Munksgaard , Codex Regius poems up to Sigrdrífumál , (3 vols.). Jónsson, Finnur, ed. (1932), De gamle Eddadigte (PDF), Copenhagen: Gads Boer, R.C., ed. (1922), Die Edda mit historisch-kritischem Commentar I: Einleitung und Text (in German), Haarlem: Willink & Zoon Heusler, Andreas; Ranisch, Wilhelm, eds. (1903), Eddica Minora, Dortmund Wimmer, E.A.; Jónsson, Finnur (1891), Håndskriftet Nr 2365 4to gl. kgl. samling på det store Kgl. bibliothek i København (Codex regius af den ældre Edda) i fototypisk og diplomatisk gengievelse., Copenhagen: Samfund til udgivelse at gammel nordisk litteratur , lithographic edition Bugge, Sophus, ed. (1867), Sæmundar Edda, Christiania: P.T. Malling Munch, P.A., ed. (1847), Den Ældre Edda. Samling af norrøne oldkvad, indeholdende Nordens ældste gude- og helte-sagn, Christiania [Oslo]: P.T. Malling Original text with English translation[edit] Dronke, Ursula, ed. (1969), The Poetic Edda, Oxford: Clarendon Heroic Poems, I, 1969, ISBN 0-19-811497-4 , (Atlakviða, Atlamál in Grœnlenzko, Guðrúnarhvöt, Hamðismál.) Dronke, Ursula (1997), Mythological Poems, II, ISBN 0-19-811181-9CS1 maint: ref duplicates default (link) , (Völuspá, Rígsthula, Völundarkvida, Lokasenna, Skírnismál, Baldrs draumar.) Mythological Poems, III, 2011, ISBN 978-0-19-811182-5 , (Hávamál, Hymiskviða, Grímnismál, Grottasöngr) Bray, Olive, ed. (1908), "Part 1 - The Mythological Poems", The Elder or Poetic Edda: Commonly known as Saemund's Edda, Viking Club Translation Series, Viking Society for Northern Research, 2 Vigfússon, Gudbrand; Powell, F. York, eds. (1883), Corpus Poeticum Boreale: The Poetry of the Old Northern Tongue, Oxford: Oxford University Press , (2 vols.) Eddic Poetry, 1 Court Poetry, 2 English translation only[edit] Crawford, Jackson, ed. (2015), The Poetic Edda: Stories of the Norse Gods and Heroes, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc., ISBN 978-1-62-466356-7 Dodds, Jeramy, ed. (2014), The Poetic Edda, Toronto: Coach House Books, ISBN 978-1-55-245296-7 Orchard, Andy, ed. (2011), The Elder Edda: A Book of Viking Lore, London: Penguin Group, ISBN 978-0-14-043585-6 Larrington, Carolyne, ed. (1996), The Poetic Edda, Oxford World's Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-282383-3 Larrington, Carolyne, ed. (2014), The Poetic Edda (2nd ed.), Oxford World's Classics, ISBN 978-0199675340 , altered translation Terry, Patricia, ed. (1969), Poems of the Vikings: The Elder Edda, Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, ISBN 0-672-60332-2 Revised as : Terry, Patricia, ed. (1990), Poems of the Elder Edda, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, ISBN 0-8122-8235-3 Auden, W.H.; Taylor, Paul B., eds. (1969), The Elder Edda: A Selection, London: Faber., ISBN 0-571-09066-4 Revised and expanded as Auden, W.H.; Taylor, Paul B., eds. (1981), Norse Poems, London: Athlone, ISBN 0-485-11226-4 Hollander, Lee M., ed. (1962), The Poetic Edda: Translated with an Introduction and Explanatory Notes (2nd ed., rev. ed.), Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, ISBN 0-292-76499-5 Bellows, Henry Adams, ed. (1923), "The Poetic Edda: Translated from the Icelandic with an Introduction and Notes", Scandinavian Classics, New York: American-Scandinavian Foundation, XXI & XXII Thorpe, Benjamin, ed. (1866), Edda Sæmundar Hinns Froða: The Edda Of Sæmund The Learned, London: Trübner & Co. , (2 vols.) Part I , e-text Part II, 1866 , e-text Reprinted in : Anderson, Rasmus B.; Buel, J.W.; Thorpe, Benjamin; Blackwell, I.A., eds. (1906), The Elder Eddas of Saemund Sigfusson [.. and the] Younger Eddas of Snorre Sturleson, Norrœna Cottle, A.S., ed. (1797), Icelandic Poetry, or The Edda of Saemund, Bristol: N.Biggs , Oldest English translation of a substantial portion of the Poetic Edda Commentary[edit] La Farge, Beatrice; Tucker, John, eds. (1992), Glossary to the Poetic Edda Based on Hans Kuhn's Kurzes Wörterbuch, Heidelberg , Update and expansions of the glossary of the Neckel-Kuhn edition Glendinning, Robert J.; Bessason, Haraldur (1983), Edda: A Collection of Essays, Winnipeg, MB: University of Manitoba Kommentar zu den Liedern der Edda, ed. by Klaus von See, 7 vols (Heidelberg: Winter, 1997-2012). An edition, German translation, and comprehensive commentary on the Poetic Edda (vol. 1: Vafþrþúðnismál, Grímnismál, Vǫluspá, Hávamál, ISBN 9783825369637; vol. 2. Skírnismál, Hárbarðslióð, Hymiskviða, Lokasenna, ISBN 3825305341; vol. 3. Völundarkviða, Alvíssmál, Baldrs draumar, Rígsþula, Hyndlolióð, Grottasöngr, ISBN 3825311368; vol. 4. Helgakviða Hundingsbana I, Helgakviða Hiörvarðssonar, Helgakviða Hundingsbana II, ISBN 382535007X; vol. 5. Frá dauða Sinfiotla, Grípisspá, Reginsmál, Fáfnismál, Sigrdrífumál, ISBN 3825351807; vol. 6. Brot af Sigurðarkviðo, Guðrúnarkviða I, Sigurðarkviða in skamma, Helreið Brynhildar, Dráp Niflunga, Guðrúnarkviða II, Guðrúnarkviða III, Oddrúnargrátr, Strophenbruchstücke aus der Volsunga saga ISBN 9783825355647; vol. 7. Atlakvið in groenlenzka, Atlamál in groenlenzko, Frá Guðrúno, Guðrúnarhvot, Hamðismál, ISBN 9783825359973). External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Poetic Edda. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikisource has original text related to this article: Poetic Edda Eddukvæði Poetic Edda in Old Norse from heimskringla.no "Eddic to English", www.mimisbrunnr.info , review of all English translations to 2018 The Elder Edda public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e The Poetic Edda Mythological poems Codex Regius Völuspá Hávamál Vafþrúðnismál Grímnismál Skírnismál Hárbarðsljóð Hymiskviða Lokasenna Þrymskviða Völundarkviða Alvíssmál Non-Codex Regius Baldrs draumar Rígsþula Hyndluljóð Völuspá hin skamma Svipdagsmál Grógaldr Fjölsvinnsmál Gróttasöngr Hrafnagaldr Óðins Heroic Lays Codex Regius Helgi Lays Helgakviða Hundingsbana I Helgakviða Hjörvarðssonar Helgakviða Hundingsbana II Niflung Cycle Frá dauða Sinfjötla Grípisspá Reginsmál Fáfnismál Sigrdrífumál Brot af Sigurðarkviðu Guðrúnarkviða I Sigurðarkviða hin skamma Helreið Brynhildar Dráp Niflunga Guðrúnarkviða II Guðrúnarkviða III Oddrúnargrátr Atlakviða Atlamál Jörmunrekkr Lays Guðrúnarhvöt Hamðismál Non-Codex Regius Hlöðskviða Hervararkviða Later poems Sólarljóð Manuscripts Codex Regius AM 748 I 4to AM 738 4to Hauksbók Flateyjarbók Codex Wormianus See also Prose Edda Norse mythology Skaldic poetry Old Norse poetry Icelandic language Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125