"Euro crime" redirects here. For supranational criminal law of the EU, see European crimes. Poliziotteschi Years active 1960s-1970s Country Italy Influences New Hollywood, film noir, exploitation film Poliziotteschi (Italian pronunciation: [polittsjotˈteski]; singular poliziottesco) constitute a subgenre of crime and action films that emerged in Italy in the late 1960s and reached the height of their popularity in the 1970s.[1] They are also known as polizieschi all'italiana, Euro-crime, Italo-crime, spaghetti crime films, or simply Italian crime films. Influenced by both 1970s French crime films and gritty 1960s and 1970s American cop films and vigilante films,[2] poliziotteschi films were made amidst an atmosphere of socio-political turmoil in Italy and increasing Italian crime rates. The films generally featured graphic and brutal violence, organized crime, car chases, vigilantism, heists, gunfights, and corruption up to the highest levels. The protagonists were generally tough working class loners, willing to act outside a corrupt or overly bureaucratic system.[3] Contents 1 Etymology of the noun 2 History 2.1 Directors include 2.2 Actors include 3 Selected films 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Etymology of the noun[edit] In Italian, poliziesco is the grammatically correct Italian adjective (resulting from the fusion of the noun polizia "police" and the desinence -esco "related to", akin to the English "-esque") for police-related dramas, ranging from Ed McBain's police procedural novels to forensic science investigations. Poliziesco is used generally to indicate every detective fiction production where police forces (Italian or foreign) are the main protagonists. Instead the term poliziottesco, a fusion of the words poliziotto ("policeman") and the same -esco desinence, has prevailed (over the more syntactically-correct Poliziesco all'Italiana) to indicate 1970s-era Italian-produced "tough cop" and crime movies. The prevalence of Poliziottesco over Poliziesco all'Italiana closely follows the success of the term Spaghetti Western over Western all'Italiana, being shorter and more vivid – though in both instances the term that has come to be used more frequently by English-speaking fans of the genre (poliziotteschi, Spaghetti Westerns) was originally used pejoratively by critics, to denigrate the films themselves and their makers. History[edit] Although the subgenre has its roots in Italian heist films of the late 1960s, such as Bandits in Milan (Banditi a Milano, 1968) by Carlo Lizzani, it was also strongly influenced by such rough-edged American police thrillers of the late 1960s and early 1970s as Bullitt, Dirty Harry, The French Connection, Magnum Force, and Serpico; the 1970s wave of American vigilante films, including 1974's Death Wish; the increase of cynicism and violence in French crime films; the resurgence of mob films in the wake of The Godfather; French and American noir and neo-noir films; and the rise of exploitation films in the late 1960s and 1970s. More generally, the genre was also heavily influenced by real-life crime and unrest in 1970s Italy during the period known as the anni di piombo (political violence, kidnappings, assassinations, bank robberies, political militant terrorism, impending oil crisis, political corruption, organized crime-related violence, and recession).[4] Just as American police films, American crime thrillers, and American vigilante films of the time focused on the crime waves and urban decline in the United States of the 1960s and 1970s, poliziotteschi were set in the context of, or directly addressed, the sociopolitical tumult and violence of Italy's anni di piombo, or the "Years of Lead", a period of widespread social unrest, political upheaval, labor unrest, rising crime, political violence, and political terrorism from the 1960s to 1980s. During this period, paramilitary and militant political terrorist groups, both on the far left (e.g. the Red Brigades) and far right (e.g. the neo-fascist Nuclei Armati Rivoluzionari) engaged in kidnappings, assassinations, and bombings (such as the Piazza Fontana bombing and 1980 Bologna train station bombing). At the same time, there was a period of especially violent conflict and disorder within the Sicilian Mafia, kicked off with the "First Mafia War" of the 1960s and culminating in the "Second Mafia War" of the early 1980s. Italian organized crime groups such as the Sicilian Mafia, the Camorra, and especially the Roman Banda della Magliana were actively involved in both criminal and political activities during this time, carrying out bombings and kidnappings, making deals with corrupt politicians, and forming strong ties to extreme far right groups and neo-fascist terrorist organizations. Accordingly, poliziotteschi films such as Execution Squad (1972) often featured political extremists and paramilitary or terrorist groups alongside or in addition to the more commonly featured apolitical mafiosi and gangster criminal elements found in Italian crime films.[3][5][6][7][8] Due in part to the genre's often ostensibly negative portrayal of political activists and militants, especially leftist militants, and its seeming endorsement of vigilantism and "tough-on-crime" or "law and order" stances, some poliziotteschi films (such as 1976's The Big Racket) were criticized by then-contemporaneous critics and accused of exploiting conservative fears of rising crime and political upheaval while containing reactionary, pro-violence, or even quasi-Fascist ideological elements in their overarching message. These critiques were similar to those leveled at the 1970s American "vigilante films" of the same period, such as 1974's Death Wish, films by which the poliziotteschi genre were considerably influenced.[3][5][7][9][10] In retrospect, despite contemporaneous claims in the 1970s of overly conservative or reactionary themes within the genre, film historians such as Louis Bayman and Peter Bondarella contend that, in fact, poliziotteschi films generally presented a more multi-faceted, complex outlook on the political turmoil and crime waves of the time, as well as violence in general, with Bayman and author Roberto Curti in particular arguing that the genre generally used political conflicts and violence for largely apolitical tension-building and cathartic or emotional purposes rather than to promote any particular political agendas.[3][11] Curti notes that the genre's protagonists often simultaneously displayed both right-wing and left-wing views, and protagonists were often working class while villains were often wealthy right-wing conservatives.[3] The film Caliber 9 (1972), for instance, features protagonists of both right-wing and leftist ideologies and offers differing views on the causes of crime and the true antagonists of law-abiding Italian society, while Execution Squad reveals the actual antagonists of the film to be right-wing reactionary, "tough-on-crime" ex-police officers and vigilantes rather than the initially suspected leftist militants.[5][7] Rather than explicitly supporting violence or vigilantism, the genre just as often displayed a morally ambiguous or aloof position on these themes, or even presented vigilantism and violence as a no-win situation. Though poliziotteschi films have been viewed by some critics as condemning a "liberal" or "weak" judiciary system as ineffectual in its treatment of criminals, the genre also suggests a more general distrust of authority, whether left-wing or right-wing, by portraying right-wing law enforcement, politicians and businessmen as hopelessly corrupt and manipulative.[3][5] According to Bondarella, the "classic" poliziotteschi film reveals "almost universal suspicion of the very social institutions charged with protecting Italian society from criminal violence."[7] With directors such as Fernando Di Leo and Umberto Lenzi and actors such as Maurizio Merli and Tomas Milian, poliziotteschi films became popular in the mid-1970s after the decline of Spaghetti Westerns and Eurospy genres. The subgenre lost its mainstream popularity in the late 1970s as Italian erotic comedy and horror films started topping the Italian box office. Although based around crime and detective work, poliziotteschi should not be confused with the other popular Italian crime genre of the 1970s, the giallo, which, to English-speaking and non-Italian audiences, refers to a genre of violent Italian murder-mystery thriller-horror films. Directors and stars often moved between both forms, and some films could be considered under either banner, such as Massimo Dallamano's What Have They Done to Your Daughters? (1974). The poliziottesco subgenre gradually declined in popularity during the late 1970s. Screenwriter Dardano Sacchetti, who was unhappy with what he deemed the genre's "fascistic" undertones, credits himself for "destroying it from the inside", by making it evolve into self-parody. By the end of the decade, the most successful films associated with the genre were crime-comedy pictures, which gradually evolved towards pure comedy.[12] Directors include[edit] Mario Bianchi Alfonso Brescia Enzo G. Castellari Bruno Corbucci Damiano Damiani Alberto De Martino Massimo Dallamano Ruggero Deodato Lucio Fulci Mario Caiano Marino Girolami Romolo Girolami Umberto Lenzi Fernando Di Leo Carlo Lizzani Sergio Martino Stelvio Massi Giuliano Montaldo Elio Petri Sergio Sollima Duccio Tessari Actors include[edit] Mario Adorf Ursula Andress Carroll Baker Martin Balsam Helmut Berger Barbara Bouchet Sal Borgese Marcel Bozzuffi Charles Bronson Luciano Catenacci Adolfo Celi Giovanni Cianfriglia Joan Collins Richard Conte Joseph Cotten Alain Delon George Eastman Mel Ferrer Klaus Kinski Angelo Infanti Leonard Mann Luc Merenda Maurizio Merli Mario Merola Tomas Milian Gordon Mitchell Gastone Moschin Franco Nero Jack Palance Oliver Reed Fernando Rey Edward G. Robinson Luciano Rossi Antonio Sabàto Sr. Telly Savalas John Saxon Henry Silva Woody Strode Fabio Testi Massimo Vanni Gian Maria Volonté Eli Wallach Fred Williamson [13] Selected films[edit] Bandits in Milan (Banditi a Milano, 1968) Detective Belli (Un Detective, 1969) Violent City (Città violenta, 1970) Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion (Indagine su un cittadino al di sopra di ogni sospetto, 1970) Execution Squad (La polizia ringrazia, 1972) Caliber 9 (Milano calibro 9, 1972) Manhunt (La mala ordina, 1972) Tony Arzenta (1973) High Crime (La polizia incrimina la legge assolve, 1973) The Violent Professionals (Milano trema – la polizia vuole giustizia, 1973) Revolver (1973) The Great Kidnapping (La polizia sta a guardare, 1973) The Boss (Il Boss, 1973) Flatfoot (Piedone lo sbirro, 1973) Gang War in Milan (Milano rovente, 1973) Emergency Squad (Squadra volante, 1974) Street Law (Il cittadino si ribella, 1974) Almost Human (Milano odia: la polizia non può sparare, 1974) What Have They Done to Your Daughters? (La polizia chiede aiuto, 1974) Kidnap (Fatevi vivi, la polizia non interverrà, 1974) The Last Desperate Hours (Milano: il clan dei calabresi, 1974) Shoot First, Die Later (Il poliziotto è marcio, 1974) Killer Cop (La polizia ha le mani legate, 1975) Manhunt in the City (L'uomo della strada fa giustizia, 1975) Mark of the Cop (Mark il poliziotto, 1975) Mark Shoots First (Mark il poliziotto spara per primo, 1975) Gambling City (La città gioca d'azzardo, 1975) Kidnap Syndicate (La città sconvolta: caccia spietata ai rapitori, 1975) Silent Action (La polizia accusa: il Servizio Segreto uccide, 1975) Syndicate Sadists (Il giustiziere sfida la città, 1975) Violent Rome (Roma violenta, 1975) Violent Naples (Napoli violenta, 1976) A Special Cop in Action (Italia a mano armata, 1976) Mister Scarface (l Padroni della città, 1976) The Cop in Blue Jeans (Squadra antiscippo, 1976) Fear in the City (Paura in città, 1976) The Big Racket (Il grande racket, 1976) Strange Shadows in an Empty Room also known as Blazing Magnum (Una magnum special per Tony Saitta, 1976) Live Like a Cop, Die Like a Man (Uomini si nasce poliziotti si muore, 1976) The Tough Ones (Roma a mano armata, 1976) Free Hand for a Tough Cop (Il trucido e lo sbirro, 1976) Colt 38 Special Squad (Quelli della Calibro 38, 1976) The Cynic, the Rat & the Fist (Il cinico, l'infame, il violento, 1977) Weapons of Death (Napoli spara!, 1977) The Heroin Busters (La via della droga, 1977) The Criminals Attack, The Police Respond (La malavita attacca, la polizia risponde!, 1977) A Man Called Magnum (Napoli si ribella, 1977) Double Game (Torino violenta, 1977) Beast with a Gun (La belva con mitra, 1977) Convoy Busters (Un poliziotto scomodo, 1978) Brothers Till We Die (La banda del gobbo, 1978) The Iron Commissioner (Il commissario di ferro, 1978) Blood and Diamonds (Diamanti sporchi di sangue, 1978) From Corleone to Brooklyn (Da Corleone a Brooklyn, 1979) Hunted City (Sbirro, la tua legge è lenta... la mia no!, 1979) The Rebel (Poliziotto, solitudine e rabbia, 1980) Contraband (Luca il contrabbandiere, 1980) [14][15] See also[edit] Italy portal Film portal Cinema of Italy Gangster film Mafia film References[edit] ^ The Best Cop Movies You’ve Never Heard Of: ‘Poliziotteschi’ Films Get Their Due|IndieWire ^ Violent Italy: A Poliziotteschi Primer|Birth.Movies.Death. ^ a b c d e f Curti, Roberto (2013). Italian Crime Filmography, 1968-1980. McFarland. ISBN 9781476612089. ^ Violent Italy: A Poliziotteschi Primer|Birth.Movies.Death. ^ a b c d Bayman, Louis; Rigoletto, Sergio (Jan 17, 2013). Popular Italian Cinema. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9781137305657. Retrieved 6 December 2015. ^ Aulenti, Lino (2011). Storia del cinema italiano. Libreria universitaria. ISBN 9788862921084. ^ a b c d Bondanella, Peter (2009). A History of Italian Cinema. A&C Black. pp. 454–479. ISBN 9781441160690. ^ Bayman, Louis (2001). Directory of World Cinema: Italy. Intellect Book. ISBN 9781841504001. ^ Canby, Vincent (1974-08-04). "Screen: 'Death Wish' Exploits Fear Irresponsibly; 'Death Wish' Exploits Our Fear". The New York Times. Retrieved 2011-11-06. ^ Canby, Vincent (1974-07-25). "Screen: 'Death Wish' Hunts Muggers:The Cast Story of Gunman Takes Dim View of City". The New York Times. Retrieved 2011-11-06. ^ Uva, Christian; Picchi, Michele (2006). Destra e sinistra nel cinema italiano: film e immaginario politico dagli anni '60 al nuovo millennio. Edizioni Interculturali S.r.l. ISBN 9788888375663. ^ Christian Uva, Michele Picchi, Destra e sinistra nel cinema italiano. film e immaginario politico dagli anni '60 al nuovo millennio, Edizioni interculturali, 2006, p. 90 ^ The Best Poliziotteschi Movies of All Time - Flickchart ^ The Best Poliziotteschi Movies of All Time - Flickchart ^ The Best Cop Movies You’ve Never Heard Of: ‘Poliziotteschi’ Films Get Their Due|IndieWire Further reading[edit] Roberto Curti, Italia odia: il cinema poliziesco italiano. Lindau, 2006, ISBN 978-8871805863. Daniele Magni, Silvio Giobbio, Ancora più... Cinici infami e violenti – Guida ai film polizieschi italiani degli anni '70, Bloodbuster Edizioni, 2010, ISBN 978-8890208744. External links[edit] Poliziotteschi – The Final Take at Allmovie Pollanet Squad – Poliziotteschi data base (in Italian) RDB Article (in Portuguese) v t e Italian film genres and movements 1900s-1940s Italian futurism Italian neorealism Calligrafismo Telefoni Bianchi Cinecittà Italy portal 1950s-1980s Cannibal films Cannibal boom Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Eurospy / Spaghetti Spy Giallo Hollywood on the Tiber Macaroni Combat / Euro War / Spaghetti War Mondo films Musicarello Nunsploitation Peplum / Sword-and-Sandal Poliziotteschi Sadiconazista Sceneggiata Spaghetti Western Zapata Western Women in prison v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie