Interpretation of science intended for a general audience This article is about popular science as a literary genre. For the magazine, see Popular Science. For the short film series, see Popular Science (film series). For references to science in culture, see Science in popular culture. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). For broader coverage of this topic, see Science communication. Title page of Mary Somerville's On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences (1834), an early popular-science book. Popular science (also called pop-science or popsci) is an interpretation of science intended for a general audience. While science journalism focuses on recent scientific developments, popular science is more broad-ranging. It may be written by professional science journalists or by scientists themselves. It is presented in many forms, including books, film and television documentaries, magazine articles, and web pages. Contents 1 History and role 2 Common threads 3 Notable English-language popularizers of science 4 Some sources of popular science 5 Science media 5.1 Science in the headlines 5.2 News online 5.3 Press 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 Bibliography History and role[edit] As early as 1830, astronomer John Herschel had recognized the need for the genre of popular science. In a letter to philosopher William Whewell, he wrote that the general public needed "digests of what is actually known in each particular branch of science... to give a connected view of what has been done, and what remains to be accomplished."[1] Indeed, as the British population became not just increasingly literate but also well-educated, there was growing demand for science titles. Mary Somerville became an early and highly successful science writers of the nineteenth century. Her On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences (1834), intended for the mass audience, sold quite well.[2][3] Arguably one of the first books in the genre of popular science, it contained few diagrams and very little mathematics. It had ten editions and was translated into multiple languages. It was the most popular science title from the publisher John Murray until On the Origin of Species (1859) by Charles Darwin.[1] Popular science is a bridge between scientific literature as a professional medium of scientific research, and the realms of popular political and cultural discourse. The goal of the genre is often to capture the methods and accuracy of science while making the language more accessible. Many science-related controversies are discussed in popular science books and publications, such as the long-running debates over biological determinism and the biological components of intelligence, stirred by popular books such as The Mismeasure of Man and The Bell Curve.[4] The purpose of scientific literature is to inform and persuade peers as to the validity of observations and conclusions and the forensic efficacy of methods. Popular science attempts to inform and convince scientific outsiders (sometimes along with scientists in other fields) of the significance of data and conclusions and to celebrate the results. Statements in the scientific literature are often qualified and tentative, emphasizing that new observations and results are consistent with and similar to established knowledge wherein qualified scientists are assumed to recognize the relevance. By contrast, popular science emphasizes uniqueness and generality, taking a tone of factual authority absent from the scientific literature. Comparisons between original scientific reports, derivative science journalism, and popular science typically reveal at least some level of distortion and oversimplification which can often be quite dramatic, even with politically neutral scientific topics.[5] Popular science literature can be written by non-scientists who may have a limited understanding of the subject they are interpreting and it can be difficult for non-experts to identify misleading popular science, which may also blur the boundaries between real science and pseudoscience. However, sometimes non-scientists with a fair scientific background and strong technical communication skills can make good popular science writers because of their ability to put themselves in the layperson's place more easily. Common threads[edit] Some usual features of popular science productions include: Entertainment value or personal relevance to the audience Emphasis on uniqueness and radicalness Exploring ideas overlooked by specialists or falling outside of established disciplines Generalized, simplified science concepts Presented for an audience with little or no science background, hence explaining general concepts more thoroughly Synthesis of new ideas that cross multiple fields and offer new applications in other academic specialties Use of metaphors and analogies to explain difficult or abstract scientific concepts Notable English-language popularizers of science[edit] Main category: Science communicators In alphabetical order by last name: Diane Ackerman, poet, essayist, and naturalist whose nonfiction has explored neuroscience and zoology John Acorn, naturalist and broadcaster known as the "Nature Nut" Amir Aczel, Jewish author and mathematician Maggie Aderin-Pocock, space scientist and broadcaster Jim Al-Khalili, theoretical physicist, author, and science communicator Alan Alda, actor, who inspired The Center for Communicating Science Michael Allaby, writes on science, ecology, and weather Elise Andrew, British blogger, founder and maintainer of the Facebook page "I Fucking Love Science" Natalie Angier, science journalist and writer Isaac Asimov, biochemist, science fiction writer, and author Peter Atkins, a physical chemist and author Sir David Attenborough, naturalist and broadcaster Francis Bacon, English philosopher, statesman, scientist, jurist, & author J. Michael Bailey, a psychologist is best known for his research on the etiology of sexual orientation Johnny Ball, broadcaster and math popularizer John D. Barrow, mathematician, theoretical physicist, and cosmologist; author of numerous journal articles, and books for general readers Marcia Bartusiak, science journalist and author David Bellamy, broadcaster, author, and botanist Bob Berman, astronomer Adrian Berry, science author and columnist Tim Blais, physicist and YouTuber Howard Bloom, author David Bodanis, author Liz Bonnin, biochemist and TV presenter Daniel J. Boorstin, author and Librarian of Congress Sir David Brewster, Scottish scientist John Brockman, specializing authorship in the scientific literature Jacob Bronowski, mathematician, biologist, historian of science, author, and pioneering science broadcaster Michael Brooks, noted for explaining complex scientific research Bill Bryson, author Rob Buckman, doctor of medicine, broadcaster, columnist, author James Burke, broadcaster, television producer, and author; best known for the science historian BBC TV series Connections Nigel Calder, broadcaster and journalist Dallas Campbell, Presented Bang Goes the Theory Fritjof Capra, physicist and author Eugene Thacker, philosopher and author Sean Carroll, cosmologist, blogger, and author Rachel Carson, marine biologist, conservationist, author Manuel Castells, sociologist and writer Marcus Chown, author and science journalist Arthur C. Clarke, science fiction author, inventor, and futurist Brian Clegg, author Jack Cohen, reproductive biologist Heather Couper, astronomer, broadcaster, and author Jacques-Yves Cousteau, Oceanographer, underwater explorer, conservationist, filmmaker, and broadcaster Brian Cox, broadcaster, musician, and physicist Michael Crichton, medical doctor, author, filmmaker Francis Crick, molecular biologist, biophysicist, and neuroscientist; joint discoverer of the structure of the DNA molecule Jon Culshaw, impressionist, also occasionally appears as a presenter on The Sky at Night Antonio Damasio, neuroscientist and writer Paul Davies, physicist, author, and broadcaster Richard Dawkins, evolutionary biologist and author Michael DeBakey, world-renowned cardiac surgeon, innovator, and author Daniel Dennett, philosopher, cognitive scientist and author Alexander Dewdney, mathematician, computer scientist, and philosopher Jared Diamond, evolutionary biologist, physiologist and geographer Robin Dunbar, anthropology; evolutionary psychology, culture and language; and specialist in primate behavior Marcus Du Sautoy, author, broadcaster, Professor of Mathematics David Eagleman, neuroscientist and author Sir Arthur Eddington, astrophysicist Gerald Edelman, from the immune system, analogously, to brain & mind Loren Eiseley, Professor of Anthropology and History of Science Peter Fairley, journalist and broadcaster Michael Faraday, scientist and lecturer Kenneth Feder, archaeologist, skeptic, lecturer, and author Timothy Ferris, science writer and best-selling author of twelve books Richard Feynman, physicist and author Brian J. Ford, biologist, lecturer, and author Anna Frebel, astrophysicist and author Morgan Freeman, actor and host for TV's Through the Wormhole George Gamow, physicist, cosmologist, and author Martin Gardner, mathematician, author, skeptic & polymath extraordinaire Atul Gawande, surgeon and author Malcolm Gladwell, journalist and author James Gleick, author and journalist Marcelo Gleiser, physicist and astronomer Ben Goldacre, medical doctor, psychiatrist, and author Stephen Jay Gould, paleontologist, evolutionary biologist, and science historian; author of numerous essays, articles, and books Steve Grand, computer scientist and roboticist Hank Green, entrepreneur, musician, and vlogger John Green, author and vlogger Brian Greene, physicist Susan Greenfield, brain physiologist, writer and broadcaster Richard Gregory, neuropsychologist, author and editor of several books John Gribbin, astronomer and author Heinz Haber, physicist and author Gunther von Hagens, german anatomist and pathologist, inventor of plastination and creator of Body Worlds Thomas Hager, author and science journalist J. B. S. Haldane, biologist and author Jack Hanna, zoologist, broadcaster, author Brady Haran, filmmaker Yuval Noah Harari, historian, professor, and writer Bas Haring, philosopher and author Sam Harris, neuroscientist and author Lucy Hawking, journalist and daughter of Stephen Hawking Stephen Hawking, theoretical physicist and author Don Herbert, a.k.a. Mr. Wizard, broadcaster Roald Hoffmann, chemist Douglas Hofstadter, computer scientist, cognitive scientist, and author Lancelot Hogben, experimental zoologist and medical statistician, with many popularising books on science, mathematics, and language Sabine Hossenfelder, a theoretical physicist who researches quantum gravity Fred Hoyle, British astronomer Julian Huxley, eminent scientist, author, and first Director of UNESCO Jamie Hyneman, special effects artist and TV personality (MythBusters) Jay Ingram, broadcaster and author (Daily Planet) Steve Irwin, wildlife expert and conservationist; TV personality of the worldwide-fame wildlife documentary TV series (The Crocodile Hunter) Hope Jahren, geochemist and author Ray Jayawardhana, astrophysicist and author Donald Carl Johanson, paleoanthropologist and author Steven Johnson, author Steve Jones, evolutionary biologist and author Horace Freeland Judson, historian of molecular biology and author Olivia Judson, evolutionary biologist, broadcaster and author Michio Kaku, theoretical physicist and author Sam Kean, author Marek Kukula, Public Astronomer at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich Lawrence Krauss, physicist and author Robert Krulwich, broadcaster Karl Kruszelnicki, a.k.a. Dr Karl, broadcaster Richard Leakey, Kenyan paleoanthropologist and conservationist John Lennox, mathematician and author Edward M. Lerner, computer engineer and author Daniel Levitin, a cognitive neuroscientist and author Roger Lewin, British anthropologist Richard Lewontin, evolutionary biologist, geneticist, and author Chris Lintott, astrophysicist Avi Loeb, astronomer and author Bob McDonald, CBC journalist and host of Quirks and Quarks Alister McGrath, molecular biologist and author Katie Mack, astrophysics professor who focuses on studying dark matter Lynn Margulis, evolutionary biologist and author Robert Matthews, physicist, mathematician, computer scientist, and distinguished science journalist Danica McKellar, actress, author, mathematician Terrence McKenna, ethnobotanist, lecturer, and author Peter Medawar, biologist, called by Richard Dawkins "the wittiest of all scientific writers"[6] and by New Scientist "perhaps the best science writer of his generation".[7] Fulvio Melia, physicist, astrophysicist, and author Ben Miller, English comedian and hosted shows such as It's Not Rocket Science (TV series) Julius Sumner Miller, physicist and broadcaster Mark Miodownik, materials scientist, engineer, broadcaster, and writer Ashley Montagu, anthropologist and humanist, authored by over 60 books Sir Patrick Moore, amateur astronomer and broadcaster Desmond Morris, zoologist, ethologist and author Hamilton Morris, pharmacologist, broadcaster, and author Philip Morrison, physicist, known for his numerous books & TV programs Siddhartha Mukherjee, oncologist, biologist, author Randall Munroe, writer of What if blog PZ Myers, professor and author of the science blog Pharyngula[8] Yoshiro Nakamatsu, Japanese inventor Jayant Narlikar, cosmologist and author Steven Novella, skeptic and advocate of science-based medicine Eugene P. Northrop, research mathematician and math popularizer Bill Nye, actor, mechanical engineer, branded as "The Science Guy" Tor Nørretranders, author Sten Odenwald, astronomer, author, lecturer Robert Olby, author and historian of science Chad Orzel, physicist and author Kasha Patel, comedian and science writer Linus Pauling, biochemist, author, and educator John Allen Paulos, mathematician and author Fred Pearce, journalist at New Scientist Yakov I. Perelman, author Jean-Pierre Petit,a theoretical physicist who researches negatif mass and author Archibald Higgins science comics series Wendell Phillips, archaeologist Steven Pinker, experimental psychologist, cognitive scientist, linguist, and author Phil Plait, astronomer and skeptic who runs the Bad Astronomy website Martyn Poliakoff, British chemist, featured in the YouTube The Periodic Table of Videos series John Polkinghorne, physicist and author Robert Pollack, biologist and author Carolyn Porco, leader of Cassini Imaging Team Roy Porter, prolific work on the history of medicine Christopher Potter, publisher, philosopher and author Eduard Punset, politician, lawyer, economist, and science popularizer Magnus Pyke, food scientist, broadcaster, and author V. S. Ramachandran, neuroscientist, cognitive scientist, and author James Randi, stage magician, skeptic, and author Lisa Randall, theoretical physicist and author Mark Ridley, zoologist, evolutionary scientist and author Matt Ridley, zoologist, journalist and author Alice Roberts, anatomist, anthropologist, television presenter, and author Steven Rose, biologist, neurobiologist, broadcaster and author Oliver Sacks, neurologist and author Carl Sagan, astrobiologist, astronomer, broadcaster, and author Kirsten Sanford, neurophysiologist and broadcaster Adam Savage, special effects artist and TV personality (MythBusters) Walter Warwick Sawyer (or W. W. Sawyer), mathematician, mathematics educator, and author Eric Scerri, chemist, historian and philosopher of science, and author Joseph A. Schwarcz, chemist, author, TV and radio host Garrett P. Serviss, American astronomer and science fiction writer Tali Sharot, cognitive neuroscientist and writer Seth Shostak, astronomer, broadcaster, and author Neil Shubin, paleontologist, evolutionary biologist George Gaylord Simpson, paleontologist, zoologist and author Simon Singh, physicist, mathematician, and author Edwin Emery Slosson, chemist, journalist, and editor Laura J. Snyder, historian, philosopher, and author Mary Somerville, polymath, mathematician, and author Paul Stamets, mycologist and author Michael Stevens, science-based YouTube content creator Iain Stewart, geologist and broadcaster Ian Stewart, mathematician and author David Suzuki, broadcaster, geneticist, and environmental activist Lewis Thomas, physician, poet, etymologist, and essayist Chriet Titulaer, Dutch astronomer, author, and broadcaster Colin Tudge, biologist and author Neil deGrasse Tyson, astrophysicist and author Kenneth Walker (author), surgeon and author Fred Watson, astrophysicist, musician, and author James D. Watson, molecular biologist, geneticist, and zoologist Kevin Warwick, biomedical scientist, roboticist, and author Michael White, musician and science writer Norbert Wiener, mathematician, author; the father of cybernetics Simon Winchester, geologist and author Robert Winston, medical doctor, scientist, TV presenter, and author Richard Wiseman, psychologist and author Stephen Wolfram, mathematics, theoretical physics, scientific computing Lewis Wolpert, developmental biologist, author, and broadcaster Peter Wothers, chemist and author Andrea Wulf, author Paul Zaloom, the actor who portrayed an eccentric scientist on the children's TV show Beakman's World 1992–1998 Carl Zimmer, science writer and author of the science blog The Loom[9] Marlene Zuk, evolutionary biologist and behavioral ecologist Some sources of popular science[edit] See also: List of science magazines and List of science books Main category: Popular science ABC Science – website[10] owned by Australian Broadcasting Corporation Archibald Higgins – science comics series Are We Alone? – Seth Shostak science radio program Ask A Biologist – audio podcast program and website BBC Focus – magazine BBC Horizon – TV series BBC Science & Nature – latest news in nature[11] and science[12] BBC Sky at Night – a monthly magazine about astronomy aimed at amateur astronomers BEYOND: Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science – website of Arizona State University[13] British Science Association – providing all ages learning about the sciences; advancing public understanding; thought-provoking its many implications CASW: Council for the Advancement of Science Writing – increasing public understanding of science[14] CBS News – Science[15] 60 Minutes: Health/Science[16] Nature[17] This Morning: HealthWatch[18] Evening News: Health[19] Sunday Morning: Nature[20] Cosmos Magazine – Australian magazine Cosmos: A Personal Voyage – 1980 television series by Carl Sagan, with its companion book Cosmos: A Spacetime Odyssey – 2014 television hosted by Neil deGrasse Tyson based on the 1980 Carl Sagan series Daily Planet – Canadian television series Discover – magazine Discovery – BBC World Service radio programme[21] and podcasts[22] Discovery Channel – cable/satellite television channel Edge – online magazine exploring scientific and intellectual ideas Exploratorium – museum in San Francisco Frontiers of Science – comic strip Guru Magazine – digital 'science-lifestyle' magazine HowStuffWorks – website Inside Science – BBC Radio 4 news stories keeping the audience abreast of important breakthroughs in science[23] Inside Science (AIP) – syndicating research news and related topics for general audiences through the press, the TV, and the web[24] Institute of Making – materials science and technology from many different perspectives ITV Science News – videos, stories, and the latest live updates[25] Knowing Neurons – a website featuring neuroscience articles, infographics, artwork, and videos Leading Edge – BBC Radio 4 series explores the world of science, people, passions & policies; final edition celebrating Darwin's 150th anniversary[26] The Life Scientific – Jim Al-Khalili talks to leading scientists about their life and work (BBC Radio 4)[27] Little Atoms – weekly chat show on Resonance104.4FM in London; also podcasts LiveScience – syndicating major news outlets with an online news-magazine format Material World (radio program) – weekly science magazine on BBC Radio 4 MITnews:science – Massachusetts Institute of Technology's recent news, featured stories, and videos[28] MIT Technology Review – a magazine with authoritative journalism in clear simple language Mr Science Show – radio show and podcast from China Radio International MythBusters – American TV series that seeks to confirm or debunk science-related stories, urban legends, viral videos, etc. The Naked Scientists – audience-interactive radio talk show NASA – news, images, videos, TV, and interactive features from the unique perspective of America's space agency National Geographic Society – one of the largest non-profit scientific and educational institutions in the world Natural History – the magazine of the American Museum of Natural History Natural History Museum (London) – "Nature online – explore the natural world"[29] NBC News – Science[30] Technology[31] Health[32] New Scientist – magazine NHS choices – UK health "Behind the Headlines ¬ Your guide to the science that makes the news"[33] Nova – television show on PBS; PBS Science & Nature[34] PBS NewsHour: Science[35] and the Nova ScienceNow TV spinoff Nova: science in the news – Australian Academy of Science making accessible, and looking behind the headlines[36] The Periodic Table of Videos – a series of YouTube videos featuring chemistry professor Martyn Poliakoff PLOS: Public Library of Science – available to every scientist, physician, educator, and citizens at home, in school, or in a library Plus – popular maths online magazine featuring the beauty and the practical; diverse topics such as art, medicine, cosmology, sport, puzzles & games Popular Mechanics – magazine Popular Science – magazine Popular Science Historic Film Series – short films Quirks & Quarks – Canadian radio show and podcast on CBC Radio; CBCnews Technology & Science[37] Quo – Spanish-language magazine Radiolab – listen, read, watch; imaginative use of radio and podcast making science accessible to broad audiences The Ri Channel – the Royal Institution, showcasing science videos from around the web[38] Science – journal of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Science (TV network) – cable/satellite television channel ScienceBlogs – some of the best-known independent science bloggers within ten subject channels science fantastic – Michio Kaku radio program[39] Science Friday – American radio show on NPR; NPR Science[40] The Science Hour – BBC World Service radio programme weekly digest of Discovery, Click, Health Check and Science in Action[41] and podcasts[42] Science Illustrated – a popular magazine with editions in other languages Science in Action (radio program) – long-running weekly broadcast on BBC World Service Science Museum (London) – "Online Science"[43] Science News – magazine Science Niblets – online magazine[44] Science World (magazine) – especially educating children and covering many aspects Scientific American – magazine Seed – magazine Smithsonian – a magazine published by the Smithsonian Institution Startalk Radio – hosted by Neil deGrasse Tyson Technologist – magazine and website published by the EuroTech Universities Alliance This Week in Science – American radio show and podcast Through the Wormhole – documentary television series with Morgan Freeman VOA News – Voice of America's latest news in science and technology[45] and VOA's Science World[46] WIRED – WIRED Science[47] WIRED Science Blogs[48] WIRED UK Science[49] ZSL: Institute of Zoology (London) – "Latest News from Science"[50] Science media[edit] This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (June 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article reads like a directory. Wikipedia policy generally considers directories in articles to be unencyclopedic and potential spam. Please help rewrite it, to better conform with the Wikipedia Manual of Style standards on lists. If it cannot be properly modified, it may be considered for deletion. (August 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Science in the headlines[edit] Science Media Centre (UK) Science Media Center (USA) SMC Global Network Inside Science (AIP) LiveScience Science360 (NSF) ScienceDaily Science (AAAS) ScienceNews (SSP) Smithsonian Science Science gateways Science.gov WorldWideScience [1] News online[edit] ABC (aus) ABC (usa) BBC CBC CBS ITV Motherboard (Vice Media) NBC NPR PBS VOA The Daily Beast Huffington Post International Business Times Newser Slate Spiked US News & World Report Ciencia del Sur[permanent dead link] News agencies Associated Press EurekAlert! (AAAS) Reuters Press[edit] Remember Newspaper Science Sections? They’re Almost All Gone Christopher Zara, International Business Times Daily newspapers The Australian Chicago Tribune The Globe and Mail The Guardian The Independent Los Angeles Times The New York Times The New Zealand Herald The Philadelphia Inquirer The Sydney Morning Herald The Telegraph The Times The Times of India USA Today The Washington Post Weeklies The Economist Maclean's The Nation New Statesman Newsweek The New Yorker The Spectator Time The Week Fortnightlies Frontline National Review New Republic Monthlies The Atlantic Prospect Vanity Fair Bimonthlies Harvard Magazine Mother Jones See also[edit] Citizen science – Scientific research conducted, in whole or in part, by amateur or nonprofessional scientists The Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online Easiness effect Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century History of science – History of the development of science and scientific knowledge Kalinga Prize – Award List of notable online science encyclopedias – Wikipedia list article List of popular science books on evolution – Wikipedia list article List of science museums – Wikipedia list article National Association of Science Writers – Organization of science journalists Nature documentary – Documentary film genre Nature writing – Nonfiction or fiction prose or poetry about the natural environment, literary genre Popular history – Genre of historiography Popular Mechanics – American science magazine Popular mathematics Popular psychology – Concepts and theories about human mental life and behavior that are purportedly based on psychology Public awareness of science Science communication – Public communication of science-related topics to non-experts Science & Entertainment Exchange Science by press conference – Practice by which scientists put an unusual focus on publicizing results of research in the media            Science outreach Physics outreach Sense about Science – British non-profit organisation TED (conference) – Global set of conferences Notes and references[edit] ^ a b Holmes, Richard (22 October 2014). "In retrospect: On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences". Nature. 514: 432–433. ^ Baraniuk, Chris (28 June 2017). "Mary Somerville: Queen of 19th-century science". New Scientist. 235 (3132): 40–1. ^ Strickland, Elisabetta (September 2017). "Mary Fairfax Somerville, Queen of Science". Notices of the American Mathematical Society. 64 (8): 929–31. ^ Murdz William McRae, "Introduction: Science in Culture" in The Literature of Science, pp. 1–3, 10–11 ^ Jeanne Fahnestock, "Accommodating Science: The Rhetorical Life of Scientific Facts" in The Literature of Science, pp. 17–36 ^ Dawkins, Richard (2008). The Oxford book of modern science writing. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: Oxford University Press. p. 179. ISBN 0-19-921680-0. ^ Editorial (October 1987). "Peter Medawar (obituary)". New Scientist. 116 (1581): 16. ^ "Pharyngula". Scienceblogs.com. 2011-11-04. Retrieved 2011-11-08. ^ "The Loom". Blogs.discovermagazine.com. Retrieved 2011-11-08. ^ "ABC Science". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "BBC Nature". Retrieved 2014-07-19. ^ "BBC Science". Retrieved 2014-07-19. ^ "BEYOND: Center for Fundamental Concepts in Science". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "CASW". Retrieved 2013-01-04. ^ "Science & Technology". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "60 Minutes: Health & Science". Retrieved 2013-12-18. ^ "60 Minutes: Nature". Retrieved 2013-12-18. ^ "This Morning: HealthWatch". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "Evening News: Health". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "Sunday Morning: Nature". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "Discovery Radio Programme". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "Discovery Podcasts". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "Inside Science". Retrieved 2013-07-18. ^ "Inside Science (AIP)". Retrieved 2013-08-06. ^ "ITV Science News". Retrieved 2013-08-08. ^ "Leading Edge". Retrieved 2014-01-02. ^ "The Life Scientific". Retrieved 2012-12-14. ^ "MITnews:science". Retrieved 2013-07-07. ^ "Nature online" ^ "NBC Science". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "NBC Technology". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "NBC Health". Retrieved 2013-08-03. ^ "Behind the Headlines ¬ Your guide to the science that makes the news" ^ "PBS Science & Nature". Retrieved 2013-01-26. ^ "PBS NewsHour: Science". Retrieved 2013-12-27. ^ "Nova: science in the news". Retrieved 2014-05-10. ^ "CBCnews Technology & Science". Retrieved 2013-01-31. ^ "The Ri Channel". Archived from the original on 2017-11-29. Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "Science Fantastic with Michio Kaku News/Audio/Video/About/Listen Live". Talk Radio Network. Retrieved 2013-09-22. ^ "NPR Science". Retrieved 2013-01-18. ^ "The Science Hour". Retrieved 2013-08-06. ^ "The Science Hour Podcasts". Retrieved 2013-08-06. ^ "Online Science" ^ "Science Niblets". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "Science & Technology News – Latest in scientific breakthroughs and gadgets – VOA News". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "Science World". Retrieved 2012-11-03. ^ "WIRED Science". Retrieved 2013-07-17. ^ "WIRED Science Blogs". Retrieved 2014-05-10. ^ "WIRED UK Science". Archived from the original on 2012-07-08. Retrieved 2012-07-08. ^ "Latest News from Science" Bibliography[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Popular science. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. McRae, Murdo William (editor). The Literature of Science: Perspectives on Popular Scientific Writing. The University of Georgia Press: Athens, 1993. ISBN 0-8203-1506-0 v t e Science and the public Citizen science Community-based participatory research Conversazione March for Science Physics outreach Popular science Public awareness of science Public science Science by press conference Science Café Science communication Science fair Science festival Science journalism Science museum Science outreach Science policy The Amateur Scientist v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Zoopoetics Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Constructivism Cosmology Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Materialism Natural philosophy Philosophy of mind Philosophy of science Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself (ethic) Natural history (museums) Popular science Property theory (common property) Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecodesign Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Urban acupuncture Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Science portal History of science portal