Genre of sex comedy films produced in Brazil This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Portuguese. (October 2018) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Portuguese article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Portuguese Wikipedia article at [[:pt:Pornochanchada]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|pt|Pornochanchada}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints. Please improve the article or discuss the issue. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Pornochanchada (Portuguese pronunciation: [poʁnoʃɐ̃ˈʃadɐ]) is the name given to a genre of sex comedy films produced in Brazil that was popular from the late 1960s after popularity of commedia sexy all'italiana. By the 1980s, with the wide availability of hardcore pornography through clandestine video cassettes, the genre suffered a considerable decline. Its name combined pornô (porn) and chanchada (light comedy), as itself combines comedy and erotica.[1][2] Pornochanchadas were massively produced in the downtown quarter of São Paulo that was nicknamed "Boca do Lixo" ("Mouth of Garbage"). The genre was usually seen as a part of low-budget films produced there, collectively known as Mouth of Garbage Cinema.[3][4] Later, there were productions in Rio de Janeiro as well, creating the subgenre pornochanchada carioca,[5] which was to find its star in Alba Valeria during the early 1980s. Pornochanchadas were generally in line with sex comedies produced in other countries (Italy, Germany, Spain, U.S., Argentina, Mexico, etc.), but also featured some Brazilian peculiarities. Contents 1 Stars 2 Influence of politics and culture 3 Notable films 4 See also 5 Bibliography 6 References Stars[edit] The prominent actresses were Helena Ramos, Aldine Müller,[6] Matilde Mastrangi, Sandra Bréa, Nicole Puzzi, Monique Lafond, Nádia Lippi, Patrícia Scalvi, Rossana Ghessa, Zilda Mayo, Zaíra Bueno, Kate Lyra, Vanessa Alves, Meire Vieira, Adele Fátima, and Marta Anderson. After the end of the pornochanchada era, they moved to telenovelas and/or more mainstream genres of cinema. Actresses like Vera Fischer and Sônia Braga have also appeared in pornochanchadas. The most popular actors were David Cardoso (presented as the symbol of Brazilian machismo, who was also a director and the owner of the production company Dacar) and Nuno Leal Maia. Among the distinguished directors of the genre were Ody Fraga, Tony Vieira and Jean Garret. Influence of politics and culture[edit] Despite conditions of strict censorship in Brazil in that era due to the military administration in Brazil, the state-run film company Embrafilme was generally eager to support pornochanchadas, because they were not critical of the government and did not depict explicit sex.[7][8] Producers became increasingly dependent on pornochanchadas to compete with American films and to guarantee immediate returns. As the genre's success grew, the term began to be indiscriminately applied to various types of films that focused on sexual relationships. Some Nelson Rodrigues adaptations were among such films. The doctor in cultural studies Fernanda Nogueira and the artist Pêdra Costa argue that Pornochancadas transgressed conservative sexual behavior and confronted the privileged imaginary of the Macho figure, thus having a disruptive and emancipatory role in the mainstream discourse about sexuality and family.[9] After the end of the military regime in 1985, repressive measures on cinema and television were lifted, marking a virtual end for pornochanchada. The Brazilian Constitution of 1988, and the subsequent Fernando Collor's government termination of Embrafilme in 1990, marked the end of the era of nudity and sex as a means of drawing mass audiences to Brazilian films. It brought to a close a generation of directors, writers and actors associated since the sixties with the Cinema Novo movement, many of whom were involved at one time or another with pornochanchadas. Notable films[edit] A Árvore dos Sexos (Sílvio de Abreu; 1977) Histórias Que Nossas Babás Não Contavam (Oswaldo de Oliveira; 1979) The Virgin and the Macho Man (José Mojica Marins; 1974) See also[edit] Nudity in film Sex comedy Commedia sexy all'italiana Bavarian porn Mexican sex comedy Brazil: Cinema, Sex and the Generals Bibliography[edit] Dennison, Stephanie (2004). Popular Cinema in Brazil: 1930-2001. Manchester University Press. ISBN 9780719064999. Johnson, Randal; Stam, Robert (1995). Brazilian Cinema. Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231102674. References[edit] ^ Johnson & Stam 1995. p. 269 ^ Dennison 2004. p. 157 ^ Lesser, Jeff (2007). A Discontented Diaspora: Japanese Brazilians and the Meanings of Ethnic Militancy, 1960–1980. Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822340812. ^ Shaw, Lisa; Dennison, Stephanie (2005). Pop Culture Latin America!: Media, Arts, and Lifestyle. ABC-CLIO. p. 262. ISBN 9781851095049. ^ Dennison 2004. p. 161 ^ Maria M. Delgado; Stephen M. Hart; Randal Johnson (14 March 2017). A Companion to Latin American Cinema. Wiley. pp. 33–. ISBN 978-1-118-55752-5. ^ Johnson & Stam 1995. p. 405 ^ Dennison 2004. p. 158 ^ Costa & Nogueira 2018 v t e Exploitation film Blaxploitation Bruceploitation Cannibal Eurospy Euro War / Macaroni Combat Giallo Hippie Martial arts Mexploitation Mockbuster Mondo Nazi exploitation Nunsploitation Outlaw biker Ozploitation Poliziotteschi Pornochanchada Rape and revenge Rumberas film Sexploitation Slasher Spaghetti Western Splatter Sword-and-sandal Turksploitation Vansploitation Women in prison v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie