Portal maintenance status: (November 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to API Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The API Portal Greek influence in the mid 6th century BC. Ancient Greece (Greek: Ἑλλάς, romanized: Hellás) was a civilization belonging to a period of Greek history from the Greek Dark Ages of the 12th–9th centuries BC to the end of antiquity (c. AD 600). This era was immediately followed by the Early Middle Ages and the Byzantine period. Roughly three centuries after the Late Bronze Age collapse of Mycenaean Greece, Greek urban poleis began to form in the 8th century BC, ushering in the Archaic period and colonization of the Mediterranean Basin. This was followed by the age of Classical Greece, from the Greco-Persian Wars to the 5th to 4th centuries BC. The conquests of Alexander the Great of Macedon spread Hellenistic civilization from the western Mediterranean to Central Asia. The Hellenistic period ended with the conquest of the eastern Mediterranean world by the Roman Republic, and the annexation of the Roman province of Macedonia in Roman Greece, and later the province of Achaea during the Roman Empire. Classical Greek culture, especially philosophy, had a powerful influence on ancient Rome, which carried a version of it throughout the Mediterranean and much of Europe. For this reason, Classical Greece is generally considered the cradle of Western civilization, the seminal culture from which the modern West derives many of its founding archetypes and ideas in politics, philosophy, science, and art. (Full article...) More... Refresh with new selections below (purge) Selected article The page "API/Selected article/3" does not exist. Selected location The page "API/Selected location/8" does not exist. Did you know... The page "API/DYK/1" does not exist. Selected image The page "API/Selected picture/3" does not exist. Selected biography The page "API/Selected biography/1" does not exist. Subcategories Select [►] to view subcategories Category API not found Topics Template:/Topics Related portals Template:/Related portals WikiProjects Wikipedia:WikiProject Greece Wikipedia:WikiProject Classical Greece and Rome Things to do Template:/Opentask Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database