Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to API Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Myths Portal 1929 Belgian banknote, depicting Ceres, Neptune and caduceus Myth is a folklore genre consisting of narratives that play a fundamental role in a society, such as foundational tales or origin myths. The main characters in myths are usually gods, demigods, or supernatural humans. Stories of everyday human beings, although often of leaders of some type, are usually contained in legends, as opposed to myths. Myths are often endorsed by rulers and priests or priestesses and are closely linked to religion or spirituality. Many societies group their myths, legends, and history together, considering myths and legends to be true accounts of their remote past. In particular, creation myths take place in a primordial age when the world had not achieved its later form. Other myths explain how a society's customs, institutions, and taboos were established and sanctified. There is a complex relationship between recital of myths and the enactment of rituals. The term mythology may either refer to the study of myths in general, or a body of myths regarding a particular subject. The study of myth began in ancient history. Rival classes of the Greek myths by Euhemerus, Plato, and Sallustius were developed by the Neoplatonists and later revived by Renaissance mythographers. Today, the study of myth continues in a wide variety of academic fields, including folklore studies, philology, psychology, and anthropology. Moreover, the academic comparisons of bodies of myth are known as comparative mythology. Since the term myth is widely used to imply that a story is not objectively true, the identification of a narrative as a myth can be highly political: many adherents of religions view their religion's stories as true and therefore object to the stories being characterised as myths. Nevertheless, scholars now routinely speak of Jewish mythology, Christian mythology, Islamic mythology, Hindu mythology, and so forth. Traditionally, Western scholarship, with its Judeo-Christian heritage, has viewed narratives in the Abrahamic religions as being the province of theology rather than mythology. Meanwhile, identifying religious stories of colonised cultures, such as stories in Hinduism, as myths enabled Western scholars to imply that they were of lower truth-value than the stories of Christianity. Labelling all religious narratives as myths can be thought of as treating different traditions with parity. (Full article...) Read more... Refresh with new selections below (purge) Selected article - show another Ahalya by Raja Ravi Varma (1848–1906) In Hinduism, Ahalya (Sanskrit: अहल्या, IAST: Ahalyā) also known as Ahilya, is the wife of the sage Gautama Maharishi. Many Hindu scriptures say that she was seduced by Indra (the king of gods), cursed by her husband for infidelity, and liberated from the curse by Rama (an avatar of the god Vishnu). Created by the god Brahma as the most beautiful woman, Ahalya was married to the much older Gautama. In the earliest full narrative, when Indra comes disguised as her husband, Ahalya sees through his disguise but nevertheless accepts his advances. Later sources often absolve her of all guilt, describing how she falls prey to Indra's trickery, or is raped. In all narratives, Ahalya and Indra are cursed by Gautama. The curse varies from text to text, but almost all versions describe Rama as the eventual agent of her liberation and redemption. Although early texts describe how Ahalya must atone by undergoing severe penance while remaining invisible to the world and how she is purified by offering Rama hospitality, in the popular retelling developed over time, Ahalya is cursed to become a stone and regains her human form after she is brushed by Rama's foot. (Full article...) List of selected articles Zeus Ancient Egyptian literature Greek mythology Vampire folklore by region LGBT themes in Hindu mythology Orion (mythology) Kitsune Ganesha Vithoba Zduhać Iravan Prithu Tuisto Kangiten Varahi Myrrha Gerðr Veðrfölnir and eagle Mythology of Carnivàle List of valkyrie names Trojan War Prester John Bhikshatana Blue men of the Minch Dali (goddess) List of Mesopotamian deities Aphrodite Athena Thor Shiva Inanna Chamunda Anu Enlil Gilgamesh Ask and Embla Valkyrie Dagr Putana Hlín Eye of Ra Chhinnamasta Sól (Norse mythology) Njörðr Satyr Did you know? - show different entries Template:/Did you know Recognised content Template:/Recognised content Wikiversity Mythology portal on Wikiversity Selected creature - show another Ninurta with his thunderbolts pursues Anzû stealing the Tablet of Destinies from Enlil's sanctuary (Austen Henry Layard Monuments of Nineveh, 2nd Series, 1853) Anzû, also known as dZû and Imdugud (Sumerian: 𒀭𒅎𒂂 AN.IM.DUGUDMUŠEN), is a lesser divinity or monster in several Mesopotamian religions. He was conceived by the pure waters of the Apsu and the wide Earth, or as son of Siris. Anzû was depicted as a massive bird who can breathe fire and water, although Anzû is alternately depicted as a lion-headed eagle. Stephanie Dalley, in Myths from Mesopotamia, writes that "the Epic of Anzu is principally known in two versions: an Old Babylonian version of the early second millennium [BC], giving the hero as Ningirsu; and 'The Standard Babylonian' version, dating to the first millennium BC, which appears to be the most quoted version, with the hero as Ninurta". However, the Anzu character does not appear as often in some other writings, as noted below. (Full article...) List of selected creatures Vampire Fenrir Ala (demon) Sharabha Ratatoskr Huginn and Muninn Keshi (demon) Nuckelavee Sea Mither Boobrie Stoor worm Mermaid Dragon Siren (mythology) Hippocampus (mythology) Phoenix (mythology) Centaur Unicorn Serpent (symbolism) Ceryneian Hind General images The following are images from various myth-related articles on Wikipedia. The Honest Woodcutter, also known as Mercury and the Woodman and his famous Golden Axe Myths and legends of Babylonia and Assyria (1916) Perillos being forced into the brazen bull that he built for Phalaris An angel (Camael) expelling Adam and Eve with a flaming sword Thor kicks Litr onto Baldr's Hringhorni, illustration by Emil Doepler (ca. 1905) Golden cosmic egg Hiranyagarbha by Manaku The Argo (c. 1500 – 1530), painting by Lorenzo Costa The Deluge, frontispiece to Gustave Doré's illustrated edition of the Bible. Based on the story of Noah's Ark, this engraving shows humans and a tiger doomed by the flood futilely attempting to save their children and cubs. King Svafrlame Secures the Sword Tyrfing Amenonuhoko (天沼矛 or 天之瓊矛 or 天瓊戈, "heavenly jeweled spear") is the name given to the spear in Shinto used to raise the primordial land-mass, Onogoro-shima, from the sea Sampo, a magical artifact of indeterminate type constructed by Ilmarinen that brought riches and good fortune to its holder, in the Finnish epic poetry Kalevala (The Forging of the Sampo, Joseph Alanen, 1911) Shield of Achilles (illustration) The Giving of the Seven Bowls of Wrath / The First Six Plagues, Revelation 16:1–16. Matthias Gerung, c. 1531 Pied piper Prometheus (1868) by Gustave Moreau. In the mythos of Hesiodus and possibly Aeschylus (the Greek trilogy Prometheus Bound, Prometheus Unbound and Prometheus Pyrphoros), Prometheus is bound and tortured for giving fire to humanity. The third gift — an enormous hammer (1902) by Elmer Boyd Smith and the ring Draupnir is visible among other creations by the Sons of Ivaldi The Fall of the Titans (1596–98) by Cornelis Cornelisz van Haarlem Jug from Lydian Treasure Usak As is usual in bestiaries, the lynx in this late 13th-century English manuscript is shown urinating, the urine turning to the mythical stone Lyngurium Symbolic power: a dragon in the Imperial City, Huế, Vietnam Ancient Sumerian cylinder seal impression showing the god Dumuzid being tortured in the Underworld by galla demons Hand of God Bhima fighting with his famous Gada The Shrine of the Three Kings in Cologne Cathedral Depiction of a kneeling Ali with Zulfiqar on his knees Fortune Wheel Voodoo doll with pins in it, Museum of Witchcraft Holy Robe in Trier Riding a Flying Carpet, an 1880 painting by Viktor Vasnetsov Arjuna fighting with his famous Bow Killing of Ravana Painting by Brahmstra of Arrow of Brahma Jacob blesses Joseph and gives him the coat of many colors 14th century Goryeo painting of Ksitigarbha holding a cintamani Ballads of bravery (1877) part of Arthurian mythology Shiva with his Trishula Goetia seal of solomon The Dispute of Minerva and Neptune (c. 1689 or 1706) by René-Antoine Houasse, depicting the founding myth of Athens Longinus with his famous Spear Surya gifts Yudhishthira the Akshayapatra Veronica holding her veil, Hans Memling, c. 1470 This panel by Bartolomeo di Giovanni relates the second half of the Metamorphoses. In the upper left, Jupiter emerges from clouds to order Mercury to rescue Io. Ancient Roman relief from the Cathedral of Maria Saal showing the infant twins Romulus and Remus being suckled by a she-wolf Adams Bridge also called as Rama Setu Hop-o'-My-Thumb stealing the Seven-league boots from the Ogre, by Gustave Doré "The Fall of Man" by Lucas Cranach the Elder and the Tree of Knowledge is on the right Houyi, the God of Archery 1929 Belgian banknote, depicting Ceres, Neptune and caduceus Joan of Arc with her famous sword Tissot Moses and Joshua in the Tabernacle Odysseus Overcome by Demodocus' Song, by Francesco Hayez, 1813–15 Achilles wearing his armor Surya on His Celestial Chariot Greek God Kronos/Saturnus with sickle Erlang Shen (二郎神), or Erlang is a Chinese God with his spear The Ash Yggdrasil by Friedrich Wilhelm Heine Azoth, a universal medicine or universal solvent sought in alchemy. (Medieval legend) The Stone of Destiny (Lia Fáil) at the Hill of Tara, once used as a coronation stone for the High Kings of Ireland Giza pyramids Thor wearing the magic belt Megingjörð Jason returns with Golden fleece Claíomh Solais on an Ireland stamp printed in 1922 Lichas bringing the garment of Nessus to Hercules Vishnu holding his famous sword Nandaka "Tizona", the sword attributed to El Cid, on exhibit in the Army Museum of Madrid A 19th-century drawing of Sun Wukong featuring his staff Dietrich von Bern and Hildebrand fight against dragons Early Hebrew Conception of the Universe The famous sword of Excalibur painted by Howard Pyle Vishnu with his Panchajanya Artist's impressions of the (unseen) Imperial Regalia of Japan Aura, a field of luminous radiation surrounding a person or object Rectangular tablets passed down by the Hand of God in the 10th century Byzantine Leo Bible The fall of Icarus In classical mythology, the Minotaur was defeated by the hero Theseus. Image showing the sacred tree to the right of the temple, from Olaus Magnus' Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus (1555). To the right of the tree is a depiction of a man being sacrificed in the spring The Celestial Chariot, Pushpaka Vimana from Ramayana Ashwatthama uses Narayanastra Golem and Loew Yama with his famous Yama Pasha Medieval bestiaries included mythical animals like the monoceros (above) alongside real animals like the bear. The Flying Dutchman Snake and world egg of the inhabitants of Tyre Fountain of Youth The Crown of Immortality, held by the allegorical figure Eterna (Eternity) Fig trees often represent talismans with the udumbara Hanuman fetches the herb-bearing mountain, in a print from the Ravi Varma Press, 1910's Lord Vishnu took the form of Beauty Mohini and distributed the Amrita (Ambrosia, Elixir) to Devas. When Rahu (snake dragon) tried to steal the Amrita, his head was cut off Heracles would use arrows dipped in the Hydra's poisonous blood to kill other foes during his Labours, such as Stymphalian birds and the giant seven angels with seven trumpets Subcategories Template:/Categories WikiProjects Template:/Wikiprojects edit  Things you can do Template:/Things you can do Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals