Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal is not manually maintained. However, please contact Nihonjoe when you plan to make significant changes. This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software, and seek consensus before making major changes. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to API Template:/Header Template:/Intro Refresh with new selections below (purge) The page "API/box-header" does not exist. The page "API/Selected article/23" does not exist. The page "API/box-header" does not exist. The page "API/Selected picture/53" does not exist. Template:/box-header Template:/Anniversaries/April/April 14 More April anniversaries Template:/box-header 13 April 2021 – Dumping of radioactive water of the Fukushima Daiichii Nuclear Power Plant The Japanese Cabinet finally approved the dumping of 1.25 million tons of treated radioactive water into the Pacific Ocean over the course of 30 years. It faced opposition in South Korea and China. (Kyodo News) (BBC) (Reuters) 13 April 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Japan 11 April 2021 – 2021 Masters Tournament Hideki Matsuyama wins the 85th edition of the Masters to become first male Japanese major champion. (Reuters) 9 April 2021 – COVID-19 pandemic COVID-19 pandemic in Japan The government designates Tokyo, Kyoto, and nine other cities in Okinawa for stricter measures, which include closing businesses at 8:00 p.m., in order to reduce the number of COVID-19 cases. These measures will be in effect from April 15 until May 5 for Kyoto and Okinawa and until May 11 for Tokyo. (The Japan Times) 6 April 2021 – Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sports, 2020 Summer Olympics North Korea announces that the country has withdrawn from participating in the Summer Olympics in Japan, citing COVID-19 concerns. (The New York Times) The page "API/box-header" does not exist. The page "API/Selected quote/6" does not exist. Template:/box-header Ono in 2007 Yoko Ono Lennon (/ˈoʊnoʊ/ OH-noh; Japanese: 小野 洋子, romanized: Ono Yōko, usually spelled in katakana オノ・ヨーコ; born February 18, 1933) is a Japanese multimedia artist, singer, songwriter and peace activist. Her work also encompasses performance art, which she performs in both English and Japanese, and filmmaking. She was married to English singer-songwriter John Lennon of the Beatles from 1969 until his murder in 1980. Ono grew up in Tokyo and moved to New York in 1953 to live with her family. She became involved in New York City's downtown artists scene, which included the Fluxus group. With their performance Bed-Ins for Peace in Amsterdam and Montreal in 1969, Ono and Lennon used their honeymoon at the Hilton Amsterdam as a stage for public protests against the Vietnam War. The feminist themes of her music have influenced musicians as diverse as the B-52s and Meredith Monk. She achieved commercial and critical acclaim in 1980 with the chart-topping album Double Fantasy, a collaboration with Lennon that was released three weeks before his murder, winning the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. (Full article...) List of selected biographies Hasekura Tsunenaga Adolfo Farsari Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi Pierre Rossier Kanō Jigorō Toru Takemitsu Ayumi Hamasaki Fujiwara no Teika Katsuhiko Nakajima Matsuo Bashō Tetsuji Takechi Toyohara Kunichika Koda Kumi Felice Beato Masako Katsura Murasaki Shikibu Ariwara no Narihira Kusumoto Ine Hiroh Kikai Yamashita Yoshitsugu Eir Aoi Kabukidō Enkyō Masashi Hamauzu Rieko Kodama Maon Kurosaki Satoshi Kon Utagawa Toyoharu Hirai Kawato Kawaji Toshiyoshi Lady Saigō Satoru Iwata Morihei Ueshiba Fukuzawa Yukichi The page "API/box-header" does not exist. The page "API/Selected prefecture/40" does not exist. Template:/box-header Template:/Did you know Template:/box-header The following are images from various Japan-related articles on Wikipedia. Amida Buddha, Kōtoku-in The Japanese Empire in 1939 Miniature model of the ancient capital Heian-kyō A map of Japan Ritsurin Garden Guardian in Tōdai-ji, Nara The Kuril Islands with Russian names. Borders of Shimoda Treaty (1855) and Treaty of St. Petersburg (1875) shown in red. Currently all islands northeast of Hokkaido are administered by Russia. Emperor Meiji, the 122nd Emperor of Japan Vegetation during the Last Glacial Maximum period 16,000 BCE Japanese suffragette Komako Kimura wears a layered kimono in New York in 1917 The Nanpō Islands of the Japanese archipelago Sandbar of Amanohashidate Japanese archipelago with outlined islands Map depicts the Kuril–Kamchatka Trench, Japan Trench, Izu–Ogasawara Trench and Mariana Trench Taiheiyō Belt A vase from the early Jōmon period (11000–7000 BC) Empress Michiko, then Crown Princess, wearing a jūnihitoe, 10 April 1959 Kabira Bay on Ishigaki Island, Okinawa Prefecture in March Sea of Japan Dogū figurine of the late Jōmon period (1000–400 BC) Chinese generals surrendering to the Japanese in the Sino-Japanese War of 1894–1895 Japan's exclusive economic zones:   Japan's EEZ   Joint regime with Republic of Korea   EEZ claimed by Japan, disputed by others A Köppen climate classification map of Japan A Yayoi period bronze bell (dōtaku) of the 3rd century CE The islands comprising the Japanese Archipelago were separated from the Asian continent by back-arc spreading Tokugawa Ieyasu was the founder and first shōgun of the Tokugawa shogunate. Shinano River in Niigata City Map of the Kantō Plain Planes from the Japanese aircraft carrier Shōkaku preparing the attack on Pearl Harbor Hōryū-ji is widely known to be the oldest wooden architecture existing in the world. Torii at Itsukushima Shrine Castles were built to guard important or strategic sites. Later Three-Year War in the 11th century. Atomic cloud over Hiroshima, 1945 Extreme points of Japan Kinkaku-ji was built in 1397 by Ashikaga Yoshimitsu Portrait of Ashikaga Takauji who was the founder and first shōgun of the Ashikaga shogunate The Daibutsu-den, within the complex of Tōdai-ji. This Buddhist temple was sponsored by the Imperial Court during the Nara period. Shigeru Yoshida was one of the longest serving PMs in Japanese history (1946–1947 and 1948–1954). Ritsurin Garden, Takamatsu, Japan The aftermath of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami Samurai of the Satsuma Domain during the Boshin War The Black Ship_ Portuguese traders that came from Goa and Macau once a year. Seto Inland Sea Kobe Airport in Osaka Bay Prince Shōtoku was a semi-legendary regent and a politician of the Asuka period. A page from the Man'yōshū, the oldest anthology of classical Japanese poetry Mount Aso 4 pyroclastic flow and the spread of Aso 4 tephra (90,000 to 85,000 years ago). The pyroclastic flow reached almost the whole area of Kyushu, and volcanic ash was deposited of 15 cm in a wide area from Kyushu to southern Hokkaido. The clothing of samurai is also a kind of kimono. This samurai wears armor in 1860s Minamoto no Yoritomo was the founder of the Kamakura shogunate in 1192. This was the first military government in which the shogun with the samurai were the de facto rulers of Japan. Edo period screen depicting the Battle of Sekigahara. It began on October 21, 1600, with a total of 160,000 men facing each other. Map showing the territories of major daimyō families around 1570 CE The capital Tokyo in 2010 Fumie Hihara playing the shamisen (kabuki dance, Guimet Museum, Paris) A village in Niigata Prefecture in January The summit of Mount Fuji is the highest point in Japan Buddhist temple of Horyu-ji is the oldest wooden structure in the world. It was commissioned by Prince Shotoku and represents the beginning of Buddhism in Japan. General Douglas MacArthur and Emperor of Japan, Hirohito, at their first meeting, September 1945 US Secretary of State Dean Acheson signing the Treaty of Peace with Japan, September 8, 1951 Middle Jōmon vase (2000 BC) Aerial view of Lake Biwa The Empire of Japan at its peak in 1942:    Territory (1870–1895)    Acquisitions (1895–1930)    Acquisitions (1930–1942) Woman in kimono at Fukuoka City Hall. Cultural map of the world according to the World Values Survey, describing Japan as highest in the world in "Secular-Rational Values" Samurai could kill a commoner for the slightest insult and were widely feared by the Japanese population. Edo period, 1798. Daisenryō Kofun, Osaka Noh play at traditional Noh theatre Traditional breakfast at ryokan Ancient drawing depicting a samurai battling forces of the Mongol Empire Tectonic map of Japan (French) Mount Fuji and sakura (cherry blossom) are national symbols of Japan Two students practicing kendo at Hiroshima University Samurai Mitsui Sukenaga (right) defeating the Mongolian invasion army (left) Lake Tōya and Shōwa-shinzan in Shikotsu-Tōya National Park A map of Japan's major cities, main towns and selected smaller centers The Ryukyu Islands administered by Kagoshima Prefecture and Okinawa Prefecture Mount Yari, Nagano Prefecture in August The word Nihon written in kanji (horizontal placement of characters). The text means "Japan" in Japanese. Torii entrance gate at Kamigamo Shrine, Kyoto Japan (Iapam) and Korea, in the 1568 Portuguese map of the cartographer João Vaz Dourado. Japanese experts inspect the scene of the 'railway sabotage' on South Manchurian Railway, leading to the Mukden Incident and the Japanese occupation of Manchuria. Pine-clad islands of Matsushima Japan in 1582, showing territory conquered by Oda Nobunaga in gray Territorial extent of Yamato court during the Kofun period Wreckage at a railway station destroyed during the 2011 earthquake and tsunami. Relief map of the land and the seabed of Japan. It shows the surface and underwater terrain of the Japanese archipelago. Sakura blossoms with Himeji Castle in Hyōgo Prefecture in April A topographic map of Japan Izu Islands south of Tokyo Shiraishi clan A handscroll painting dated c. 1130, illustrating a scene from the "Bamboo River" chapter of The Tale of Genji Osechi, new year special dishes in three-tiered box Sakurajima eruption on October 3, 2009 Regions and prefectures of Japan Social structure of the Edo period Template:/box-header Template:/Related portals Template:/box-header Template:/Topics Template:/box-header Template:/Categories Template:/box-header Template:/Recognized content Template:/box-header Template:/Wikimedia Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals Coordinates: 36°30′N 139°00′E﻿ / ﻿36.5°N 139°E﻿ / 36.5; 139 Template:Featured portal is only for Wikipedia:Featured portals.