Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to API Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal The Myths Portal 1929 Belgian banknote, depicting Ceres, Neptune and caduceus Myth is a folklore genre consisting of narratives that play a fundamental role in a society, such as foundational tales or origin myths. The main characters in myths are usually gods, demigods, or supernatural humans. Stories of everyday human beings, although often of leaders of some type, are usually contained in legends, as opposed to myths. Myths are often endorsed by rulers and priests or priestesses and are closely linked to religion or spirituality. Many societies group their myths, legends, and history together, considering myths and legends to be true accounts of their remote past. In particular, creation myths take place in a primordial age when the world had not achieved its later form. Other myths explain how a society's customs, institutions, and taboos were established and sanctified. There is a complex relationship between recital of myths and the enactment of rituals. The term mythology may either refer to the study of myths in general, or a body of myths regarding a particular subject. The study of myth began in ancient history. Rival classes of the Greek myths by Euhemerus, Plato, and Sallustius were developed by the Neoplatonists and later revived by Renaissance mythographers. Today, the study of myth continues in a wide variety of academic fields, including folklore studies, philology, psychology, and anthropology. Moreover, the academic comparisons of bodies of myth are known as comparative mythology. Since the term myth is widely used to imply that a story is not objectively true, the identification of a narrative as a myth can be highly political: many adherents of religions view their religion's stories as true and therefore object to the stories being characterised as myths. Nevertheless, scholars now routinely speak of Jewish mythology, Christian mythology, Islamic mythology, Hindu mythology, and so forth. Traditionally, Western scholarship, with its Judeo-Christian heritage, has viewed narratives in the Abrahamic religions as being the province of theology rather than mythology. Meanwhile, identifying religious stories of colonised cultures, such as stories in Hinduism, as myths enabled Western scholars to imply that they were of lower truth-value than the stories of Christianity. Labelling all religious narratives as myths can be thought of as treating different traditions with parity. (Full article...) Read more... Refresh with new selections below (purge) Selected article - show another "Walkyrien" (1905) by Emil Doepler In Norse mythology, a valkyrie (from Old Norse valkyrja "chooser of the slain") is one of a host of female figures who decide who will die in battle. Selecting among half of those who die in battle (the other half go to the goddess Freyja's afterlife field Fólkvangr), the valkyries bring their chosen to the afterlife hall of the slain, Valhalla, ruled over by the god Odin. There, when the einherjar are not preparing for the events of Ragnarök, the valkyries bear them mead. Valkyries also appear as lovers of heroes and other mortals, where they are sometimes described as the daughters of royalty, sometimes accompanied by ravens, and sometimes connected to swans. The Old Norse poems Völuspá, Grímnismál, Darraðarljóð, and the Nafnaþulur section of the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál provide lists of valkyrie names. Other valkyrie names appear solely outside these lists, such as Sigrún (who is attested in the poems Helgakviða Hundingsbana I and Helgakviða Hundingsbana II). Valkyrie names commonly emphasize associations with battle and, in many cases, with the spear—a weapon heavily associated with the god Odin. Scholars such as Hilda Ellis Davidson and Rudolf Simek propose that the names of the valkyries themselves contain no individuality, but are rather descriptive of the traits and nature of war-goddesses, and are possibly the descriptive creations of skalds, a type of traditional Scandinavian poet. (Full article...) List of selected articles Zeus Ancient Egyptian literature Greek mythology Vampire folklore by region LGBT themes in Hindu mythology Orion (mythology) Kitsune Ganesha Vithoba Zduhać Iravan Prithu Tuisto Kangiten Varahi Myrrha Gerðr Veðrfölnir and eagle Mythology of Carnivàle Ahalya Trojan War Prester John Bhikshatana Blue men of the Minch Dali (goddess) List of Mesopotamian deities Aphrodite Athena Thor Shiva Inanna Chamunda Anu Enlil Gilgamesh Ask and Embla Valkyrie Dagr Putana Hlín Eye of Ra Chhinnamasta Sól (Norse mythology) Njörðr Satyr Did you know? - show different entries Template:/Did you know Recognised content Template:/Recognised content Wikiversity Mythology portal on Wikiversity Selected creature - show another Heracles breaking off the golden antler of the Ceryneian Hind, while Athena (left) and Artemis look on (black-figure amphora, ca. 540–30 BC) In Greek mythology, the Ceryneian hind (Greek: Κερυνῖτις ἔλαφος Kerynitis elaphos, Latin: Elaphus Cerynitis), was a mythical creature that lived in Ceryneia, Greece and took the form of an enormous female deer, larger than a bull, with golden antlers like a stag, hooves of bronze or brass, a "dappled hide", "excelled in swiftness of foot" and snorted fire. To bring it back alive to Eurystheus in Mycenae was the third labour of Heracles. Other names and descriptions for it were: doe with the golden horns, Golden-horned hind, Ceryneia hind, Cerynitian hind, beast with golden antlers, Parrhasian hind, nimble hind of Maenalus and beast of Maenalus. Frazer says that the hind took its name from the river Cerynites, "which rises in Arcadia and flows through Achaia into the sea". (Full article...) List of selected creatures Vampire Fenrir Ala (demon) Sharabha Ratatoskr Huginn and Muninn Keshi (demon) Nuckelavee Sea Mither Boobrie Stoor worm Mermaid Dragon Siren (mythology) Hippocampus (mythology) Phoenix (mythology) Centaur Unicorn Serpent (symbolism) Anzû General images The following are images from various myth-related articles on Wikipedia. Artist's impressions of the (unseen) Imperial Regalia of Japan The famous sword of Excalibur painted by Howard Pyle Pied piper Depiction of a kneeling Ali with Zulfiqar on his knees Thor wearing the magic belt Megingjörð Hop-o'-My-Thumb stealing the Seven-league boots from the Ogre, by Gustave Doré Ballads of bravery (1877) part of Arthurian mythology Fig trees often represent talismans with the udumbara The Crown of Immortality, held by the allegorical figure Eterna (Eternity) Rectangular tablets passed down by the Hand of God in the 10th century Byzantine Leo Bible Claíomh Solais on an Ireland stamp printed in 1922 An angel (Camael) expelling Adam and Eve with a flaming sword Jacob blesses Joseph and gives him the coat of many colors Ashwatthama uses Narayanastra "The Fall of Man" by Lucas Cranach the Elder and the Tree of Knowledge is on the right This panel by Bartolomeo di Giovanni relates the second half of the Metamorphoses. In the upper left, Jupiter emerges from clouds to order Mercury to rescue Io. Killing of Ravana Painting by Brahmstra of Arrow of Brahma Surya gifts Yudhishthira the Akshayapatra Myths and legends of Babylonia and Assyria (1916) Lord Vishnu took the form of Beauty Mohini and distributed the Amrita (Ambrosia, Elixir) to Devas. When Rahu (snake dragon) tried to steal the Amrita, his head was cut off Sampo, a magical artifact of indeterminate type constructed by Ilmarinen that brought riches and good fortune to its holder, in the Finnish epic poetry Kalevala (The Forging of the Sampo, Joseph Alanen, 1911) The fall of Icarus Goetia seal of solomon Early Hebrew Conception of the Universe The Honest Woodcutter, also known as Mercury and the Woodman and his famous Golden Axe Houyi, the God of Archery Tissot Moses and Joshua in the Tabernacle Lichas bringing the garment of Nessus to Hercules The Celestial Chariot, Pushpaka Vimana from Ramayana Longinus with his famous Spear Hanuman fetches the herb-bearing mountain, in a print from the Ravi Varma Press, 1910's Riding a Flying Carpet, an 1880 painting by Viktor Vasnetsov Hand of God Golden cosmic egg Hiranyagarbha by Manaku Medieval bestiaries included mythical animals like the monoceros (above) alongside real animals like the bear. Ancient Sumerian cylinder seal impression showing the god Dumuzid being tortured in the Underworld by galla demons Jason returns with Golden fleece Erlang Shen (二郎神), or Erlang is a Chinese God with his spear In classical mythology, the Minotaur was defeated by the hero Theseus. Joan of Arc with her famous sword The Fall of the Titans (1596–98) by Cornelis Cornelisz van Haarlem Snake and world egg of the inhabitants of Tyre The Stone of Destiny (Lia Fáil) at the Hill of Tara, once used as a coronation stone for the High Kings of Ireland Symbolic power: a dragon in the Imperial City, Huế, Vietnam The third gift — an enormous hammer (1902) by Elmer Boyd Smith and the ring Draupnir is visible among other creations by the Sons of Ivaldi The Flying Dutchman Prometheus (1868) by Gustave Moreau. In the mythos of Hesiodus and possibly Aeschylus (the Greek trilogy Prometheus Bound, Prometheus Unbound and Prometheus Pyrphoros), Prometheus is bound and tortured for giving fire to humanity. Vishnu with his Panchajanya As is usual in bestiaries, the lynx in this late 13th-century English manuscript is shown urinating, the urine turning to the mythical stone Lyngurium Thor kicks Litr onto Baldr's Hringhorni, illustration by Emil Doepler (ca. 1905) Heracles would use arrows dipped in the Hydra's poisonous blood to kill other foes during his Labours, such as Stymphalian birds and the giant Shield of Achilles (illustration) Voodoo doll with pins in it, Museum of Witchcraft Amenonuhoko (天沼矛 or 天之瓊矛 or 天瓊戈, "heavenly jeweled spear") is the name given to the spear in Shinto used to raise the primordial land-mass, Onogoro-shima, from the sea Fountain of Youth Achilles wearing his armor Greek God Kronos/Saturnus with sickle Giza pyramids King Svafrlame Secures the Sword Tyrfing Yama with his famous Yama Pasha The Argo (c. 1500 – 1530), painting by Lorenzo Costa Vishnu holding his famous sword Nandaka Golem and Loew Arjuna fighting with his famous Bow Adams Bridge also called as Rama Setu Surya on His Celestial Chariot The Shrine of the Three Kings in Cologne Cathedral "Tizona", the sword attributed to El Cid, on exhibit in the Army Museum of Madrid Dietrich von Bern and Hildebrand fight against dragons seven angels with seven trumpets Holy Robe in Trier Fortune Wheel Aura, a field of luminous radiation surrounding a person or object Azoth, a universal medicine or universal solvent sought in alchemy. (Medieval legend) Ancient Roman relief from the Cathedral of Maria Saal showing the infant twins Romulus and Remus being suckled by a she-wolf Odysseus Overcome by Demodocus' Song, by Francesco Hayez, 1813–15 A 19th-century drawing of Sun Wukong featuring his staff The Ash Yggdrasil by Friedrich Wilhelm Heine Bhima fighting with his famous Gada 1929 Belgian banknote, depicting Ceres, Neptune and caduceus 14th century Goryeo painting of Ksitigarbha holding a cintamani The Giving of the Seven Bowls of Wrath / The First Six Plagues, Revelation 16:1–16. Matthias Gerung, c. 1531 Image showing the sacred tree to the right of the temple, from Olaus Magnus' Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus (1555). To the right of the tree is a depiction of a man being sacrificed in the spring Perillos being forced into the brazen bull that he built for Phalaris The Deluge, frontispiece to Gustave Doré's illustrated edition of the Bible. Based on the story of Noah's Ark, this engraving shows humans and a tiger doomed by the flood futilely attempting to save their children and cubs. Veronica holding her veil, Hans Memling, c. 1470 The Dispute of Minerva and Neptune (c. 1689 or 1706) by René-Antoine Houasse, depicting the founding myth of Athens Shiva with his Trishula Jug from Lydian Treasure Usak Subcategories Template:/Categories WikiProjects Template:/Wikiprojects edit  Things you can do Template:/Things you can do Associated Wikimedia The following Wikimedia Foundation sister projects provide more on this subject: Wikibooks Books Commons Media Wikinews  News Wikiquote  Quotations Wikisource  Texts Wikiversity Learning resources Wiktionary  Definitions Wikidata  Database Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals