Portal maintenance status: (June 2018) This portal's subpages have been checked by an editor, and are needed. Please take care when editing, especially if using automated editing software. Learn how to update the maintenance information here. Wikipedia portal for content related to API Template:Featured portal is only for Wikipedia:Featured portals. Portal topics Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal Introduction In computing, an application programming interface (API) is an interface that defines interactions between multiple software applications or mixed hardware-software intermediaries. It defines the kinds of calls or requests that can be made, how to make them, the data formats that should be used, the conventions to follow, etc. It can also provide extension mechanisms so that users can extend existing functionality in various ways and to varying degrees. An API can be entirely custom, specific to a component, or designed based on an industry-standard to ensure interoperability. Through information hiding, APIs enable modular programming, allowing users to use the interface independently of the implementation. Reference to Web APIs is currently the most common use of the term. There are also APIs for programming languages, software libraries, computer operating systems, and computer hardware. APIs originated in the 1940s, though the term API did not emerge until the 1960s and 70s. (Full article...) Read more... Refresh with new selections below (purge) Featured article The page "API/Selected article/41" does not exist. Selected image The page "API/Selected picture/13" does not exist. Did you know... ... that in his book The Unending Game, Indian spymaster Vikram Sood explains that the real world of espionage is less like a James Bond movie and more like a George Smiley novel? ... that the director of the film The VelociPastor thought of the idea when his phone autocorrected "Velociraptor" to "Veloci Pastor"? ... that Australian actress Betty Bryant was honoured by Hillary Clinton for her humanitarian service? ... that screenwriter and director Yūki Yamato created her first film, That Girl is Dancing by the Seaside, while studying philosophy at Sophia University? ... that director Patrick Creadon said he made the documentary Hesburgh in part because he was skeptical whether the work of Father Theodore Hesburgh "really lived up to his reputation"? More... News Template:/Film news Featured biography The page "API/Selected biography/6" does not exist. Featured list The page "API/Selected list/5" does not exist. WikiProjects Template:/WikiProjects Selected quote The page "API/Selected quote/20" does not exist. Featured content Template:/Featured content Main topics Template:/Topics Things you can do Template:/Things you can do Subcategories Template:/Categories Subportals Template:/Subportals Related portals Template:/Related portals Associated Wikimedia Template:/Other projects Portals Activities Culture Geography Health History Mathematics Nature People Philosophy Religion Society Technology Random portal What are portals? List of portals