This article contains translated text and the factual accuracy of the translation should be checked by someone fluent in Swedish and English. This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Princ Bajaja Princ Bajaja Directed by Antonín Kachlík Produced by Eliška Nejedlá Screenplay by Antonín Kachlík Eva Košlerová Story by Božena Němcová Based on Prince Bajaja by Božena Němcová Starring Ivan Palúch Magda Vašáryová František Velecký Gustav Opočenský Music by Vladimír Sommer Edited by Jaromír Janáček Production company Filmové Studio Barrandov Release date December 17, 1971 (1971-12-17) (Czechoslovakia) Running time 81 minutes Country Czechoslovakia Language Czech Princ Bajaja is a 1971 Czechoslovak fantasy film based on the fairy tale Prince Bajaja by Božena Němcová and directed by Antonín Kachlík. Plot[edit] After the death of his parents, the young Prince Bajaja sets out to find his fortune. On his journey, he rescues an enchanted horse, who later comes to his aid. Disguised as a mute gardener, he gets acquainted with Princess Slavěna, who is to be sacrificed to a three-headed dragon on her 18th birthday. Her father, the king, is looking for a suitor for the princess, but no one is prepared to fight the dragon, except Bajaja, who receives magical armor from the enchanted horse. Although hurt, Bajaja defeats the dragon, but an evil knight takes credit for the deed. Principal cast[edit] Ivan Palúch - Prince Bajaja (Voice: Petr Štěpánek) Magda Vašáryová - Princess Slavěna František Velecký - The black knight (Voice: Petr Čepek) Gustav Opočenský - The King External links[edit] API at IMDb This article related to a Czech film of the 1970s is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a fantasy film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e