Andromeda Chained to a Rock by Gustave Doré (1869). Princess and dragon is a generic premise common to many legends, fairy tales, and chivalric romances.[1] Northrop Frye identified it as a central form of the quest romance. The story involves an upper-class woman, generally a princess or similar high-ranking nobility, saved from a dragon, either a literal dragon or a similar danger, by the virtuous hero (see Damsel in distress). She may be the first woman endangered by the peril, or may be the end of a long succession of women who were not of as high birth as she is, nor as fortunate.[2] Normally the princess ends up married to the dragon-slayer. The motifs of the hero who finds the princess about to be sacrificed to the dragon and saves her, the false hero who takes his place, and the final revelation of the true hero, are the identifying marks of the Aarne–Thompson folktale type 300, the Dragon-Slayer. They also appear in type 303, the Two Brothers.[3] These two tales have been found, in different variants, in countries all over the world.[4] The "princess and dragon" scenario is given even more weight in popular imagination than it is in the original tales; the stereotypical hero is envisioned as slaying dragons even though, for instance, the Brothers Grimm had only a few tales of dragon and giant slayers among hundreds of tales.[5] Contents 1 History 2 Modern versions 3 Diversions 4 Tales with princesses and dragons 4.1 Mythology 4.2 Folk and fairy tales 4.3 Literature 4.4 Modern media 4.4.1 Films and television 4.4.2 Video games 5 Tales with princesses and similar perils 5.1 Mythology 5.2 Folk and fairy tales 5.3 Literature 5.4 Modern media 5.4.1 Animated and live-action films 5.4.2 Television 5.4.3 Video games 6 References 7 Further reading History[edit] One of the earliest examples of the motif comes from the Ancient Greek tale of Perseus, who rescued the princess Andromeda from Cetus, a sea monster often described as resembling a serpent or dragon.[6] This was taken up into other Greek myths, such as Heracles, who rescued the princess Hesione of Troy from a similar sea monster. Most ancient versions depicted the dragon as the expression of a god's wrath: in Andromeda's case, because her mother Cassiopeia had compared her beauty to that of the sea nymphs, and in Hesione's, because her father had reneged on a bargain with Poseidon. This is less common in fairy tales and other, later versions, where the dragon is frequently acting out of malice. Susanoo slaying the Yamata no Orochi, by Yoshitoshi The Japanese legend of Yamata no Orochi also invokes this motif. The god Susanoo encounters two "Earthly Deities" who have been forced to sacrifice their seven daughters to the many-headed monster, and their daughter Kushinadahime is the next victim. Susanoo is able to kill the dragon after getting it drunk on sake (rice wine).[7] Another variation is from the tale of Saint George and the Dragon. The tale begins with a dragon making its nest at the spring which provides a city-state with water. Consequently, the citizens had to temporarily remove the dragon from its nest in order to collect water. To do so, they offered the dragon a daily human sacrifice. The victim of the day was chosen by drawing lots. Eventually in this lottery, the lot happened to fall to the local princess. The local monarch is occasionally depicted begging for her life with no result. She is offered to the dragon but at this point a traveling Saint George arrives. He faces and defeats the dragon and saves the princess; some versions claim that the dragon is not killed in the fight, but pacified once George ties the princess' sash around its neck. The grateful citizens then abandon their ancestral paganism and convert to Christianity. A similar tale to St. George's, attributed to Russian sources, is that of St. Yegóry, the Brave: after the kingdoms of Sodom and Komor fall, the kingdom of "Arabia" is menaced by a sea-monster that demanded a sacrifice of a human victim every day. The queenly stepmother sent the Princess Elizabeth, the Fair, as the sacrifice. Yegóry, the Brave rescues Elizabeth and uses her sash to bind the beast. To mark her deliverance, he demands the building of three churches.[8] In a tale from Tibet, a kingdom suffers from draught due to two "serpent-gods" blocking the streams of water at the source. Both dragons also demand the sacrifices of citizens from the kingdom, men and women, to appease them, until prince Schalu and his faithful companion Saran decide to put an end to their existence.[9] When the tale is not about a dragon but a troll, giant, or ogre, the princess is often a captive rather than about to be eaten, as in The Three Princesses of Whiteland. These princesses are often a vital source of information to their rescuers, telling them how to perform tasks that the captor sets to them, or how to kill the monster, and when she does not know, as in The Giant Who Had No Heart in His Body, she frequently can pry the information from the giant. Despite the hero's helplessness without this information, the princess is incapable of using the knowledge herself. The Marshall (false hero) tells the court how he killed the dragon. Illustration by John Batten for Joseph Jacobs's Europa's Fairy Book (1916). Again, if a false claimant intimidates her into silence about who actually killed the monster as in the fairy tale The Two Brothers, when the hero appears, she will endorse his story, but she will not tell the truth prior to them; she often agrees to marry the false claimant in the hero's absence. The hero has often cut out the tongue of the dragon, so when the false hero cuts off its head, his claim to have killed it is refuted by its lack of a tongue; the hero produces the tongue and so proves his claim to marry the princess.[10] In some tales, however, the princess herself takes steps to ensure that she can identify the hero—cutting off a piece of his cloak as in Georgic and Merlin, giving him tokens as in The Sea-Maiden—and so separate him from the false hero. Ruggiero Rescuing Angelica, an illustration for Orlando Furioso by Gustave Doré This dragon-slaying hero appears in medieval romances about knights-errant,[11] such as the Russian Dobrynya Nikitich. In some variants of Tristan and Iseult, Tristan wins Iseult for his uncle, King Mark of Cornwall, by killing a dragon that was devastating her father's kingdom; he has to prove his claim when the king's steward claims to be the dragon-slayer.[12] Ludovico Ariosto took the concept up into Orlando Furioso using it not once but twice: the rescue of Angelica by Ruggiero, and Orlando rescuing Olimpia. The monster that menaced Olimpia reconnected to the Greek myths; although Ariosto described it as a legend to the characters, the story was that the monster sprung from an offense against Proteus. In neither case did he marry the rescued woman to the rescuer. Edmund Spenser depicts St. George in The Faerie Queene, but while Una is a princess who seeks aid against a dragon, and her depiction in the opening with a lamb fits the iconography of St. George pageants, the dragon imperils her parents' kingdom, and not her alone. Many tales of dragons, ending with the dragon-slayer marrying a princess, do not precisely fit this cliché because the princess is in no more danger than the rest of the threatened kingdom. An unusual variant occurs in Child ballad 34, Kemp Owyne, where the dragon is the maiden; the hero, based on Ywain from Arthurian legend, rescues her from the transformation with three kisses.[13] Mythological comparativist Julien d'Huy ran an analytical study of the antiquity and diffusion of the snake- or dragon-battling mytheme in different cultural traditions.[14] Scholarship suggests a connection between the episode of the dragon-slaying by the hero and the journey on an eagle's back, akin to the Mesopotamian myth of Etana.[15] Modern versions[edit] Russian civil war propaganda poster: White Russian knight is fighting the Red Russian dragon In the 1959 animated film Sleeping Beauty, Walt Disney concluded the tale by having the wicked fairy godmother Maleficent transform herself into a dragon to withstand the prince, converting the fairy tale to one with the princess and dragon theme.[16] In Ian Fleming's Dr. No, both the book and film versions feature a tank in the shape of a dragon that protects Dr. No's island from superstitious intruders. James Bond and Honeychile Rider are menaced by the dragon, do battle with it, have their friend Quarrel killed and are captured by the crew of the Dragon tank. Ann Boyd's 1967 book The Devil with James Bond explores the theory of the updating of the Princess and dragon genre.[citation needed] In modern fantasy works, the dragon may hold the princess captive instead of eating her. Patricia Wrede spoofed this concept in Dealing with Dragons. A feminist subversion of the concept for young readers is Robert Munsch's The Paper Bag Princess, in which a princess outwits a dragon to save a prince (her betrothed, whom she proceeds not to marry upon him insulting her makeshift clothing instead of thanking her). In Jay Williams's tale The Practical Princess, a dragon demands that a king should sacrifice his daughter to him so that he will leave the rest of the kingdom alone. But the princess saves herself by making a "princess dummy" out of straw, and filling it with boiling pitch and tar. The princess dresses the dummy in one of her own gowns, then goes to the dragon's cave where she offers herself as a sacrifice. The unwitting dragon swallows the straw dummy whole, and the pitch and tar explodes inside the dragon's stomach, killing him. Afterwards, the princess observes, "Dragons are not very smart." In the Isaac Asimov short story Prince Delightful and the Flameless Dragon, it is revealed that Dragons used to be slain as part of a passage from princehood to adulthood, though after a while, they became a protected species. Contrary to popular myth, they do not eat princesses as they tend to smell of cheap perfume and give indigestion. In the few stories, a princess can be rescued by an anthropomorphic animal as well. For instance, in Kate DiCamillo's book The Tale of Despereaux, a mouse named Despereaux Tilling sets out on the quest to rescue Princess Pea from a group of rats led by Chiaroscuro. And in the 2006 video game Sonic the Hedgehog, Sonic, the high-speed blue hedgehog, has to save Princess Elise multiple times from mad scientist Doctor Eggman, who attempts to release the sun god's raw power from within the princess, and help free her from heavy burden. In the 2005 video game Resident Evil 4, special agent Leon S. Kennedy has been assigned to rescue the U.S. president's daughter who has been held captive by Los Illuminados (meaning "The Enlightened" in Spanish), a mysterious and sinister cult led by Osmund Saddler, somewhere in a rural part of Europe.[17] Diversions[edit] In some stories, mostly in more recent literary works, the cliché involving princesses and dragons is somehow twisted to create a more exciting or humorous effect. For example, in The Paper Bag Princess, the princess came to realize that her prince was even more obnoxious than the dragon, and refused to go with him, preferring to skip off into the setting sun alone instead. In some versions, the princess may also befriend, tame, personally defeat, or even be turned into a dragon herself. Indeed, there are a few examples when a curse or spell transforms a princess into a dragon or similar creature (e.g. an alligator, giant bird, or fictional reptile species) or merges her with an object. For instance, in Atlantis: The Lost Empire, the Atlantean princess is called upon by the crystal that detects a threat and merges with her before she is locked in the crate by Lyle Rourke and, after being rescued by Milo and his allies from Rourke, creates a force field to protect the city from an awakened volcano. In such stories, the transformed princess usually aids her sweetheart in a battle against a force of evil. In The Swan Princess, for example, Princess Odette is transformed into a swan, and she helps her lover triumph in a battle against the sorcerer Rothbart, who has the power to transform himself into a hideous beast (a manifestation of a lion, wolf, and bear). Tales with princesses and dragons[edit] Mythology[edit] Andromeda Hesione Þóra Borgarhjǫrtr, rescued from a serpent by Ragnar Lodbrok Nikita the Tanner, Russian bogatyr who fights Zmey Gorynych Folk and fairy tales[edit] The Dragon with Seven Heads in Italo Calvino's Italian Folktales The Two Brothers, collected by the Brothers Grimm The Twins The Knights of the Fish The Dragon of the North The Dragon and the Prince The Three Dogs The Three Princes and their Beasts The Nine Peahens and the Golden Apples The Sea-Maiden The Thirteenth Son of the King of Erin The Bold Knight, the Apples of Youth, and the Water of Life The Little Bull-Calf The Three Enchanted Princes The Merchant Georgic and Merlin Saint George and the Dragon Cesarino di Berni (The Facetious Nights of Straparola)[18] Ileana Simziana Ileana Cosânzeana, rescued by Făt-Frumos from the Zmeu ou Balaur Kulshedra, a creature in Albanian folklore that sometimes guards the fairy or princess Beauty of the Earth Literature[edit] When Princesses Are Pawns by E. G. Cramer Modern media[edit] Films and television[edit] Dragonslayer Shrek Blazing Dragons (here, the knight's and the dragon's roles are reversed) SpongeBob SquarePants – "Dunces and Dragons" Video games[edit] Super Mario series Dragon's Lair King's Quest III: To Heir Is Human Dragon Quest Hydlide and its remake, Virtual Hydlide Tales with princesses and similar perils[edit] Mythology[edit] the Ramayana Folk and fairy tales[edit] The Giant Who Had No Heart in His Body The Red Ettin Soria Moria Castle Snow-White-Fire-Red Shortshanks Tritill, Litill, and the Birds The Death of Koschei the Deathless The Crystal Ball The Flea Schippeitaro The Three Princesses of Whiteland Literature[edit] Ruslan and Ludmila Peter and Wendy by J. M. Barrie The Tale of Despereaux by Kate DiCamillo Modern media[edit] Animated and live-action films[edit] Walt Disney's Sleeping Beauty Star Wars: A New Hope Fire and Ice Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers Atlantis: The Lost Empire Castle in the Sky Wizards of the Lost Kingdom The Princess and the Pirate The Castle of Cagliostro Felix the Cat: The Movie Wizards 1½ Knights: In Search of the Ravishing Princess Herzelinde Television[edit] Black Mirror – "The National Anthem" Video games[edit] The Legend of Zelda series Wario Land 4 Prince of Persia (1989) Dragon Spirit Ghosts 'n Goblins series Marvel Land Wizards & Warriors Bomberman Hero Shining in the Darkness Shining Soul II Kaeru no Tame ni Kane wa Naru Resident Evil 4 Valkyria Chronicles Sonic the Hedgehog (2006) King's Quest II: Romancing the Throne Wizard and the Princess Princess Tomato in the Salad Kingdom Pit Pot References[edit] ^ Johan Huizinga, The Autumn of the Middle Ages p 83 ISBN 0-226-35992-1 ^ Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism, p 189, ISBN 0-691-01298-9 ^ Stith Thompson, The Folktale, p 24-5, University of California Press, Berkeley Los Angeles London, 1977 ^ Thompson, Stith. The Folktale. Berkeley - Los Angeles - London: University of California Press. 1977. p. 27. ^ Maria Tatar, p 282, The Annotated Classic Fairy Tales, ISBN 0-393-05163-3 ^ Jacobs, Joseph. Europa's Fairy Book. New York, London: G. P. Putnam's sons. 1916. pp. 228-230 (Notes on Tale nr. III). ^ Weiss, Michael. "Slaying the Serpent: Comparative Mythological Perspectives on Susanoo's Dragon Fight". In: Journal of Asian Humanities at Kyushu University (JAH-Q). Volume 3. Spring 2018. pp. 1-20. ^ Hapgood, Isabel Florence. A Survey of Russian Literature, with Selections. New York: Chautauqua Press. 1902. pp. 16-17. ^ "The Prince with the Golden Mouth". In: Jewett, Eleanore Myers, and Siddhi-kür. Kalmükische märchen. Wonder Tales From Tibet. Boston: Little, Brown, and company, 1922. pp. 112-132. [1] ^ Max Lüthi, Once Upon A Time: On the Nature of Fairy Tales, p 54, Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., New York, 1970 ^ Johan Huizinga, The Autumn of the Middle Ages p 84 ISBN 0-226-35992-1 ^ Anne Wilson, Traditional Romance and Tale, p 46, D.S. Brewer, Rowman & Littlefield, Ipswitch, 1976, ISBN 0-87471-905-4 ^ Francis James Child, The English and Scottish Popular Ballads, v 1, p 306, Dover Publications, New York 1965 ^ d'Huy, Julien. (2016). Première reconstruction statistique d'un rituel paléolithique: autour du motif du dragon. Nouvelle Mythologie Comparée / New Comparative Mythology. ^ Annus, Amar. "Review Article. The Folk-Tales of Iraq and the Literary Traditions of Ancient Mesopotamia". In: Journal of Ancient Near Eastern Religions. 9 (2009): 91. 10.1163/156921209X449170. ^ John Grant and John Clute, The Encyclopedia of Fantasy, "Sleeping Beauty" p 874 ISBN 0-312-19869-8 ^ Capcom Production Studio 4 (October 25, 2005). Resident Evil 4 (PlayStation 2). Capcom. Leon: It was right before I was to take on my duties of protecting the President's daughter when she was abducted. That's the ultimate reason I'm in this lonely and rural part of Europe. According to our intelligence, there's reliable information of a sighting of a girl that looks very similar to the President's daughter. Apparently, she's being withheld by some unidentified group of people. Who would have thought my first job would be a rescue mission? ^ "Cesarino the Dragon Slayer". In: The Pleasant Nights. Volume 2. edited by Beecher Donald, by Straparola Giovan Francesco and Waters W.G., 361-93. Toronto; Buffalo; London: University of Toronto Press, 2012. http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.3138/9781442699533.30. Further reading[edit] Bauman, R. (1970). "A Sixteenth Century Version of The Dragon-Slayer". In: Fabula 11 (Jahresband): 137–143, Available From: De Gruyter https://doi.org/10.1515/fabl.1970.11.1.137 [Accessed 9 October 2020] Hart, Donn V., and Harriett C. Hart. "A Philippine Version of "The Two Brothers and the Dragon Slayer" Tale." In: Western Folklore 19, no. 4 (1960): 263-75. doi:10.2307/1497353. Marjanić, Suzana. (2010). "Dragon and Hero or How to Kill a Dragon – on the Example of the Legends of Međimurje about the Grabancijaš and the Dragon (Zmaj i junak ili kako ubiti zmaja na primjeru međimurskih predaja o grabancijašu i pozoju)". In: Studia mythologica Slavica. 13. 127. 10.3986/sms.v13i0.1644. Rebel, Hermann. "When Women Held the Dragon's Tongue." In: When Women Held the Dragon's Tongue: And Other Essays in Historical Anthropology. pp. 131–80. Berghahn Books, 2010. www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt9qcq7b.10. Velie, Alan R. "The Dragon Killer, The Wild Man and Hal", Fabula 17, Jahresband (1976): 269–274, doi: https://doi.org/10.1515/fabl.1976.17.1.269 v t e Stock characters By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Supersoldier Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Harlequin Zanni Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Social Darwinist Dark Lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer toy Skeleton Swamp monster Vampires Zombies Other Alazon Archenemy Igor Masked Mystery Villain Miser By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Magical Negro Young Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Himbo Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Moleman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent cliques Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Pop icon Redshirt Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Village idiot White savior