For other uses, see Proteus (disambiguation). For other Greek mythological characters of the same name, see Proteus (mythological character). "Protean" redirects here. For other uses, see Protean (disambiguation). Illustration of Proteus by Andrea Alciato from The Book of Emblems (1531) Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Aquatic deities Amphitrite Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Tethys Thetis Triton v t e This article contains special characters. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols. In Greek mythology, Proteus (/ˈproʊtiəs, -tjuːs/;[1] Ancient Greek: Πρωτεύς, Prōteus) is an early prophetic sea-god or god of rivers and oceanic bodies of water, one of several deities whom Homer calls the "Old Man of the Sea" (halios gerôn).[2] Some who ascribe a specific domain to Proteus call him the god of "elusive sea change", which suggests the constantly changing nature of the sea or the liquid quality of water. He can foretell the future, but, in a mytheme familiar to several cultures, will change his shape to avoid doing so; he answers only to those who are capable of capturing him. From this feature of Proteus comes the adjective protean, meaning "versatile", "mutable", or "capable of assuming many forms". "Protean" has positive connotations of flexibility, versatility and adaptability. Contents 1 Name Origin 2 Family 3 Mythology 3.1 Proteus, prophetic sea-god 3.2 Proteus, king of Egypt 4 Cultural references 4.1 In alchemy and psychology 4.2 In literature 4.3 In cinema 4.4 Proteus in use today 4.5 Biology 5 Honours 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Name Origin[edit] Proteus' name suggests the "first" (from Greek "πρῶτος" prōtos, "first"), as prōtogonos (πρωτόγονος) is the "primordial" or the "firstborn". It is not certain to what this refers, but in myths where he is the son of Poseidon, it possibly refers to his being Poseidon's eldest son, older than Poseidon's other son, the sea-god Triton. The first attestation of the name, although it is not certain whether it refers to the god or just a person, is in Mycenaean Greek; the attested form, in Linear B, is 𐀡𐀫𐀳𐀄, po-ro-te-u.[3][4][5] Family[edit] Proteus was generally regarded as the son of the sea-god Poseidon[6][7] and Phoenice,[8] a daughter of King Phoenix of Phoenicia.[9] The children of Proteus by his sister-wife Torone of Phlegra were Polygonus (Tmolus) and Telegonus. They both challenged Heracles at the behest of Hera and were killed by the hero.[10][11] Another son of Proteus, Eioneus, became the father of Dymas, king of Phrygia.[12][13] By the Nereid Psamathe, Proteus fathered Theoclymenos and Theonoe[14] (Eidothea[15] or Eurynome[16]). Cabeiro, mother of the Cabeiri and the three Cabeirian nymphs by Hephaestus, was also called the daughter of Proteus.[17] Three daughters, Rhoiteia gave her name to the city of Rhoiteion in Troad[18], Thebe became the eponym of Thebes in Egypt[19] and Thaicrucia, mother of Nympheus by Zeus.[20] Mythology[edit] Proteus, prophetic sea-god[edit] According to Homer (Odyssey iv: 355), the sandy island of Pharos situated off the coast of the Nile Delta was the home of Proteus, the oracular Old Man of the Sea and herdsman of the sea-beasts. In the Odyssey, Menelaus relates to Telemachus that he had been becalmed here on his journey home from the Trojan War. He learned from Proteus' daughter Eidothea ("the very image of the Goddess"), that if he could capture her father, he could force him to reveal which of the gods he had offended and how he could propitiate them and return home. Proteus emerged from the sea to sleep among his colony of seals, but Menelaus was successful in holding him, though Proteus took the forms of a lion, a serpent, a leopard, a pig, even of water or a tree. Proteus then answered truthfully, further informing Menelaus that his brother Agamemnon had been murdered on his return home, that Ajax the Lesser had been shipwrecked and killed, and that Odysseus was stranded on Calypso's Isle Ogygia. According to Virgil in the fourth Georgic, at one time the bees of Aristaeus, son of Apollo, all died of a disease. Aristaeus went to his mother, Cyrene, for help; she told him that Proteus could tell him how to prevent another such disaster, but would do so only if compelled. Aristaeus had to seize Proteus and hold him, no matter what he would change into. Aristaeus did so, and Proteus eventually gave up and told him that the bees' death was a punishment for causing the death of Eurydice. To make amends, Aristaeus needed to sacrifice 12 animals to the gods, leave the carcasses in the place of sacrifice, and return three days later. He followed these instructions, and upon returning, he found in one of the carcasses a swarm of bees which he took to his apiary. The bees were never again troubled by disease. There are also legends concerning Apollonius of Tyana that say Proteus incarnated himself as the 1st century philosopher. These legends are mentioned in the 3rd century biographical work Life of Apollonius of Tyana. Proteus, king of Egypt[edit] Main article: Proteus of Egypt In the Odyssey (iv.430ff) Menelaus wrestles with "Proteus of Egypt, the immortal old man of the sea who never lies, who sounds the deep in all its depths, Poseidon's servant" (Robert Fagles's translation). Proteus of Egypt is mentioned in an alternative version of the story of Helen of Troy in the tragedy Helen of Euripides (produced in 412 BC). The often unconventional playwright introduces a "real" Helen and a "phantom" Helen (who caused the Trojan War), and gives a backstory that makes the father of his character Theoclymenus, Proteus, a king in Egypt who had been wed to a Nereid Psamathe. In keeping with one of his themes in Helen, Euripides mentions in passing Eido ("image"), a daughter of the king and therefore sister of Theoclymenus who underwent a name-change after her adolescence and became "Theonoë," "god-minded," since she was as it turned out capable of foreseeing the future--as such, she is a prophet who appears as a crucial character in the play. The play's king Proteus is already dead at the start of the action, and his tomb is present onstage. It appears that he is only marginally related to the "Old Man of the Sea"[21] and should not be confused with the sea god Proteus, although it is tempting to see Euripides as playing a complex literary game with the sea god's history--both Proteuses, for example, are protectors of the house of Menelaus, both are connected with the sea, both dwell in Egypt, and both are "grandfatherly" or "ancient" figures. At Pharos a king of Egypt named Proteus welcomed the young god Dionysus in his wanderings.[22] In Hellenistic times, Pharos was the site of the Lighthouse of Alexandria, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world.[23] Cultural references[edit] In alchemy and psychology[edit] The German mystical alchemist Heinrich Khunrath wrote of the shape-changing sea-god who, because of his relationship to the sea, is both a symbol of the unconscious as well as the perfection of the art. Alluding to the scintilla, the spark from ‘the light of nature’ and symbol of the anima mundi, Khunrath in Gnostic vein stated of the Protean element Mercury: our Catholick Mercury, by virtue of his universal fiery spark of the light of nature, is beyond doubt Proteus, the sea god of the ancient pagan sages, who hath the key to the sea and …power over all things. — Von Hyleanischen Chaos, Carl Jung, vol. 14:50[better source needed] In modern times, the Swiss psychologist Carl Jung defined the mythological figure of Proteus as a personification of the unconscious, who, because of his gift of prophecy and shape-changing, has much in common with the central but elusive figure of alchemy, Mercurius. In literature[edit] The poet John Milton, aware of the association of Proteus with the Hermetic art of alchemy, wrote in Paradise Lost of alchemists who sought the philosopher's stone: In vain, though by their powerful Art they bind Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound In various shapes old Proteus from the Sea, Drain'd through a Limbec to his native form. — John Milton, Paradise Lost, III.603–06 In his 1658 discourse The Garden of Cyrus, Sir Thomas Browne, pursuing the figure of the quincunx, queried: "Why Proteus in Homer the Symbole of the first matter, before he settled himself in the midst of his Sea-Monsters, doth place them out by fives?" Shakespeare uses the image of Proteus to establish the character of his great royal villain Richard III in the play Henry VI, Part Three, in which the future usurper boasts: I can add colours to the chameleon, Change shapes with Proteus for advantages, And set the murderous Machiavel to school. Can I do this, and cannot get a crown? Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down. — William Shakespeare, Henry VI, Part Three, Act III, Scene ii Shakespeare also names one of the main characters of his play The Two Gentlemen of Verona Proteus. Inconsistent with his affections, his deceptions have unraveled at the finale of the play as he is brought face-to-face with his friend Valentine and original love Julia: O Heaven, were man but constant, he were perfect: that one error fills him with faults; makes him run through all sins Inconstancy falls off, ere it begins. In 1807, William Wordsworth finished his sonnet on the theme of a modernity deadened to Nature, which opens "The world is too much with us", with a sense of nostalgia for the lost richness of a world numinous with deities: …I'd rather be A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn; So might I, standing on this pleasant lea, Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn; Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea. Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.[24] James Joyce's Ulysses[25] uses Protean transformations of matter in time for self-exploration. "Proteus" is the title provided for the third chapter in the Linati schema for Ulysses. The protagonist of Kurt Vonnegut's 1952 novel Player Piano is an engineer named Paul Proteus. Proteus is the name of the submarine in the original story by Otto Klement and Jay Lewis Bixby, which became the basis for the 1966 film Fantastic Voyage and Isaac Asimov's novelization. John Barth's novelette "Menelaiad" in Lost in the Funhouse is built around a battle between Proteus and Menelaus. It is told as a multiply-nested frame tale, and the narrators bleed into each other as the battle undermines their identities. "Proteus: The City" is the title of Book Four of Thomas Wolfe's autobiographical novel Of Time and the River.[26] In cinema[edit] The Lighthouse (2019 film) directed by Robert Eggers depicts the event of two lighthouse keepers stranded on an island while progressively going mad. One of the characters is modeled on Proteus, a "prophecy-telling ocean god who serves Poseidon", and is even shown with tentacles and sea creatures stuck to his body.[27] Proteus in use today[edit] As a concept and as a word, Proteus is not a commonly used term today, but has been adopted by some companies to be an interesting concept for the basis of their business names, ranging from healthcare to industrial supplies all the way to sports nutrition and supplementation.[28] In medicine, Proteus syndrome refers to a rare genetic condition characterized by symmetric overgrowth of the bones, skin, and other tissues. Organs and tissues affected by the disease grow out of proportion to the rest of the body. This condition is associated with mutations of the PTEN gene.[29] Proteus also refers to a genus of Gram-negative Proteobacteria, some of which are opportunistic human pathogens known to cause urinary tract infections, most notably. Proteus mirabilis is one of these and is most referenced in its tendency to produce "stag-horn" calculi composed of struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) that fill the human renal pelvis. In July 2019 the British professional wrestling company PROGRESS Wrestling announced the introduction of a Proteus Championship. The current holder of the championship will be allowed to declare the type of match they will defend the championship in, with each new champion being able to set their own match type. The name of the championship was chosen due to its ever-changing nature, reflecting the shape-changing abilities of the deity it was named for.[30] Biology[edit] The protist Amoeba proteus is named for the Greek god, as it has no fixed shape and constantly changes form.[31] Honours[edit] Proteus Lake in Antarctica is named after the deity. See also[edit] Proteus in popular culture USS Proteus HMS Proteus Oresteia, section Proteus Notes[edit] ^ "Proteus". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. ^ See also Nereus and Phorcys ^ Bartoněk, Antonin (2002). "Mycenaean words in Homer". In Clairis, Christos (ed.). Recherches en linquistique grecque. L'Harmattan. p. 94. ISBN 2-7475-2742-5. At Google Books. ^ "The Linear B Word po-ro-te-u". Palaeolexicon. Word study tool of ancient languages. ^ "po-ro-te-u". Deaditerranean: Minoan Linear A & Mycenaean Linear B. ^ Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 2.5.9 ^ Lycophron, Alexandra 112 ^ Stephanus of Byzantium, Ethnica s.v. Torōnē ^ Scholia on Euripides, Phoenissae 5 ^ Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 2.5.9 ^ Tzetzes, Chilliades 2.320 ^ Scholia on Euripides, Hecuba 3 ^ Pherecydes fr. 136 (Fowler 2013, p. 42) ^ Euripides, Helen 7 ff. ^ Homer, Odyssey 4.360ff ^ Zenodotus in scholia on Homer, Odyssey 4.366 ^ Strabo, Geographica 10.321 citing Pherecydes ^ Scholia on Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica 1.929 (ed. Wendel) ^ Scholia on Homer, Iliad 9.383 ^ Pseudo-Clement, Recognitions 10.21 ^ Helen Archived 2005-03-01 at the Wayback Machine, Euripides, Nottingham. ^ Graves, Robert (2012). The Greek Myths. New York: Penguin – via Google Books. ^ Wilson, Nigel (2006). Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece. New York: Routledge. p. 36 – via Google Books. ^ Wordsworth Archived 2006-06-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Chapter 3". Readprint.com. Retrieved 2018-11-05. ^ Thomas Wolfe, Of Time and the River ^ "The Lighthouse ending explained". Mashable. ^ "Proteus Supplements". Proteus Supplements. Retrieved 2017-06-14. ^ "Proteus syndrome". US National Library of Medicine. July 7, 2020. ^ "A landscape-changing announcement for Alexandra Palace..." PROGRESS Wrestling. July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2020 – via YouTube. ^ Nakate, Shashank. "Amoeba Facts." BiologyWise. April 02, 2018. Accessed February 07, 2019. https://biologywise.com/amoeba-facts. References[edit] Karl Kerenyi, The Gods of the Greeks Robert Graves, The Greek Myths E. Prioux, «Géographie symbolique des errances de Protée : un mythe et sa relecture politique à l’époque impériale», in A. Rolet (dir.), Protée en trompe-l'œil. Genèse et survivances d'un mythe, d'Homère à Bouchardon (Paris, P.U.R., 2009), p. 139-164 (Interférences). A. Scuderi, Il paradosso di Proteo. Storia di una rappresentazione culturale da Omero al postumano, Carocci, Collana Lingue e letterature n.147, Roma, 2012. ISBN 9788843067190 Sherwood Fox, William (1916), "Greek and Roman", The Mythology of All Races, 1 External links[edit] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Proteus (mythology) . Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of Proteus at Wiktionary v t e Ancient Greek deities by affiliation Primordial deities Achlys Aether Aion/Chronos Ananke Chaos Erebus Eros/Phanes Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus/Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Fates Atropos Clotho Lachesis Titan deities Titanes (male) Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Oceanus Titanides (female) Dione Mnemosyne Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Children of Hyperion Eos Helios Selene Children of Coeus Asteria Leto Children of Crius Astraeus Pallas Perses Children of Iapetus Atlas Epimetheus Menoetius Prometheus Olympian deities Dodekatheon Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Theoi Olympioi Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Mousai (Muses) Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaea Antheia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelos Aquatic deities Sea Gods Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus The Ichthyocentaurs Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites The Nesoi Oceanus Phorcys Pontus/Thalassa Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Amalthea Asia Callirrhoe Ceto Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Zeuxo Nereides Amphitrite Arethusa Dynamene Galatea Galene Psamathe Thetis Potamoi Achelous Almo Alpheus Anapos Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Clitumnus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Rivers of the Underworld Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Sangarius Scamander Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Kleodora Melaina Tiasa Chthonic deities Theoi Chthonioi Angelos Gaia Hades Hecate The Lampads Macaria Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Erinyes (Furies) Alecto Megaera Tisiphone Earthborn Cyclopes Gigantes Hecatonchires Kouretes Meliae Telchines Typhon Apotheothenai Trophonius Triptolemus Orpheus Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Logoi Children of Nyx Achlys Apate Dolos Eleos Elpis Epiphron Eris Geras Hesperides Hybris Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Sophrosyne Thanatos Children of Phorcys Echidna The Graeae Deino Enyo Pemphredo The Gorgones Euryale Medusa Stheno The Sirenes Aglaopheme Leucosia Ligeia Molpe Parthenope Peisinoe Thelxiepeia Children of Thaumas The Harpiae Aello Celaeno Ocypete Podarge Iris Children of other gods Aergia Aidos Alala Aletheia Angelia Arete Astraea Caerus The Younger Charites Eucleia Eupheme Euthenia Philophrosyne Corus Deimos The Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Hymen Ersa Eupraxia Hedone Homonoia Iacchus The Litae Homonoia Peitho Phobos Tyche Others Adephagia Alala Alke Amechania Anaideia Alastor Apheleia The Arae Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eusebeia Gelos Heimarmene Homados Horme Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Other deities Sky The Anemoi The Astra Planeti Stilbon Hesperus Phosphorus Pyroeis Phaethon Phaenon Aura Chione The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Agriculture Aphaea Demeter Despoina Eunostus Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis The Anthousai Aristaeus Attis The Auloniads Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimeliades Hecaterus Leuce Ma The Maenades The Meliae The Napaeae The Nymphai Hyperboreioi The Oreads Adrasteia Echo Helice Iynx Nomia Oenone Pitys The Pegasides Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Alexiares and Anicetus Aphroditus Enyalius Palaestra v t e Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Twelve Olympians Zeus Hera Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hermes Hestia Poseidon Aquatic deities Poseidon Amphitrite Ceto Glaucus Nereus Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Proteus Tethys Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Naiads Nereids Chthonic Deities (Deities of the Underworld) Hades Persephone Angelos Erinyes Eurynomos Gaia Hecate Iacchus Melinoe Trophonius Triptolemus Anemoi (Deities of the Wind) Aeolus Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus v t e William Shakespeare's The Two Gentlemen of Verona Characters Valentine Proteus Julia Silvia Launce Speed Crab Sources The Boke Named the Governour (1531) Los Siete Libros de la Diana (1559) Euphues, The Anatomy of Wit (1578) The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia (1580) Theatrical adaptations Two Gentlemen of Verona (1971) Screen adaptations A Spray of Plum Blossoms (1931) The Two Gentlemen of Verona (TV; 1983) Related Proteus Jorge de Montemor Stuart Draper "An Sylvia" (1826) Shakespeare in Love (1998) The Goat, or Who Is Sylvia? (2002) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125