For other uses, see Psychometry. Part of a series on Spiritualism Main articles Spirit Spiritualism Spiritualist beliefs Spiritism Practices Mediumship Faith healing Psychometry Automatic writing Related topics Afterlife Spirit world Spirit guide Shamanism Animism Psychic Clairvoyance Paranormal Occult Ouija Parapsychology  Philosophy portal ·  Religion portal v t e Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune telling Ghost hunting Indigo children Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychokinesis Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Reportedly haunted locations: India United Kingdom United States World Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific skepticism Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend Parapsychology Death and culture Parapsychology Scientific literacy v t e Psychometry (from Greek: ψυχή, psukhē, "spirit, soul" and μέτρον, metron, "measure"),[1] also known as token-object reading,[2] or psychoscopy,[3] is a form of extrasensory perception characterized by the claimed ability to make relevant associations from an object of unknown history by making physical contact with that object.[4] Supporters assert that an object may have an energy field that transfers knowledge regarding that object's history.[4] There is no scientific evidence that psychometry exists and the concept has been widely criticized.[4][5] Contents 1 History 2 Scientific reception 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links History[edit] Joseph Rodes Buchanan Joseph Rodes Buchanan coined the word "psychometry" (measuring the soul) in 1842.[6][7] Buchanan developed the idea that all things give off an emanation.[8] The Past is entombed in the Present! The world is its own enduring monument; and that which is true of its physical, is likewise true of its mental career. The discoveries of Psychometry will enable us to explore the history of man, as those of geology enable us to explore the history of the earth. There are mental fossils for psychologists as well as mineral fossils for the geologists; and I believe that hereafter the psychologist and the geologist will go hand in hand — the one portraying the earth, its animals and its vegetation, while the other portrays the human beings who have roamed over its surface in the shadows, and the darkness of primeval barbarism! Aye, the mental telescope is now discovered which may pierce the depths of the past and bring us in full view of the grand and tragic passages of ancient history![9] Buchanan asserted that his particular psychism would supersede empiric science. He wrote a comprehensive treatise, Manual of Psychometry: the Dawn of a New Civilization (1885), detailing how the direct knowledge of psychometry would be applied to and affect the many various branches of science. It also would elevate the various schools of philosophy and arts thereby affecting wide social change and ultimately an enlightenment of humanity:[10] The thermometer measures caloric (thermo temperature). The barometer measures the weight (baro, weight) of the atmosphere; the electrometer measures electric conditions; the psychometer measures the soul (psyche). In the case of Psychometry, however, the measuring assumes a new character, as the object measured and the measuring instrument are the same psychic element, and its measuring power is not limited to the psychic as it was developed in the first experiments, but has appeared by successive investigation to manifest a wider and wider area of power, until it became apparent that this psychic capacity was really the measure of all things in the Universe.[11] Buchanan continued to promote psychometry throughout his life and his followers believed that it would revolutionize science in a comprehensive way as "the dawn of a new civilization".[12] Buchanan's work on psychometry was continued by the geologist William Denton (1823-1883). In 1863, Denton published a book on the subject The Soul of Things. Their work was criticized by Joseph Jastrow as based on delusion and wishful thinking.[13] Others, such as Stephen Pearl Andrews who promoted Psychometry along with his own new science of Universology, built upon Buchanan's ideas. As a lecturer Andrews asserted that such inquiries, as paraphrased by an 1878 New York Times article, "demonstrated that the sympathy between the mind and body is an exact science".[14] In the later nineteenth century demonstrations of psychometry became a popular part of stage acts and séances; with participants providing a personal object for "reading" by a medium or psychic. It is also commonly offered at psychic fairs as a type of psychic reading.[15] At New Age events psychometry has claimed to help visitors "meet the dearly departed" (a form of spiritualism).[16] Scientific reception[edit] There is no scientific evidence that psychometry exists. Skeptics explain alleged successes of psychometry by cold reading and confirmation bias.[4][17][18][19] Skeptic Robert Todd Carroll describes psychometry as a pseudoscience.[5] The majority of police departments polled do not use psychics and do not consider them credible or useful on cases.[20][21][22][23] Proponents of psychometry have argued that psychic detectives have been used by law enforcement agencies on specific cases. However, psychologist Leonard Zusne has noted that "enquiries with police officials... reveal that the involvement of psychics has not been very helpful, and that second-hand reports of it are often in gross error."[4] See also[edit] Religion portal Law of contagion List of parapsychology topics Parapsychology Retrocognition Precognition List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Discernment of Spirits References[edit] ^ Joseph Rodes Buchanan, Manual of Psychometry : the Dawn of a New Civilization Boston, Frank H. Hodges (4th edition), 1893 p.3. ISBN 1-150-07724-7 ^ Psychometry Archived 2010-08-24 at the Wayback Machine - Key Words Frequently Used in Parapsychology, Parapsychological Association (2006-12-17) ^ Tischner, Rudolf, Telepathy and Clairvoyance Great Britain, Steven Austin & Sons, Ltd. 1924, p.70. ISBN 1-84664-135-7 ^ a b c d e Zusne, Leonard; Jones, Warren H. (1989). Anomalistic Psychology: A Study of Magical Thinking. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. pp. 193-194. ISBN 978-0-805-80507-9 ^ a b "Psychometry". The Skeptic's Dictionary. ^ Spence, Lewis Encyclopedia of Occultism and Parapsychology, Part 2, Kessinger Publishing, LLC (February 1, 2003), p.754. ISBN 0-7661-2817-2 ^ Mark A. Lause (University of Cincinnati): Joseph Rodes Buchanan (Internet Archive) ^ Psychometry at paralumun.com ^ Buchanan, 1893, p.73 ^ Buchanan, 1893, pp.4–5 ^ Buchanan 1893, pp.3–4 ^ Buchanan's Journal of Man., Vol. I. August, 1887. No. 7. ^ Jastrow, Joseph. (1935). Wish and Wisdom: Episodes in the Vagaries of Belief. D. Appleton-Century Company. pp. 314-322. (Published in 1962 by Dover Books as Error and Eccentricity in Human Belief). ^ A discourse on Seven Sciences.; Cerebral Physiology, Cerebral Psychology, Sarcognomy, Psychometry, Pneumatology, Pathology, and Cerebral Pathology. The New York Times, March 17, 1878 ^ Marcelle S. Fischler LONG ISLAND JOURNAL; Where $20 Will Buy A Peek at the Future nytimes.com, December 15, 2002. ^ Katherine E. Finkelstein Northport Journal; The Very Determined Meet the Dearly Departed nytimes.com, August 25, 1999. ^ Hoebens, Piet Hein; Truzzi, Marcello. (1985). Reflections on Psychic Sleuths. In A Skeptic's Handbook of Parapsychology, ed. Paul Kurtz. Prometheus Books. pp. 631-643. ISBN 0-87975-300-5 ^ Carroll, Robert Todd. (2003). The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions. John Wiley & Sons. p. 316. ISBN 978-0-471-27242-7 ^ Stollznow, Karen. "A Psychometry Reading". Skeptical Inquirer. Center for Inquiry. Retrieved 12 February 2018. ^ Barnes, Hannah (2009-11-23). "Can psychics help to solve crime??". BBC. Retrieved 2009-11-22. ^ Silence, Eddie (2006-03-29). "Do the police use psychics?". Critical Thinking Association (UK). Retrieved 2007-05-25. ^ "Police reject psychic advice". Bay Of Plenty Times. Retrieved 2007-05-21. ^ Nickell, Joe. "Police Psychics: Do They Really Solve Crimes?". csicop.org. Further reading[edit] Joseph Rodes Buchanan (1893). Manual of Psychometry: The Dawn of a New Civilization. Boston: F. H. Hodges. William Denton (1863). The Soul of Things, Or, Psychometric Researches and Discoveries. Boston: Walker, Wise & Co. Joe Nickell (1994). Psychic Sleuths: ESP and Sensational Cases. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-880-5 James Randi (1982). Flim-Flam! Psychics, ESP, Unicorns, and Other Delusions. Prometheus Books. ISBN 0-87975-198-3 Colin Wilson. (1985). The Psychic Detectives: The Story of Psychometry and Paranormal Crime Detection. Mercury House. ISBN 0-330-28119-4 Richard Wiseman (2011). Paranormality: Why We See What Isn't There. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-75298-6 External links[edit] Look up psychometry in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Psychometry Experiment, a project that gave residents in Ontario, Canada the opportunity to participate in a psychometry study Psychometry - Skeptic's Dictionary v t e Parapsychology Outline Topics Apparitional experience Astral projection Auras Bilocation Clairvoyance Deathbed phenomena Dermo-optical perception Dream telepathy Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Extrasensory perception Ganzfeld experiment Ghosts Kirlian photography Levitation Materialization Mediumship Near-death experience Orb Out-of-body experience Pam Reynolds case Parapsychology research at SRI Past life regression Plant perception (paranormal) Poltergeist Precognition Psychic Psychic detective Psychic reading Psychic surgery Psychokinesis Psychometry Pyrokinesis Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Second sight Sensory leakage Spoon bending Telepathy Thoughtography Xenoglossy Zener cards Active organizations American Society for Psychical Research Association for the Scientific Study of Anomalous Phenomena College of Psychic Studies Institut Métapsychique International Institute of Noetic Sciences International Association for Near-Death Studies Koestler Parapsychology Unit Parapsychological Association Parapsychology Foundation Rhine Research Center Society for Psychical Research The Ghost Club Defunct organizations American Psychical Institute British College of Psychic Science Cambridge Ghost Society International Club for Psychical Research International Institute for Psychical Research London Dialectical Society Metropolitan Psychical Society National Laboratory of Psychical Research Oxford Phasmatological Society Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory Society for the Study of Supernormal Pictures People List of parapsychologists Skeptics of parapsychology Publications An Experiment with Time Extrasensory Perception Irreducible Mind Journal of Near-Death Studies Journal of Parapsychology Journal of Scientific Exploration Life After Life (Moody book) Life Before Life Mental Radio Old Souls: The Scientific Evidence For Past Lives Parapsychology: Frontier Science of the Mind The Roots of Coincidence Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation Varieties of Anomalous Experience Category Commons v t e New Age movement Culture New Age communities New Age music New Age travelers Groups Association for Research and Enlightenment The Family New World Alliance Rainbow Family Non-exclusive themes Age of Aquarius Akashic records Alternative medicine Ancient astronauts Angels Animism Ascended master Astral projection Astrology Atlantis Aura Conspiracy theories Contactee Cosmic ordering Conscious evolution Crystal healing Earth Changes Earth mysteries Ecofeminism Energy Environmentalism Faith healing Feng shui Gaia hypothesis Gaia philosophy Gnosis Goddess movement Higher consciousness Idealism Indigo children Intuition Karma Law of attraction Lemuria Magic Meditation Mediumship Michael Teachings Odic force Paganism Pantheism Parapsychology Perception Perennial philosophy Quantum mysticism Qi Reincarnation Religious pluralism Supernatural Tantra UFOs Veganism Vegetarianism Visualization Wellness Yoga Proponents or individual influences José Argüelles Richard Bach Alice Bailey Annie Besant Helena Blavatsky Gregg Braden Rhonda Byrne Eileen Caddy Marjorie Cameron Lee Carroll Edgar Cayce Deepak Chopra Andrew Cohen Benjamin Creme Aleister Crowley Scott Cunningham Adi Da Ram Dass Wayne Dyer Werner Erhard Marilyn Ferguson Debbie Ford Gandalf Linda Goodman Glenda Green Alex Grey Michael Harner Esther Hicks Barbara Marx Hubbard David Icke Timothy Leary John Lilly Max Freedom Long Shirley MacLaine Leon MacLaren Terence McKenna Corinne McLaughlin Michael Mirdad Tony Nader Mariam Nour Leonard Orr Jack Parsons Daniel Quinn Rajneesh James Redfield Wilhelm Reich Jane Roberts Helena Roerich Walter Russell Mark Satin Helen Schucman John Selby Ravi Shankar David Spangler Joshua David Stone Ingo Swann Herbert Sutcliffe Michael Talbot William Thetford Eckhart Tolle Neale Donald Walsch Alan Watts Ken Wilber Stuart Wilde Marianne Williamson Robert Anton Wilson Oprah Winfrey Fred Alan Wolf Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Other influences Advaita Vedanta Animism Anthroposophy Ariosophy Ascended Master Teachings Astrology Beat Generation Buddhism Cannabis culture Cognitive science Conspiracy theories Discordianism Eight-circuit model of consciousness Entheogens Esalen Institute Esoteric Christianity Esotericism Freemasonry Fringe science Gnosticism Hermeticism Hinduism Hippie subculture Human Potential Movement Huna Integral theory Kabbalah Leather subculture Metaphysics Neuro-linguistic programming New Thought Nonviolence Occultism Paganism Neo-Druidism Neotantra Wicca Postmodernism Pseudoarchaeology Pseudoscience Psychedelic music Quantum mechanics Radical Faeries Rastafari movement Rosicrucianism School of Economic Science Science fiction Seth Material Shamanism Shinto Spiritism Spiritualism Spirituality Sufism Taoism Thelema Theosophy Traditionalist School Transhumanism Transpersonal psychology Zen