The tobacco plant (Nicotiana tabacum) is an example of a psychoactive plant. The active constituent is nicotine. Psychoactive plants are plants, or preparations thereof, that upon ingestion induce psychotropic effects. As stated in a reference work: Psychoactive plants are plants that people ingest in the form of simple or complex preparations in order to affect the mind or alter the state of consciousness.[1] Psychoactivity may include sedative, stimulant, euphoric, deliriant, and hallucinogenic effects. Several hundred psychoactive plants are known.[1] Some important examples of psychoactive plants include Coffea arabica (coffee), Camellia sinensis (tea), Nicotiana tabacum (tobacco), and Cannabis (including hashish). Psychoactive plants have been used ritually (e.g., peyote as an entheogen), medicinally (e.g., opium as an analgesic), and therapeutically (e.g., cannabis as a drug) for thousands of years.[2] Hence, the sociocultural and economic significance of psychoactive plants is enormous. Contents 1 Examples of psychoactive plants 2 Botanical taxonomy 3 Phytochemistry 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Examples of psychoactive plants[edit] Main article: List of psychoactive plants In the table below, a few examples of significant psychoactive plants and their effects are shown. For further examples, see List of psychoactive plants. Examples of psychoactive plants Plant Common preparation Main active constituent Psychoactive effects Coffea arabica coffee caffeine stimulant, temporarily warding off drowsiness and restoring alertness Nicotiana tabacum tobacco nicotine stimulant, relaxant Cannabis sativa marijuana, hashish tetrahydrocannabinol euphoria, relaxation, and increase in appetite Erythroxylum coca coca cocaine stimulant, appetite suppressant Papaver somniferum opium morphine analgesia, sedation, euphoria Lophophora williamsii peyote mescaline hallucinogen Botanical taxonomy[edit] In the plant kingdom (Plantae), almost all psychoactive plants are found within the flowering plants (angiosperms).[3] There are many examples of psychoactive fungi, but fungi are not part of the plant kingdom. Some important plant families containing psychoactive species are listed below. The listed species are examples only, and a family may contain more psychoactive species than listed. Solanaceae (nightshades) Nicotiana tabacum Datura stramonium Rubiaceae Coffea arabica Theaceae Camellia sinensis Cannabaceae Cannabis sativa Cannabis indica Cactaceae Lophophora williamsii Trichocereus pachanoi Papaveraceae Papaver somniferum Erythroxylaceae Erythroxylum coca Celastraceae Catha edulis Convolvulaceae Ipomoea tricolor Lamiaceae Salvia divinorum Phytochemistry[edit] The active constituents of the majority of psychoactive plants fall within the alkaloids (e.g., nicotine, morphine, cocaine, mescaline, caffeine, ephedrine), a class of nitrogen-containing natural products. Examples of psychoactive compounds of plant origin that do not contain nitrogen are tetrahydrocannabinol (a phytocannabinoid from Cannabis sativa) and salvinorin A (a diterpenoid from Salvia divinorum). See also[edit] List of psychoactive plants Psychoactive cacti Psychoactive fungi Psychoactive drugs Ethnobotany Ethnopharmacology Christian Rätsch Richard Evans Schultes References[edit] ^ a b Rätsch, Christian (2004). The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Plants: Ethnopharmacology and Its Applications. Park Street Press, U.S. ISBN 978-0892819782. ^ Schultes, Richard Evans (1976). Hallucinogenic Plants. Illustrated by Elmer W. Smith. New York: Golden Press. pp. 2, 9, 34. ISBN 0-307-24362-1. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Schultes, Richard Evans (2001). Plants of the Gods: Their Sacred, Healing, and Hallucinogenic Powers. Rochester, Vermont: Healing Arts Press. ISBN 978-089281979-9. External links[edit] Erowid – Psychoactive Plants & Fungi Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125