This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Pulgasari Japanese poster Chosŏn'gŭl 불가사리 Hancha 不可殺而 McCune–Reischauer Pulgasari Revised Romanization Bulgasari Directed by Shin Sang-ok Chong Gon Jo Produced by Kim Jong-il Shin Sang-ok Written by Kim Se Ryun Starring Kenpachiro Satsuma Chang Son Hui Ham Gi Sop Jong-uk Ri Gwon Ri Gyong-ae Yu Music by So Jong Gon Cinematography Cho Myong Hyon Pak Sung Ho Kenichi Eguchi Edited by Kim Ryon Sun Production companies Korean Film Studio Shin Films[1] Distributed by Korean Film Studio Release date 1985 (1985) (North Korea) 4 July 1998 (1998-07-04) (Japan) Running time 95 minutes Country North Korea Language Korean Pulgasari (Korean: 불가사리; RR: Bulgasari) is the title for a 1962 film of South Korea[2] and a 1985 North Korean dark fantasy-action kaiju film, which was based on the 1962 film[3], directed by Shin Sang-ok and Chong Gon Jo. It stars Chang Son Hui and Pak Sung Ho and features special effects by Duk Ho Kim, supervised by Teruyoshi Nakano. The film is loosely based on the legend of the Bulgasari. The 1962 film is considered lost. Director Shin had been kidnapped in 1978 by North Korean intelligence on the orders of Kim Jong-il, son of the then-ruling Kim Il-sung and was coerced into making several films as a director, with Pulgasari being his final before he and his wife, actress Choi Eun-hee, escaped to the United States.[4] Contents 1 Plot summary 2 Cast 3 Background 4 Production 5 Legacy 5.1 Shin Sang-ok and Choi Eun-hee's story 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Plot summary[edit] In feudal Korea, during the Goryeo Dynasty, a king controls the land with an iron fist, subjecting the peasantry to misery and starvation. An old blacksmith who was sent to prison for defending his people creates a tiny figurine of a monster by making a doll of rice and before dying asks the gods of earth and sky to make his creation a living creature that protects the rebels and the oppressed. When the figurine comes into contact with the blood of the blacksmith's daughter, the creature springs to life, becoming a giant metal-eating monster whom the blacksmith's daughter names Pulgasari, which is the name of the mythical monster her father used to mention as an eater of iron and steel.[5] Pulgasari now shares a special bond with the blacksmith's daughter, and after he starts eating some of the farmer's tools, becomes a giant and powerful figure. After much suffering, the peasants form an army, storm the palace of the region's Governor and kill him. Soon after the evil king becomes aware that there is a rebellion being planned in the country and he intends to crush it, but he runs into Pulgasari, who fights with the peasant army to overthrow the corrupt monarchy.[5] Pulgasari wins many battles because of his unending hunger for all kind of metal, readily provided by its enemies. Nevertheless, after capturing and executing the leader of the rebellion (who was also the future husband of the blacksmith's daughter), the king's army threatens to kill the blacksmith's daughter if Pulgasari does not surrender. Pulgasari lets itself be trapped to save the woman, and the royal army apparently kills the creature by burying it under the ground. After escaping, the blacksmith's daughter revives Pulgasari by again pouring some of her blood on the burial site. Pulgasari grows strong once more and attacks the king's palace, destroying it and simultaneously killing the king. After the defeat of the king, Pulgasari becomes a new problem, since he starts eating the rebel's weapons and farmer's tools, which are given to the creature without objection, since the peasants still believe Pulgasari is a benign savior. The blacksmith's daughter realizes that Pulgasari's hunger will never stop, and that he is inadvertently oppressing the people he fought for. She decides to sacrifice herself by hiding inside a big bell that Pulgasari finds and quickly eats. Pulgasari yells in anguish as the blacksmith's daughter's presence in its system causes its stomach to explode, tragically killing both of them, but saving the people once and for all. Cast[edit] Chang Son Hui as Ami Ham Gi Sop as Inde Jong-uk Ri as Ana Gwon Ri as Takse Gyong-ae Yu as Inde's Mother Hye-chol Ro as Inde's Brother Sang-hun Tae as Rebel Forces Gi-chon Kim as Rebel Forces In-chol Ri as Rebel Forces Riyonun Ri as General Fuan Yong-hok Pak as The King Pong-ilk Pak as The Governor Kenpachiro Satsuma as Pulgasari Little Man Machan as Baby Pulgasari Background[edit] The film is based around a legendary creature called the "Pulgasari" (or "Bulgasari").[6] The original story was set in the city of Songdo (now Kaesong, North Korea). Production[edit] Kim was a lifelong admirer of the director, as well as Godzilla and other kaiju films. He kidnapped the former director and his wife, famous actress Choi Eun-hee, with the specific purpose of making fantasy/propaganda films for the North Korean government. Kim Jong-il also produced Pulgasari (through Korean Film Studio) and all the films that Sang-ok made before he and Choi managed to escape from their minders while on a festival tour in Austria. Specifically, the film was inspired by The Return of Godzilla. The staff from Japan's Toho Studios, the creators of Godzilla, participated in creating the film's special effects. They were tricked into coming as they thought they were filming in China.[7] Jonathan Ross stated that the film was intended by the North Korean government to be a propaganda metaphor for the effects of unchecked capitalism and the power of the collective.[8][9] Legacy[edit] Kenpachiro Satsuma was quoted as saying he preferred Pulgasari to TriStar's Godzilla.[10] There has been some speculation that the director Shin Sang-ok included a hidden message of his own in the film; the monster of the movie was to be interpreted as a metaphor for Kim Il-sung betraying a people's revolution for his own purposes.[5] After finding out that his credit was removed from the movie, Shin Sang-ok also wrote a remake called The Adventures of Galgameth. In 2006, Pulgasari made its New York debut at the end of Columbia University Japanese culture center's year-long “Godzilla” festival.[8] Shin Sang-ok and Choi Eun-hee's story[edit] Main article: Abduction of Shin Sang-ok and Choi Eun-hee Pulgasari has gained some popularity over the years because of the shocking story of Shin Sang-ok and Choi Eun-hee's kidnapping at the hands of North Korea's government. During their strange captivity in the country Shin and Choi were, respectively, director and leading actress in a number of North Korean films produced by Kim Jong-il. The director and leading actress made together a total of seven films, for which the couple – who were separated before their kidnapping – was simultaneously commissioned and forced to do by North Korea's government.[1] However, Pulgasari does not feature Choi.[citation needed] Pulgasari was made in 1985, the same year that Shin's North Korean films Salt and The Tale of Shim Chong were released.[11] It was the last film directed by Shin before he and Choi escaped to the United States.[1] See also[edit] Film portal North Korea portal Abduction of Shin Sang-ok and Choi Eun-hee Culture of North Korea List of North Korean films List of films set in or about North Korea Propaganda in North Korea References[edit] ^ a b c Peralta, Eyder (December 19, 2011). "'Pulgasari': Kim Jong Il's Giant Monster Film". The Two-Way. National Public Radio. Retrieved September 25, 2017. ^ https://www.imdb.com/title/tt9815476/ ^ https://www.thecinema.jp/article/734 ^ Backrow Banter, The Dear Leader, The Director And The Director’s Wife ^ a b c Gorenfeld, John (3 April 2003). "The producer from hell" – via The Guardian. ^ Choe, Sang-Hun; Torchia, Christopher (2002). "Eat, Eat: Rice Is Everything". How Koreans Talk. pp. 024–025. ISBN 89-87976-95-5. He ate like a Bulgasari eating metal. ^ Romano, Nick (April 6, 2015). "How Kim Jong Il Kidnapped a Director, Made a Godzilla Knockoff, and Created a Cult Hit". HWD. Condé Nast. Retrieved September 25, 2017. ^ a b "A KIM JONG IL PRODUCTION". New Yorker. Retrieved 8 May 2013. ^ Taylor, Ben (2 February 2012). Apocalypse on the Set: Nine Disastrous Film Productions. Overlook Hardcover. pp. 168–169. ISBN 978-1468300130. ^ First NK Monster Faces Hollywood-Born Godzilla in Japan Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine The People's Korea ^ Schönherr, Johannes (2012). North Korean Cinema: A History. Jefferson: McFarland. pp. 81–82. ISBN 978-0-7864-6526-2. External links[edit] API at IMDb N. Korean movies' propaganda role BBC Goo Movies (in Japanese) v t e Zombi Original Italian series Zombi, a.k.a. Dawn of the Dead Zombi 2 Zombi 3 Additions made to the American series Zombie 4: After Death, a.k.a. After Death Zombie 5: Killing Birds, a.k.a. Killing Birds Additions made to the Australian series Zombi IV: Bakterion, a.k.a. Panic Zombi V: Vengeance, a.k.a. Vengeance of The Zombies Zombi VI: The Mirage, a.k.a. Oasis of The Zombies Zombi VII: Last Rites, a.k.a. Night of The Seagulls Additions made to the T-Z Video series Zombie 3: Return of the Zombies, a.k.a. The Hanging Woman Zombie 4: A Virgin Among the Living Dead, a.k.a. A Virgin Among the Living Dead Zombie 5: Revenge in the House of Usher, a.k.a. Revenge in the House of Usher Zombie 6: Monster Hunter, a.k.a. Absurd Zombie 7, a.k.a. Anthropophagus Other films Let Sleeping Corpses Lie, a.k.a. Zombi 3 Zombie Holocaust, a.k.a. Zombie 3 Nightmare City, a.k.a. Zombi 3 Burial Ground, a.k.a. Zombi 3 Panic, a.k.a. Zombie 4 Pulgasari, a.k.a. Zombi 34: The Communist Bull-Monster Films known as Zombi 2 or Zombie 2 Zombi 2 Zombi 3 Day of the Dead Films known as Zombi 3 or Zombie 3 Zombi 3 The Hanging Woman Let Sleeping Corpses Lie Zombie Holocaust Nightmare City Burial Ground Films known as Zombi 4 or Zombie 4 After Death A Virgin Among the Living Dead Killing Birds Panic Films known as Zombi 5 or Zombie 5 Killing Birds Vengeance of The Zombies Revenge in the House of Usher v t e Films directed by Shin Sang-ok A Flower in Hell (1958) To the Last Day (1960) Prince Yeonsan (1961) The Houseguest and My Mother (1961) The Memorial Gate for Virtuous Women (1962) Rice (1963) Red Scarf (1964) Deaf Sam-yong (1964) Phantom Queen (1967) Prince Daewon (1968) Ghosts of Chosun (1970) A Woman with Half Soul (1973) The Three-Day Reign (1973) An Emissary of No Return (1984) Runaway (1984) Love, Love, My Love (1985) Salt (1985) The Tale of Shim Chong (1985) Pulgasari (1985) Mayumi (1990) 3 Ninjas Knuckle Up (1995)