Purpure   Class Colour Non-heraldic equivalent Purple Monochromatic designations Hatching pattern   Tricking abbr. p., pu., purp. Poetic designations Heavenly body Mercury, ☿ Jewel Amethyst In heraldry, purpure, (/ˈpɜːrpjʊər/) is a tincture, equivalent to the colour "purple", and is one of the five main or most usually used colours (as opposed to metals). It may be portrayed in engravings by a series of parallel lines at a 45-degree angle running from upper right to lower left from the point of view of an observer, or else indicated by the abbreviation purp. Purpure has existed since the earliest periods, for example in the purpure lion of the arms of León; at that time, it was painted in a greyer shade. However, it has never been as common as the other colours, and this has led to some controversy as to whether it should be counted among the common colours. In French heraldry, the colour is usually excluded from the common colours as well as considered "ambiguous" (could be either colour or metal), and Finnish heraldry restricts its use to certain additaments.[1] There is at least one instance of it being blazoned as "Imperial Purple".[2] One of the most expensive colors to acquire in ancient times, Tyrian purple was used in the war banner of Byzantine Emperor Komnenos: Purpur (porphyr red) a double-headed eagle displayed Or. Sometimes, the different tinctures are said to be connected with special meanings or virtues, and represent certain elements and precious stones. Even if this is an idea mostly disregarded by serious heraldists throughout the centuries,[3] it may be of anecdotal interest to see what they are, since the information is so often sought after. Many sources give different meanings, but purpure is often said to represent the following: Of jewels, the amethyst Of heavenly bodies, Mercury (this is disputable. Western Alchemy associates the amethyst with Jupiter; viz. 777.) The planet Mercury is further associated with the element mercury or "quicksilver" in traditional alchemical/occultistic lore Contents 1 Gallery 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Gallery[edit] Arms of Mauves-sur-Loire city (Loire-Atlantique) Arms of Hakewill of Exeter, Devon. Coat of arms of the former Dutch municipality of Zijpe. Coat of Arms of Klyonovskoe settlement (Moscow, Russia). Arms of Dene of Newton St Petrock, Devon. Arms of British MP Jo Cox, installed in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom Arms of the Portuguese municipality of Montemor-o-Velho Arms of Cardinal Luis Ladaria Ferrer See also[edit] Born in the purple ("Porphyrogennetos") Tyrian purple Purple References[edit] ^ "Heraldiset värit". The Heraldic Society of Finland (in Finnish). Archived from the original on 30 July 2013. ^ John, Cilia La Corte. "Sperver". John Cilia La Corte. Retrieved 1 January 2012. ^ Woodcock, Thomas; Robinson, John Martin (1988). The Oxford Guide to Heraldry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 0-19-211658-4. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Purpure (purple in heraldry). Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Heraldica.org: Purpure, discussion based on Michel Pastoureau, Traité d'Héraldique. Red vs. Purple Lions v t e Tinctures in heraldry Rule of tincture Tricking system Hatching system "Proper" Fimbriation Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermine Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné (tawny) Non-traditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste (sky blue)   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation (flesh-coloured)   Cendrée (ash grey)   Ochre   Orange   Rose (pink) 1 Rarely used – mostly only in some regional traditions or as relatively modern innovations – and considered unheraldic by some. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources