Python DVD cover Screenplay by Daniel Knauf Garrison Hershberger Paul Bogh Story by Phillip Roth Directed by Richard Clabaugh Starring Frayne Rosanoff Robert Englund Casper Van Dien William Zabka Dana Barron Wil Wheaton Sean Whalen Jenny McCarthy Gary Grubbs Music by Daniel J. Nielsen Mad Bus Country of origin United States Original language English Production Producers Ken Olandt Jeffery Beach Phillip Roth Cinematography Patrick Rousseau Editor Christian McIntire Running time 99 minutes[1] Production company UFO International Release Original release August 9, 2000 (2000-08-09) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Python is a 2000 made-for-TV comedy horror[2] film directed by Richard Clabaugh. The film features several cult favorite actors, including William Zabka of The Karate Kid fame, Wil Wheaton, Casper Van Dien, Jenny McCarthy, Keith Coogan, Robert Englund, Dana Barron, David Bowe, and Sean Whalen. The film concerns a genetically engineered snake, a python, that escapes and unleashes itself on a small town. It was filmed in Los Angeles and Malibu, California. Python was followed by three sequels: Pythons 2 (2002), New Alcatraz (also known as Boa) and Boa vs. Python (2004), all of which are also made-for-TV films. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Reception 4 Sequels 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] The crew of a plane gets nervous when the cargo it is carrying starts making noises and shifting. When one of the crew opens the crate, the pilot hears screams from the back. Something attacks him, causing the plane to crash near a town called Ruby.[3] The cargo survives the crash and begins attacking Ruby citizens, starting with a lesbian couple, whose names are Lisa Johnson and Roberta Keeler, camping in the woods. At a swimming hole the next day, John Cooper (Rosanoff), his girlfriend Kristin (Barron), his best friend Tommy (Wheaton), and Tommy's girlfriend Theresa (Mornell) find a pet burmese python belonging to one of the dead women, Lisa. Deputy Greg (Zabka) shows up, mentioning that Lisa is missing and takes the snake. Lisa's body is found, appearing to have been corroded by acids. Greg suspects John, since he works at a plant that uses acids. Complicating things, Greg is also Kristin's ex-fiancé, with her having left him when her first love came back to town. Scientist Anton Rudolph (Englund) is talking with NSA Special Agent Parker (Van Dien), explaining that the cargo is an abnormally large reticulated python that has been genetically engineered in Southeast Asia, blending several species. In the words of Dr. Rudolph, it is "not some garden snake you're going after. We are talking about a perfect killing machine. A 129-foot all-terrain vehicle, capable of speeds exceeding 50 miles an hour, with skin that can deflect an antitank round, enhanced night vision, and a voracious appetite for human flesh." The NSA team plans an assault against the snake, hoping to kill it discreetly before it eats more people. The snake kills a real estate agent (Williamson) and the agent's client (McCarthy). It leaves behind the client and the body of the other lesbian, Roberta Keeler. John enters as the snake leaves, furthering suspicion against him. The sheriff shuts down his brother Brian's plant, furthering the tensions between Brian and him. As John leaves the plant, he runs into Greg's car and his bike is damaged. They end up in a fistfight, mostly over Kristin, though they ultimately reconcile. When the body of the real estate agent is found with the same acid damage, the sheriff orders John arrested. Kristin yells at Greg when they come to arrest John, but he says that he does not think John is the killer. The NSA team and Rudolph arrive, telling the sheriff a story about a psychotic rogue operative imprisoned in a military psychiatric unit who escaped and is committing the murders. He does not believe them, but goes back to the office and frees John. Kristin, Tommy, Theresa, and he plan to go on a trip the next morning. The NSA set up base at a water-treatment center. They use radar to find where the snake is likely to be, then have the police set up a perimeter to keep people out of the zone. Believing the snake to be sleeping, the team wastes most of its ammunition on the snake's shed skin. Agent Parker realizes the snake set them up using its skin as a decoy. The snake arrives and kills the team, the sole survivor being Rudolph who keeps himself standing motionless in front of the creature. Theresa's morning shower is interrupted by the snake. Though she is able to escape, the snake eats Tommy. Theresa drives away, but the snake follows. It gets in front of her and rips the rear axle off, disabling the truck. She gets away again and hides in a crevice. When Tommy and Theresa do not arrive to pick them up, John and Kristin go looking for them, finding the wrecked truck. Theresa tries to warn them as the snake comes to attack, but they cannot hear her. John and Kristin escape using Tommy and Theresa's bikes from the truck. They make it to the water-treatment center, where Theresa later joins them, and find Rudolph in shock. The group realizes that they must do something about the snake or it will get to the town. They call Greg on the radio and fill him in on a plan they have devised. They lure the snake into the water-treatment plant by having it chase John through a shaft, while they set a bomb near the entrance. Kristin drops a line down another shaft for John to escape. The other two escape through the regular door, where Greg is waiting to drive them to the other shaft. They pull John out and the python is unable to climb up the shaft. Trapped in the tunnel, the python returns to the doorway entrance. The group returns to the entrance to trigger the bomb, but it does not detonate. Rudolph says the snake must have torn out the antenna when it crashed into the bunker, so he leaves his pet snake with Kristin and runs back in to reset it. While Rudolph resets the charges, he is confronted by the snake, but is able to succeed in his task. The charges go off, killing Rudolph, and the other four are celebrating their success, but the python emerges unscathed. They flee in Greg's police car, and come up with a new plan to penetrate the snake's hide by luring the snake into a vat of acid at John's plating plant. Once there, John acts as the bait once again, while Kristin uses a winch to push the snake's underbelly into one of the vats, causing the snake to be disemboweled and killed by the acid. Six months later, Greg has been accepted into Quantico to be an FBI agent, the plant has been reopened as a bar/bike shop where the snake's skin is used as a sales tool, and John finds out that Kristin and he are soon to be parents. Cast[edit] Frayne Rosanoff as John Cooper Robert Englund as Dr. Anton Rudolph Casper Van Dien as Special Agent Bart Parker William Zabka as Deputy Greg Larston Dana Barron as Kristin Sara Mornell as Theresa Wil Wheaton as Tommy Jenny McCarthy as Francesca Garibaldi Chris Owens as Brian Cooper Sean Whalen as Deputy Lewis Ross Gary Grubbs as Sheriff Griffin Wade Theo Pagones as Dootsen Scott Williamson as Kenny Summers David Bowe as Boone Keith Coogan as Lenny John Franklin as Floyd Fuller LoriDawn Messuri as Lisa Johnson Kathleen Randazzo as Roberta Keeler Ed Lauter as Pilot Frank Welker as the Python (voice) Reception[edit] Python received mixed reviews.[4] Critics praised the ensemble cast, but criticized the special effects and plot.[5] Others thought that it was an above-average television film with good special effects. Sequels[edit] Python had three sequels: New Alcatraz (2002, also known as Boa) is about a giant prehistoric boa constrictor that is accidentally unleashed into a state-of-the-art prison in Antarctica, during a mining operation. The prison staff, the inmates, and two paleontologists must band together to escape the prison or become the serpent's prey. The film was considered a critical failure. Pythons 2 (2002) has two carnivorous mutant pythons that terrorize a Russian research complex and military base; the Russians and the Americans must work together to destroy the creatures and save themselves. Boa vs. Python (2004), directed by David Flores, is a crossover between Python and Boa. See also[edit] List of killer snake films References[edit] ^ "Python". 1 August 2001 – via www.imdb.com. ^ "Python (2000) - Richard Clabaugh | Synopsis, Characteristics, Moods, Themes and Related". AllMovie. ^ "Python (TV Movie 2000)" – via www.imdb.com. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-10-04. Retrieved 2011-07-25.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Movie Gurus - The Movie Review Community". movie-gurus.com. External links[edit] Python at IMDb Python at AllMovie Director Richard Clabaugh's talks about Python v t e Films produced by Phillip J. Roth Prototype (1992) A.P.E.X. (1994) Total Reality (1997) Storm (1999) Velocity Trap (1999) Python (2000) Escape Under Pressure (2000) Deep Core (2000) Epoch (2001) Falcon Down (2001) New Alcatraz (2001) Lost Voyage (2001) Pythons 2 (2002) Interceptor Force 2 (2002) Antibody (2002) Landspeed (2002) Dark Descent (2002) Deep Shock (2003) Dragon Fighter (2003) Epoch: Evolution (2003) Silent Warnings (2003) Darklight (2004) Post Impact (2004) Boa vs. Python (2004) Locusts: The 8th Plague (2005) Path of Destruction (2005) Manticore (2005) S.S. Doomtrooper (2006) Magma: Volcanic Disaster (2006) Reign of the Gargoyles (2007) Bats: Human Harvest (2007) Lake Placid 2 (2007) Grendel (2007) Ghost Voyage (2008) Rock Monster (2008) Copperhead (2008) Monster Ark (2008) Star Runners (2009) Thor: Hammer of the Gods (2009) Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead (2009) Triassic Attack (2010) Dark Relic (2010) Lake Placid 3 (2010) Rage of the Yeti (2011) Lake Placid: The Final Chapter (2012) Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines (2012) Invasion Roswell (2013) Company of Heroes (2013) Supercollider (2013) Taken: The Search for Sophie Parker (2013) Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort (2014) Firequake (2014) Lake Placid vs. Anaconda (2015) The Throwaways (2015) Jarhead 3: The Siege (2016) Jarhead: Law of Return (2019)