American series of action films Rambo Official franchise logo Created by David Morrell Original work First Blood (1972) Years 1982–present Print publications Novel(s) List of novels Comics List of comics Films and television Film(s) First Blood (1982) Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) Rambo III (1988) Rambo (2008) Rambo: Last Blood (2019) Animated series Rambo: The Force of Freedom (1986) Games Video game(s) Rambo (1985) Rambo: First Blood Part II (1986) Rambo (1987) Rambo III (1989) Rambo III (1989) Rambo (2008) Rambo: The Video Game (2014) Audio Soundtrack(s) First Blood (1982) Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) Rambo III (1988) Rambo (2008) Rambo: Last Blood (2019) Miscellaneous Character(s) List of characters Rambo is an American media franchise centered on a series of action films. There have been five films released so far in the series: First Blood (1982), Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985), Rambo III (1988), Rambo (2008) and Rambo: Last Blood (2019). The films follow John Rambo, a United States Army Special Forces veteran played by Sylvester Stallone, whose experience fighting in the Vietnam War traumatized him but also gave him superior military skills, which he has used to fight corrupt police officers, enemy troops and drug cartels. The first film in the series, First Blood, is an adaptation of the 1972 novel First Blood by David Morrell. The film series has grossed $819 million in total, with the most successful film, Rambo: First Blood Part II, grossing $300 million. Stallone co-wrote the screenplays of all five films, and directed Rambo. In addition to films, the franchise also spawned an animated television series, Rambo: The Force of Freedom, as well as comic books, novels, video games and a Bollywood remake. Contents 1 Films 1.1 First Blood (1982) 1.2 Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) 1.3 Rambo III (1988) 1.4 Rambo (2008) 1.5 Rambo: Last Blood (2019) 1.6 Future 2 Television 2.1 Rambo: The Force of Freedom (1986) 3 Cast and crew 3.1 Cast 3.2 Crew 4 Reception 4.1 Box office performance 4.2 Critical and public response 5 Music 5.1 Soundtracks 6 Home media 7 Other media 7.1 Novelizations 7.2 Comic books 7.3 Video games 7.4 Legend 7.5 Statue 7.6 Bollwood remake 7.7 Other appearances 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Films[edit] Film U.S. release date Director(s) Screenwriter(s) Story by Producer(s) First Blood October 22, 1982 (1982-10-22) Ted Kotcheff Michael Kozoll, William Sackheim and Sylvester Stallone N/A Buzz Feitshans Rambo: First Blood Part II May 22, 1985 (1985-05-22) George P. Cosmatos Sylvester Stallone and James Cameron Kevin Jarre Rambo III May 25, 1988 (1988-05-25) Peter MacDonald Sylvester Stallone and Sheldon Lettich N/A Rambo January 25, 2008 (2008-01-25) Sylvester Stallone Art Monterastelli and Sylvester Stallone N/A Avi Lerner, Kevin King Templeton and John Thompson Rambo: Last Blood September 20, 2019 Adrian Grunberg Matthew Cirulnick and Sylvester Stallone Dan Gordon and Sylvester Stallone Avi Lerner, Kevin King Templeton, Yariv Lerner and Les Weldon First Blood (1982)[edit] Main article: First Blood Upon returning to the United States, Vietnam veteran John Rambo has difficulty adjusting to civilian life and wanders the country as a drifter for almost a decade. In December 1981, Rambo travels to a small town in rural Washington (filmed in Hope, British Columbia, Canada), in search of a fellow U.S. Army Green Beret buddy. He learns that his friend died from cancer the previous summer due to exposure to Agent Orange. He attempts to find a diner in town, and maybe a temporary job. The overconfident town sheriff Will Teasle (Brian Dennehy) does not welcome Rambo, judging the military hero negatively because of his long hair and scruffy look. Rambo disobeys the sheriff's order to stay away from town, as he has done nothing wrong and believes such banishment to be a violation of his freedom of movement, and most of all he is hungry. Rambo returns to town soon afterwards and is promptly charged with vagrancy and subject to harassment from the deputies. The harassment triggers flashbacks of Rambo's memories of his torture at the hands of the North Vietnamese when he was a prisoner of war. Rambo fights his way out of the sheriff's department with his bare hands and makes his way into the wilderness. A manhunt ensues, with the sheriff and his deputies all badly wounded. Rambo chooses not to kill any of them, but unintentionally kills a police officer in self-defense by throwing a rock at a helicopter, causing the pilot to lose control and an officer to fall out. The State Police and National Guard are called in. Colonel Samuel Trautman (Richard Crenna), Rambo's former commanding officer, arrives. He suggests giving Rambo a chance to escape; if Rambo is allowed to slip away, he'll be given time to calm down and he can be arrested without incident. Teasle allows Trautman to contact Rambo through a stolen police radio, but Rambo refuses to surrender, stating that "They (the deputies) drew first blood not me" and then hangs up. The authorities reject Trautman's recommendation for a wait-and-see attitude and continue the manhunt, and Rambo's subsequent rampage culminates in him returning to town with guns and bombs from a commandeered Army truck. This results in the destruction of the sheriff's office and more of the town's main street. Rambo stands poised to eliminate the sheriff, but Trautman finally confronts Rambo face-to-face, and ultimately convinces his former soldier to surrender to the authorities. Between the first and second films, Rambo is convicted and remanded to a civilian maximum-security prison where hard labor is the norm. Despite being a convict, the rigid routine and discipline of prison life provides Rambo with some measure of much-needed stability, as it reminds him of his past in the military and its own rigid hierarchy. Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985)[edit] Main article: Rambo: First Blood Part II The film opens with Colonel Samuel Trautman (Richard Crenna) offering Rambo his freedom if Rambo will return to Vietnam to search for American prisoners of war remaining in Vietnamese captivity. Marshall Murdock (Charles Napier), the official in charge of the mission, is portrayed as a corrupt political figure who doesn't want to expose the truth. Rambo is not to engage the enemy and instead is ordered to take photographs of a North Vietnamese camp, the same camp he himself had been held prisoner in, to prove to the American public there are no more POWs in Vietnam, although Murdock knows that there are. Rambo is flown into the country with the purpose of parachuting into the jungle, but a malfunction during his exit from the plane causes him to have to cut away much of his equipment. He then meets his in-country contact, anti-communist Vietnamese rebel Co Bao (Julia Nickson), who is serving as an intelligence agent. Rambo discovers that there are POWs being held in the camp where he was dropped and that POWs were rotated between camps. Rambo breaks one POW out of the camp and attempts to escape, only to be abandoned at the moment of a pick up by helicopter on a hilltop on the orders of Murdock, after which both he and the POW are recaptured by the Vietnamese soldiers. Rambo is immobilized in a pit of sewage and leeches, then tortured by Soviet soldiers, who are allied with the Vietnamese and training Vietnamese soldiers. Co enters the base under the guise of a prostitute for hire, where she aids Rambo in escaping. After Rambo expresses his deepest gratitude for his rescue, the two share a kiss, after Co implores him to take her back to America with him. As they prepare to move on, Co is shot by surprise gunfire. Enraged, Rambo then acts on his own initiative and starts a one-man war, hunting the Vietnamese and Soviet soldiers searching for him in the jungle and stealing a Soviet-captured helicopter. He flies the helicopter back to the camp, destroying it and killing the remaining Vietnamese and Soviet soldiers in the camp. He frees all the POWs and is pursued by a Soviet Mi-24 Hind helicopter. After destroying the Hind with an RPG, he returns to the US base in Thailand with all the POWs. Rambo is enraged at how the United States government has ignored the existence of surviving soldiers being held captive, and grabs an M-60 machine gun and proceeds into the headquarters building, destroying all of the electronic gear within. Rambo then threatens Murdock and tells him to be forthright with the American public regarding the truth of the POWs and to spare no expense in rescuing them all, or else he will return for Murdock. When Trautman says Rambo will be honored once again, he declines, saying the POWs deserve the accolades more. For his actions in Vietnam, Rambo is granted a presidential pardon and decides to remain in Thailand. Between the second and third films, Rambo takes up residence near a monastery where he engages in frequent meditation to find a sense of inner peace. Although Rambo believes his soldiering days are apparently over, he does not become a complete pacifist, as he often participates in violent stick-fighting matches and donates his winnings to the monks to help renovate the monastery. Rambo III (1988)[edit] Main article: Rambo III Stallone in Rambo III The film opens with Colonel Samuel Trautman (Richard Crenna) returning to Thailand to once again enlist Rambo's help. After witnessing Rambo's victory in a stick-fighting match, Trautman visits the temple Rambo is helping to build and asks him to join him on a mission to Afghanistan. This brings Rambo into the realm of the CIA's Special Activities Division which primarily hires Army Special Forces soldiers. The mission is meant to supply weapons, including FIM-92 Stinger missiles, to Afghan freedom fighters, the Mujahideen, who are fighting the Soviets. Despite having been shown photos of civilians suffering under Soviet rule, Rambo refuses and Trautman chooses to go on his own. While in Afghanistan, Trautman's troops are ambushed by Soviet troops while passing through the mountains at night. Trautman is imprisoned in a Soviet base and tortured for information by commanding officer Zaysen (Marc de Jonge) and his henchman Kourov (Randy Raney). Rambo learns of the incident from embassy field officer Robert Griggs (Kurtwood Smith) and immediately flies to Pakistan where he meets up with Mousa (Sasson Gabai), a weapons supplier who agrees to take him to a village deep in the Afghan desert, close to the Soviet base where Trautman is kept. The Mujahideen in the village are already hesitant to help Rambo in the first place, but are convinced not to help him when their village is attacked by Soviet helicopters after one of Mousa's shop assistants informed the Russians of Rambo's presence. Aided only by Mousa and a young boy named Hamid (Doudi Shoua), Rambo makes his way to the Soviet base and starts his attempts to free Trautman. The first attempt is unsuccessful and results in Hamid getting shot in the leg, and Rambo himself getting hit by wooden shrapnel. After escaping from the base, Rambo tends to Hamid's wounds and sends him and Mousa away to safety. The next day, Rambo returns to the base once again, just in time to rescue Trautman from being tortured with a flamethrower. After rescuing several other prisoners, Rambo steals a helicopter and escapes from the base. The helicopter crashes and Rambo and Trautman are forced to continue on foot. After a confrontation in a cave, where Rambo and Trautman kill several Russian soldiers including Kourov, they are confronted by an entire army of Russian tanks, headed by Zaysen. Just as they are about to be overwhelmed by the might of the Soviet Army, the Mujahideen warriors, together with Mousa and Hamid, ride onto the battlefield in a cavalry charge, overwhelming the Russians despite their numerical and technological superiority. In the ensuing battle, in which both Trautman and Rambo are wounded, Rambo manages to kill Zaysen by driving a tank into the helicopter in which Zaysen is flying. At the end of the battle Rambo and Trautman say goodbye to their Mujahideen friends and leave Afghanistan to go home. Between the third and fourth films, Rambo still lives in Thailand, making a meager living as a snake catcher and by providing boat rides. Rambo (2008)[edit] Main article: Rambo (2008 film) The film opens with news footage of the crisis in Burma. Burma (also known as Myanmar) is under the iron fist rule of Than Shwe and takes harsher stances against the nation's pro-democracy movement. Rebels are thrown into a mine-infested marsh and then gunned down by a Burmese army unit, overseen by Major Pa Tee Tint. Former U.S. soldier John Rambo still lives in Thailand, now residing in a village near the Burmese border and makes a living capturing snakes and selling them in a nearby village. A missionary, Michael Burnett (Paul Schulze), asks Rambo to take him and his associates down the Salween River to Burma on a humanitarian mission to help the Karen people. Rambo initially refuses but is convinced by another missionary in the group, Sarah Miller (Julie Benz), to take them. The boat is stopped by pirates who demand Sarah in exchange for passage. After taking advantage of the pirates' complacency, Rambo kills them all. Although his actions save the missionaries, it greatly disturbs them. Upon arrival, Michael says that they will travel by road and will not need Rambo's help for the return trip. The mission goes well until the Burmese army, led by Major Tint, attacks the village, killing most of the villagers and two missionaries, and capturing the rest. When the missionaries fail to come back after ten days, their pastor, Arthur Marsh (Ken Howard), comes to Rambo to ask for his help in guiding hired mercenaries to the village where the missionaries were last seen. Troubled by Sarah's potential fate, Rambo decides to accompany the soldiers. After seeing the destroyed village filled with mutilated humans and animals, the mercenaries spot some soldiers forcing several surviving villagers to run through a minefield. The mercenaries are hesitant to rescue the villagers, but not Rambo, who shoots the soldiers with a bow and arrow. Rambo reminds his colleagues of the rescue mission and encourages the team to move on. Hijacking a truck, they create a plan to save the hostages at the P.O.W. camp, doing so within fifteen minutes to avoid alerting the army. Rambo helps Sarah and the others to escape. The Burmese Army (Tatmadaw) unit finds their hostages missing and organizes a massive manhunt. Everyone except for Rambo, Sarah, and "School Boy" (Matthew Marsden), the mercenary team's sniper, is captured. Just as the group is to be executed, Rambo hijacks a truck-mounted .50-caliber machine gun and engages the Burmese army. A group of Karen rebels joins the fight to help Rambo and the mercenaries defeat the Burmese unit. Seeing that the battle is lost, Major Tint decides to flee, only to run into Rambo's machete, which Rambo then uses to disembowel the Major. Encouraged by Sarah's words, Rambo returns to the United States. The last scene shows him walking along a rural highway, past a horse farm and a rusted mailbox with the name "R. Rambo" on it. He makes his way down the gravel driveway as the credits roll. Rambo: Last Blood (2019)[edit] Main article: Rambo: Last Blood Eleven years after the events in Burma, Vietnam War veteran John Rambo lives in Bowie, Arizona at his deceased father's horse ranch, which he manages with his old friend, Maria Beltran, and her granddaughter, Gabriela. Gabriela tells Rambo that a friend of hers, Gizelle, has found Gabriela's biological father, Miguel, in Mexico. Both Rambo and Maria tell her not to go to Mexico, but Gabriela secretly drives there to ask Miguel why he abandoned her and her mother years ago. Gizelle leads Gabriela to Miguel's apartment, where he coldly tells her that he never really cared for Gabriela or her mother. Gizelle takes a heartbroken Gabriela to a nearby club, where Gabriela is drugged and kidnapped by the enforcers of a Mexican cartel. Meanwhile, Maria informs Rambo of Gabriela's disappearance in Mexico. Rambo rushes to Mexico and interrogates both Miguel and Gizelle about Gabriela's whereabouts. Gizelle reluctantly leads Rambo to the club where Gabriela was last seen and confronts El Flaco, the man who last spoke with Gabriela. A mysterious woman, Carmen Delgado, tails Rambo as El Flaco leads him to Gabriela's location. Rambo is immediately confronted, beaten and marked by the cartel, led by the brothers Hugo and Victor Martinez. They take his driver's license with the location of Rambo's ranch and a photo of Gabriela, whom Victor recognizes. The cartel vow to mistreat Gabriela further due to Rambo's actions. Carmen takes Rambo back to her home where she cares for him until he fully recovers after four days. While Rambo is cared for by Carmen, Gabriela is stripped and consistently dosed with heroin and sold to be raped repeatedly. Carmen says she is an independent journalist who has been investigating the Martinez brothers, who kidnapped and murdered her sister. Rambo later raids one of the brothels, killing several men until he finds a drugged Gabriela. While driving back home in his pickup, Rambo thanks Gabriela for giving him hope for ten years but she dies from the forced overdose. An enraged Rambo sends Maria away and rigs the ranch with traps for a confrontation, and later returns to Mexico to ask Carmen's help in finding Victor. Carmen initially refuses and tells Rambo that it will solve nothing, but is convinced after he appeals to her grief and frustration. Rambo raids Victor's home, killing several guards and decapitating Victor. In retaliation, Hugo leads a large train of 7 SUVs filled with mercenaries to Rambo's ranch, but each eventually falls victim to Rambo's rigged traps. Saving Hugo for the last, Rambo mutilates him and rips his heart out, killing him instantly. In the aftermath, a weakened Rambo sits on the porch of his father's house, vowing to continue fighting and keep the memories of his loved ones alive. During the credits, flashbacks to scenes from the first four movies in the franchise are shown, with Rambo finally saddling up his horse and riding off into the sunset. Future[edit] During Cannes 2019, Stallone said he would continue portraying Rambo if the fifth film succeeds.[1] Grunberg, however, said that Rambo: Last Blood "closes the circle", hoping it would conclude the film series.[2] In September 2019, Stallone confirmed that he has plans for a prequel to the series; although he would not reprise the title role, he would like to explore who Rambo was before the war: I always thought of Rambo when he was 16 or 17—I hope they can do the prequel—he was the best person you could find. He was the captain of the team; he was the most popular kid in school; super athlete. He was like Jim Thorpe, and the war is what changed him. If you saw him before, he was like the perfect guy.[3] Stallone has expressed interest in having Rambo take refuge in an Indian reservation for the sixth Rambo film.[4] In June 2020, Stallone briefly elaborated on the idea, stating, "If I ever did another one, I think he would go back to the Indian reservation that he grew up on because he has Indian family."[5] Television[edit] Series Season Episodes First released Last released Showrunner(s) Network(s) Rambo: The Force of Freedom 1 65 September 15, 1986 December 26, 1986 TBA Broadcast syndication Rambo: The Force of Freedom (1986)[edit] Main article: Rambo: The Force of Freedom Rambo: The Force of Freedom was an animated series that ran in 1986 in which John Rambo leads a team called The Force of Freedom to fight an evil organization called S.A.V.A.G.E. (short for Specialist-Administrators of Vengeance, Anarchy and Global Extortion). 65 episodes were aired. Rambo and the Forces of Freedom spawned a line of toys.[6] Cast and crew[edit] Cast[edit] Main article: List of Rambo characters List indicator(s) This table shows the characters and the actors who have portrayed them throughout the franchise Italics indicate the actor only appears in flashbacks via archive footage from previous films A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film Character Films Animated series First Blood Rambo: First Blood Part II Rambo III Rambo Rambo: Last Blood Rambo: The Force of Freedom 1982 1985 1988 2008 2019 1986 John J. Rambo Sylvester Stallone Neil Ross Colonel Samuel R. "Sam" Trautman Richard Crenna Richard Crenna (archival footage) Alan Oppenheimer Sheriff William "Will" Teasle Brian Dennehy Brian Dennehy (archival footage) Deputy Sergeant Arthur "Art" Galt Jack Starrett Jack Starrett (archival footage) Deputy Mitch Rogers David Caruso Deputy Lester Alf Humphreys Captain Dave Kern Bill McKinney Lieutenant Clinton Morgen Patrick Stack Agent Co Phuong Bao Julia Nickson Banks Andy Wood Andy Wood (archival footage) Major Marshall Roger T. Murdock Charles Napier Michael Reed Ericson Martin Kove Lifer Steve Williams Lieutenant Colonel Sergei T. Podovsky Steven Berkoff Sergeant Yushin Voyo Goric Lieutenant Tay George Cheung George Cheung (archival footage) Captain Vinh William Ghent Robert Griggs Kurtwood Smith Mousa Ghani Sasson Gabai Masoud Spiros Focás Hamid Doudi Shoua Doudi Shoua (archival footage) Colonel Alexei Zaysen Marc de Jonge Sergeant Kourov Randy Raney Sarah Miller Julie Benz Michael Burnett Paul Schulze School Boy Matthew Marsden Lewis Graham McTavish Reese Jake La Botz Diaz Rey Gallegos En-Joo Tim Kang Father Arthur Marsh Ken Howard Major Pa Tee Tint Maung Maung Khin Maung Maung Khin (archival footage) Lieutenant Aye Aung Aay Noi Gabriela Yvette Monreal Maria Beltran Adriana Barraza Carmen Delgado Paz Vega Hugo Martinez Sergio Peris-Mencheta Victor Martinez Óscar Jaenada Crew[edit] Film Crew/Detail Composer(s) Cinematographer Editor(s) Production Companies Distributing Company Running time First Blood Jerry Goldsmith Andrew Laszlo Joan E. Chapman Anabasis Investments, N. V. Orion Pictures 93 minutes Rambo: First Blood Part II Jack Cardiff Mark Goldblatt and Mark Helfrich TriStar Pictures 96 minutes Rambo III John Stanier James Symons, Andrew London and O. Nicholas Brown Carolco Pictures 101 minutes Rambo Brian Tyler Glen MacPherson Sean Albertson Nu Image Equity Pictures Medienfonds GmbH & Co. KG IV Lionsgate The Weinstein Company 91 minutes Extended Cut: 99 minutes Rambo: Last Blood Brendan Galvin Todd E. Miller and Carsten Kurpanek Millennium Media Balboa Productions Templeton Media Lionsgate 89 minutes International: 101 minutes Reception[edit] Box office performance[edit] Film U.S. release date Budget Box office revenue United States International Worldwide First Blood[7] October 22, 1982 $15 million $47,212,904 $78,000,000 $125,212,904 Rambo: First Blood Part II[8] May 22, 1985 $25 million $150,415,432 $149,985,000 $300,400,432 Rambo III[9] May 25, 1988 $58 million $53,715,611 $135,300,000 $189,015,611 Rambo[10] January 25, 2008 $50 million $42,754,105 $70,490,185 $113,244,290 Rambo: Last Blood[11] September 20, 2019 $50 million $44,819,352 $46,671,001 $91,490,353 Total[12] $198 million $338,906,479 $480,446,186 $819,363,590 Critical and public response[edit] Film Rotten Tomatoes Metacritic CinemaScore First Blood 85% (47 reviews)[13] 61 (15 reviews)[14] N/A Rambo: First Blood Part II 35% (43 reviews)[15] 47 (15 reviews)[16] N/A Rambo III 39% (36 reviews)[17] 36 (15 reviews)[18] B+[19] Rambo 38% (154 reviews)[20] 46 (26 reviews)[21] A−[19] Rambo: Last Blood 26% (171 reviews)[22] 26 (31 reviews)[23] B[19] Music[edit] Soundtracks[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Title U.S. release date Length Composer(s) Label First Blood: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack 1982 TBA Jerry Goldsmith TBA Rambo: First Blood Part II (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) 1985 TBA Jerry Goldsmith TBA Rambo III: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack 1988 TBA Jerry Goldsmith TBA Rambo: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack January 22, 2008 75:59 Brian Tyler Lionsgate Rambo: Last Blood (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) September 20, 2019 75:03 Brian Tyler Lakeshore The original scores for the first three films were composed and conducted by Jerry Goldsmith. The music from the first and second films was performed by the National Philharmonic Orchestra and the music from the third by the Hungarian State Opera Orchestra. Goldsmith's main theme for Rambo was the basis for the end title song "It's a Long Road", performed by Dan Hill, part of the First Blood soundtrack. The music for the first film is harsher and more dissonant than that for the sequels, as is keeping with the tone of the film. As such, it bears more of a resemblance to Goldsmith's output of the 1960s and 1970s than it does most of his work in the 1980s. The first film's score does use electronics but is primarily orchestral while the sequel scores incorporate heavier use of electronics. The second film's score is the most popular, being that it is the most exciting. The music in the third film is an extension of the style used in the second, but with a few new themes. Both sequels feature new themes for Rambo that are based on elements found in the original "It's a Long Road" theme, which is also heard in its original form in each film as well. Because Goldsmith died in 2004, film composer Brian Tyler (The Expendables and Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem) scored the fourth film. He reassured fans at the time of Goldsmith's death that his score would be based on Goldsmith's cues for the first three films. Tyler later returned to score the fifth film Rambo: Last Blood. The 2008 film, Rambo, was advertised with Drowning Pool's "Bodies" and features two songs in the film written and performed by Jake La Botz, who portrays the mercenary "Reese" in the film. The theme music for 1986 animated TV series, Rambo: The Force of Freedom came from a Jerry Goldsmith's scores for First Blood and Rambo: First Blood Part II were licensed for use in the series and tracked throughout (mostly from Rambo: First Blood Part II), with his music for the film's trailer for Rambo: First Blood Part II, used as the opening and closing themes. It was supplemented by original music composed by Haim Saban and Shuki Levy, who received an "additional music by" credit. Soundtracks with music from the films were also released. The soundtracks for First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo and Rambo: Last Blood are available on iTunes. However, the soundtrack for Rambo III is not available on iTunes. For more on the music of the Rambo franchise, see the "Music" section below. Home media[edit] All five existing films in the Rambo franchise are available from Lionsgate by virtue of the studio's output deal with StudioCanal (the company that currently holds the underlying rights to the first three films) and Lionsgate itself co-producing the latter film (in partnership with The Weinstein Company). Paramount Pictures (via Trifecta Entertainment and Media) holds the television rights to the first three films, while Debmar-Mercury handles television distribution for the latter film on behalf of parent company Lionsgate. Title Format Release date Films Reference Rambo Collector's Pack DVD July 24, 2001 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III TBA Rambo: The Complete Collector's Set DVD, Blu-ray July 27, 2010 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III, Rambo TBA Ultimate Rambo Collection Blu-ray October 28, 2013 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III, Rambo TBA Rambo Classic Trilogy Collection DVD January 1, 2014 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III TBA Rambo: Trilogy – The Ultimate Edition Blu-ray September 28, 2015 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III TBA Rambo Complete Collection DVD March 1, 2016 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III, Rambo TBA Rambo: Trilogy DVD, Blu-ray November 15, 2018 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III TBA Rambo: 5-Film Collection Blu-ray February 11, 2020 First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II, Rambo III, Rambo, Rambo: Last Blood TBA Other media[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Novelizations[edit] David Morrell, author of the original First Blood novel, wrote novelizations (book adaptations) for the first two Rambo sequels. Morrell has said that he wrote the novelizations because he wanted to include characterization that he felt wasn't in Rambo: First Blood Part II and Rambo III. Morrell did not write a novelization for the 2008 film, Rambo, as he felt the film's characterization matched that of the original First Blood novel.[citation needed] Comic books[edit] In 1986 an Italian series of comic books inspired by Rambo was published, Rambo Adventures by Giorgio Pedrazzi. In the late 1980s, Blackthorne Publishing published a few comics starring the character. One, titled Rambo III, adapted the film of the same name. Rambo III was also published in a 3D version by Blackthorne. Also, there was a comic simply titled Rambo featuring other adventures of the character. Video games[edit] Various licensed video games for various arcade and home console systems were released: Rambo – Based on Rambo: First Blood Part II. Released in 1985 for the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, and Commodore 64 Rambo: First Blood Part II – Based on Rambo: First Blood Part II. Released in 1986 for Master System Rambo – Based on Rambo: First Blood Part II. Released in 1987 for the NES Rambo III – Based on Rambo III. Various games released in 1989 for Amiga, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Commodore 64, DOS, MSX, ZX Spectrum, Sega Mega Drive/Genesis, Master System, Arcade Rambo III – Based on Rambo III. Released in 1989 for the arcades Rambo – Based on Rambo: First Blood Part II and Rambo III. Released in 2008 for Sega 2-player light gun game Rambo: The Video Game – Based on First Blood, Rambo: First Blood Part II and Rambo III. Released in 2014 for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 Legend[edit] Among the Kamula of Wawoi Falls in Western Province, Papua New Guinea, Rambo was very popular in the late 1990s. His figure was imported into local legends. For example, Rambo is rumored to have de-escalated the Bougainville conflict. Rambo is also said to have had sex with the daughter of the Queen. When threatened with execution, a PNG lawyer pleaded in his favor. As a result, Rambo promised to help Papua New Guinea in the Third World War.[24] Statue[edit] On August 14, 2020, a cedar wood statue of Rambo was unveiled in Hope, Canada, 38 years after Rambo was released. Mayor Peter Robb, Canadian Minister of Parliament Mark Strahl, and the statue's sculptor, Ryan Villers, attended the ceremony. Bollwood remake[edit] In May 2013, Original Entertainment confirmed to have sealed a five-picture deal with Millennium Films to produce Bollywood remakes of First Blood, The Expendables, 16 Blocks, 88 Minutes, and Brooklyn's Finest, with the productions for First Blood and The Expendables expected to start at the end of that year.[25] In early 2016, Siddharth Anand was announced as the director[26] and the film will be co-produced by Anand, Daljit DJ Parmar, Samir Gupta, Hunt Lowry, Saurabh Gupta and Gulzar Inder Chahal.[27] The film will specifically remake First Blood and will follow the last member of an elite unit in the Indian Armed forces returning home only to discover a different war waiting for him, forcing Rambo to the jungles and mountains of the Himalayas and unleash mayhem and destruction.[27] In May 2017, Tiger Shroff was cast in the role of Rambo while production was schedule for a late 2018 release date.[27] By October 2017, the film was placed on hold while Shroff and Anand complete other projects.[28] The film is scheduled to be released in October 2020, with Shroff expected to star in Hindi remakes of all five films in the Rambo franchise.[29] Other appearances[edit] Fight Klub, Rambo is a character in a trading card game published by Decipher, Inc.. Family Guy: The Quest for Stuff, a freemium video game in which Rambo is an unlockable character. Broforce, a side-scrolling run-and-gun platform video game in which Rambo is an unlockable character. Mortal Kombat 11, a fighting game in which Rambo is a playable DLC character via downloadable content, with Sylvester Stallone reprising his role.[30] See also[edit] Syndicate Sadists, a Poliziotteschi film that predates First Blood Wild Blood, a Turkish copy film of First Blood Thunder Warrior, an Italian film influenced by First Blood Missing in Action, an American film inspired by Rambo: First Blood Part II Missing in Action 2: The Beginning, an American film and prequel to Missing in Action Rampage, a Turkish copy film of Rambo: First Blood Part II The Intruder, an Indonesian action film inspired by First Blood Strike Commando, an Italian film influenced by Rambo: First Blood Part II Braddock: Missing in Action III, an American film and sequel to Missing in Action Strike Commando 2, an Italian film influenced by Rambo: First Blood Part II Gremlins 2: The New Batch, an American parody film of Rambo: First Blood Part II and Rambo III Hot Shots! Part Deux, an American parody film of Rambo: First Blood Part II and Rambo III with colonel role reprised by Richard Crenna When Eagles Strike, a Philippines film influenced by Rambo: First Blood Part II Son of Rambow, a British comedy film inspired by First Blood Second Blood, a Kuwaiti action film inspired by Rambo: First Blood Part II References[edit] ^ Sprague, Mike (June 12, 2019). "Stallone happy to return as Rambo if Last Blood is a hit". JoBlo.com. Retrieved June 13, 2019. ^ Jack Shepherd, James Mottram (July 22, 2019). "Exclusive: Rambo: Last Blood director discusses bringing back Sylvester Stallone's action hero: "This movie closes the circle"". GamesRadar. Retrieved July 25, 2019. ^ Zinski, Dan. "Sylvester Stallone Wants a Rambo Prequel". Screen Rant. Retrieved 17 September 2019. ^ "Sylvester Stallone interview for Rambo: Last Blood!". JoBlo.com. JoBlo.com official YouTube channel. Event occurs at 3:52. Retrieved 18 September 2019. ^ "ランボー ラスト・ブラット シルベスター・スタローン主演 インタビュー最後の勇者編 Rambo: Last Blood Sylvester Stallone interview movie". Nippon TV Sukkiri. Shigz Channel, YouTube. 2020-06-23. Event occurs at 8:30. Retrieved June 25, 2020. ^ Erickson, Hal (2005). Television Cartoon Shows: An Illustrated Encyclopedia, 1949 Through 2003 (2nd ed.). McFarland & Co. pp. 651–652. ISBN 978-1476665993. ^ "First Blood (1982)". Box Office Mojo. ^ "Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985)". Box Office Mojo. ^ "Rambo III (1988)". Box Office Mojo. ^ "Rambo (2008)". Box Office Mojo. ^ "Rambo: Last Blood". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved December 16, 2019. ^ "Rambo Moviesat the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. ^ "Rating for First Blood". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 2011-07-31. ^ "First Blood". Metacritic. ^ "Rating for Rambo: First Blood Part II". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 2011-07-31. ^ "Rambo: First Blood Part II" – via www.metacritic.com. ^ "Rating for Rambo III". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 2011-07-31. ^ "Rambo III" – via www.metacritic.com. ^ a b c "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on February 6, 2018. ^ "Rating for Rambo". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 2011-07-31. ^ "Rambo". Metacritic. ^ "Rating for Rambo: Last Blood". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved September 29, 2019. ^ "Rambo: Last Blood". Metacritic. Retrieved September 19, 2019. ^ Wood, Michael (2006). "Kamula Accounts of Rambo and the State of Papua New Guinea". Oceania. 76 (1): 61–82. JSTOR 40332008. (article text). ^ McNary, Dave (May 15, 2013). "Original Ent. Plans Bollywood Remakes of 'Rambo,' 'Expendables' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved May 20, 2017. ^ Dhar, Debanjan (February 1, 2016). "Director Siddharth Anand To Remake Hollywood Movie 'Rambo' After Remaking 'Knight And Day'". Story Pick. Retrieved May 20, 2017. ^ a b c Brzeski, Patrick (May 18, 2017). "Cannes: Indian 'Rambo' Remake Finds Its Answer to Stallone (Exclusive)". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 20, 2017. ^ Burwick, Kevin (October 12, 2017). "Bollywood's Rambo Remake Gets Indefinitely Delayed, What Happened?". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on February 14, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019. ^ Dixit, Ayush Mohan (17 May 2019). "Sylvester Stallone's Rambo remake starring Tiger Shroff to release on Gandhi Jayanti 2020 | Bollywood News". Times Now. Retrieved 31 May 2019. ^ "Mortal Kombat 11 Ultimate brings Rain, Mileena, and Rambo". PlayStation Blog. October 8, 2020. Retrieved 8 October 2020. External links[edit] Look up Rambo in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e David Morrell's Rambo Sylvester Stallone Films First Blood First Blood Part II Rambo III Rambo Last Blood Novels First Blood Characters John Rambo Sam Trautman Television The Force of Freedom Video games Rambo First Blood Part II Rambo Rambo III Rambo The Video Game Mortal Kombat 11 Category v t e Sylvester Stallone Filmography Accolades Balboa Productions Story and Screenplay The Evil Touch (1973) The Lords of Flatbush (1974) Rocky (1976) F.I.S.T. (1978) First Blood (1982) Rhinestone (1984) Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) Cobra (1986) Over the Top (1987) Rambo III (1988) Rocky V (1990) Cliffhanger (1993) The Expendables 2 (2012) The Expendables 3 (2014) Rambo: Last Blood (2019) Directions Paradise Alley (1978) Rocky II (1979) Rocky III (1982) Staying Alive (1983) Rocky IV (1985) Rocky Balboa (2006) Rambo (2008) The Expendables (2010) Productions Staying Alive (1983) Driven (2001) Homefront (2013) Creed II (2018) Productions Heart of a Champion: The Ray Mancini Story (1985) The Contender (2006–09) Creed (2015) Strong (2016) Ultimate Beastmaster (2017) Samaritan (2021) Franchises Rocky Rocky Balboa Rambo John Rambo The Expendables United States portal Film portal Television portal Comics portal Video games portal War portal 1980s portal 1990s portal