Raptor Island DVD cover Written by Stanley Isaacs Dean Widenmann Directed by Stanley Isaacs Starring Lorenzo Lamas Steven Bauer Hayley DuMond Music by Peter Bernstein Country of origin United States Original language English Production Cinematography David Worth Editor Christopher Roth Running time 89 min. Distributor Freshwater Entertainment Sci Fi Pictures Release Original network Sci Fi Channel Original release August 21, 2004 (2004-08-21) Chronology Followed by Planet Raptor Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Warning: Page using Template:Infobox television with unknown parameter "narrator". See Infobox instructions. (this message is shown only in preview). Raptor Island is a Sci Fi original film about an island in the South China Sea. The film debuted on the Sci Fi Channel on August 21, 2004.[1] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Sequel 4 Home media 5 Internet mobisodes 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] A team of SEALs chases a group of terrorists onto the island after destroying a weapons cache and rescuing a hostage special agent. While tracking the terrorists, mutated dinosaurs appear and the mission changes into simple survival. The dinosaurs use their skilled sense of smell and ability to swim to hunt down the SEALs and terrorists. After losing several men to the raptors and killing some of the terrorists, the SEALs manage to rescue the female agent, Jamie, captured by the terrorists. She and the remaining SEALs discover a crash site of a Chinese airplane. Around the site are broken containers that had contained nuclear waste. The team figures the spilled waste caused the local animals to mutate into dinosaurs. The dinosaurs kill all the terrorists except Azir, who murders a SEAL, stealing his armor and machine gun. After encountering more mutant raptors, the last three SEALs and Jamie find refuge in a cave, which turns out to be the nest of the dinosaurs. In the end, Azir is eaten by a mutated Carnotaurus and the island is destroyed as a result of volcanic activity. The last scene is of three raptors escaping the carnage, swimming after the rescue helicopter. Cast[edit] Lorenzo Lamas: Hacket Steven Bauer: Azir Hayley DuMond: Jamie Cole Michael Cory Davis: Marcus Peter Jason: The Captain Hristo Shopov: Quinn Atanas Srebrev: Simon Ivo Tonchev: Rico Michail Elenov: Kalif Yulian Vergov: Rashid Pavil Gavrilov: Yusef Velislav Pavlov: Hassan Dejan Angelov: Diaz Sequel[edit] Main article: Planet Raptor Raptor Island was followed by the loosely related 2007 sequel Planet Raptor. Planet Raptor is set in the year 2066, when Earth's only occupants are raptors and marines. Planet Raptor is directed by Gary Jones and was filmed entirely in Romania. Home media[edit] Raptor Island was released on DVD on November 14, 2006 by Anchor Bay Entertainment. Internet mobisodes[edit] Mobisodes can be found on YouTube in twenty parts. References[edit] ^ Shaheen, Jack G. (2012), Guilty: Hollywood's Verdict on Arabs After 9/11, Interlink Books, p. 46, ISBN 1623710200. External links[edit] API at IMDb This article related to an American television thriller film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This 2000s science fiction film–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e