This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Raptor Ranch Movie poster Directed by Dan Bishop, Will Raee (2nd Unit) Produced by Stephan Galfas Mosh Moe Grunberg Shlomo May-Zur Written by Dan Bishop Shlomo May-Zur Starring Jana Mashonee Lorenzo Lamas Cody Vaughn Lexy Hulme Donny Boaz Cole Brown Marcus M. Mauldin Rowdy Arroyo Kimberly Matula Declan Joyce Jack Gould Carrie Newell Inges Brigman Al Burke Music by Evan Frankfort Cinematography Clint Childers Edited by Dory Lubliner Christopher Roth Ryan Williams Production company Nu Imagination Release date December 30, 2012 (2012-12-30) (U.S.) Running time 90 minutes Country United States Language English Budget $3,500,000 (estimated) Raptor Ranch (also known as The Dinosaur Experiment[1]) is a 2012 science fiction action adventure horror comedy film written and directed by Dan Bishop. Produced by Stephan Galfas, Mosh Moe Grunberg and Shlomo May-Zur, it stars Jana Mashonee, and Lorenzo Lamas. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 3.1 Filming 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] A modern-day Texas community is overrun by vicious prehistoric raptors and a group of people try to survive the raptor onslaught at a cattle ranch.[2] In Fossil Ridge, Texas, a reclusive, Dr. Cane experimenting with bird DNA, managed to create several species of carnivorous dinosaurs. One of them gets loose and causes a string of killings, drawing the attention of the police and the FBI who send two agents to investigate. Abbi Whitecloud, a waitress and aspiring singer whose mother was one of the casualties, is forced to work for her demanding boss, Eddie Wayne to pay off a debt. Entering Fossil Ridge are college buddies Sheldon, Lucas, and "Manbeast", who run out of gas, and touring band Little Willie and the Willettes, who suffer engine trouble. Abbi agrees to take Sheldon and Manbeast to the rancher's property for gasoline. They are accompanied by Willie's drummer, Kolin. The rancher suffers a heart attack and Manbeast is devoured after accidentally releasing the rest of the dinosaurs. Abbi, Sheldon, and Kolin return to Abbi's house to find her boss there, who is subsequently eaten by a T-rex. It then trashes Abbi's house while going after her and her friends. As they escape, they are chased by a pair of Megalosaurs, but Abbi is able to fend them off with a bow and arrows. They return to the gas station to find Lucas as the only survivor; Willie and Willie's band member, Josie has been killed by raptors. After attempting to escape in Willie's broken down tour bus, they are trapped by the dinosaurs and hide in a store. Kolin finds a book containing the dinosaurs' origins. Lucas is eaten by the T-rex in an attempt to fight it. A few hours later, the others escape the store and make it to a factory while the dinosaurs converge and fight one another, with the Megalosaurus emerging victorious. The Megalosaurus tracks them to a processing plant and in the ensuing chase, Kolin and Sheldon are crushed to death by the rampaging reptile. Abbi lures the dinosaur to a different part of the factory containing flammables, pours gasoline onto the floor and ignites it, incinerating the beast. She is then taken into custody by the FBI agents, who release her and cover up the incident by attributing it to attacks by "killer emus" or "the chupacabra". One year later, Abbi finally realizes her dream as a cabaret singer and is performing in an undisclosed nightclub. As her show wraps up, a surviving raptor appears and pounces at the screen. Cast[edit] Jana Mashonee as Abbi Whitecloud Lorenzo Lamas as Special Agent Logan Cole Brown as Billy Wayne Donny Boaz as Lucas Young Cody Vaughan as Sheldon Macabeach Lexy Hulme as Kolin Kimberly Matula as Josie Hutchens Rowdy Arroyo as Man Beast Marcus M. Mauldin as Little Willie Declan Joyce as Special Agent O'Reilly Carrie Newell as Deputy Jones Jack Gould as Dr. Cane Ines Brigman as Agent Atwood Al Burke as Sheriff Morgan Kyle Little as Eddie Wayne Charlene Gleeson as Carrie Ann Asst. Director as Will Raee Production[edit] Filming[edit] Filmed on location in St. Petersburg, Russia, Leonard and Celeste, Texas, and in Los Angeles, California. References[edit] ^ "The Dinosaur Experiment at Walmart.com". Walmart. Retrieved 1 June 2014. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Mosey on Down to Raptor Ranch". Dread Central. January 1, 2009. Retrieved 6 September 2012. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at IMDb