Red Hand of Doom Code 953857400 Rules required 3rd Edition D&D Character levels (6-12) starting at 6th[1] Campaign setting Generic D&D Authors James Jacobs and Richard Baker First published 2006 Red Hand of Doom is a 128-page adventure module for the 3.5 version of Dungeons & Dragons (D&D).[2] It is designed as a generic D&D adventure that can be dropped into any campaign world, including a personal one. Instructions are given in the first pages of the module on where to place it in the worlds of Greyhawk, the Forgotten Realms, and Eberron (the three primary campaign settings of D&D at the time of release). The adventure was indicated as appropriate for characters of experience levels six to twelve,[3] but the designers have stated that it is targeted to levels five to eleven. It is also the first Wizards of the Coast Dungeons & Dragons adventure to make significant use of designer notes.[3][4] The adventure is expected to take players weeks, or even months, to complete.[5] Contents 1 Plot 2 Publication history 3 Critical reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] The plot of Red Hand of Doom follows a group of adventurers who have entered the Elsir Vale, a thinly populated frontier region. The party discovers a massive hobgoblin horde that is fanatically devoted to the dark goddess Tiamat and led by the charismatic half-dragon warlord Azarr Kul. To stop the horde, players have to muster the inhabitants of the Vale, battle hobgoblins, giants and dragons, and defeat an overwhelming enemy. Publication history[edit] Red Hand of Doom was the first Dungeons & Dragons adventure to include Designer Notes—asides written by the authors to provide additional advice to players and to explain decisions made during the design process,[6] as well as incorporating downloadable content in the form of PDF stat blocks. The authors regarded the adventure as being self-contained and did not intend to continue the story in later publications.[6] The first Dungeon Adventure Path for 4th Edition, Scales of War, does start off in the same location, reusing the maps from Red Hand of Doom, but quickly diverges into a history and geography of its own. Critical reception[edit] The publication has been generally well received, with reviewers rating it as one of the best adventures in many years.[7] In terms of content and quality, one reviewer compared it favorably with both The Temple of Elemental Evil and The Keep on the Borderlands.[8] The inclusion of the Designer Notes was well regarded by critics,[8] as was the provision of downloadable content.[9] The artwork featured throughout the publication received special attention, with Howard Jones describing it as "fabulous".[5] The generic nature of the campaign was seen as both a strength and a limitation. While it permitted the material to be inserted into existing campaigns and game worlds,[10] it was acknowledged that doing so might be a difficult task, and that the publication lacked sufficient information for such a task, especially for non-standard campaigns.[7][8] Dungeon Master for Dummies lists Red Hand of Doom as one of the ten best 3rd edition adventures.[11] References[edit] ^ "Wizards of the Coast". California Bookwatch. June 1, 2006. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved September 6, 2012. ^ James, Jacobs; Baker, Richard (2006-02-02). "Red Hand of Doom Excerpt". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved 2008-01-21. ^ a b Kushner, Joe. "Staff review of Red Hand of Doom". EN World. Retrieved 2008-01-29. ^ "Product Spotlight: Red Hand of Doom". Wizards of the Coast. 2006-02-10. Archived from the original on 2014-07-27. Retrieved 2008-01-21. ^ a b Jones, Howard Andrew (2007). "Red Hand of Doom". Black Gate. New Epoch Press, Inc. (Summer 2007). ^ a b Carroll, Bart (2006-02-10). "Red Hand of Doom: Designer Interview". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved 2008-02-04. ^ a b Grigsby, John (2006-04-13). "Red Hand of Doom Review". d20zine. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved 2008-02-04. ^ a b c Wells, Daniel (2006-02-27). "Red Hand of Doom: A Dungeons & Dragons Adventure". The Official Time-Waster's Guide. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved 2008-02-04. ^ Cooper, John. "Review of Red Hand of Doom". EN World. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved 2008-02-02. ^ Pook, Matthew (August 3, 2007). "Red Hand of Doom (for the d20 System)". Pyramid. Steve Jackson Games. Retrieved 2008-02-05. ^ Slavicsek, Bill; Baker, Rich; Grubb, Jeff (2006). Dungeon Master For Dummies. For Dummies. p. 320. ISBN 978-0-471-78330-5. Retrieved 2019-04-04. External links[edit] d20zine review Timewaster review review by enworld staff reviewer John Cooper Neverwinter Nights 2 adaptation v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond