System that collects reviews of products and services This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A review aggregator is a system that collects reviews of products and services (such as films, books, video games, software, hardware, and cars). This system stores the reviews and uses them for purposes such as supporting a website where users can view the reviews, selling information to third parties about consumer tendencies, and creating databases for companies to learn about their actual and potential customers. The system enables users to easily compare many different reviews of the same work. Many of these systems calculate an approximate average assessment, usually based on assigning a numeric value to each review related to its degree of positive rating of the work. Review aggregation sites have begun to have economic effects on the companies that create or manufacture items under review, especially in certain categories such as electronic games, which are expensive to purchase. Some companies have tied royalty payment rates and employee bonuses to aggregate scores, and stock prices have been seen to reflect ratings, as related to potential sales.[1][2] It is widely accepted in the literature that there is a strong correlation between sales and aggregated scores.[3] Due to the influence reviews have over sales decisions, manufacturers are often interested in measuring these reviews for their own products. This is often done using a business-facing product review aggregator. In the film industry, according to Reuters, big studios pay attention to aggregators but "they don’t always like to assign much importance to them".[4][5] See also[edit] Rating site Review site References[edit] ^ Nick Wingfield (20 September 2007). "High Scores Matter To Game Makers, Too". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 15 February 2008. ^ Liam Lacey (26 August 2011). "The studios wake up to the power of Rotten Tomatoes". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 26 August 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2011. ^ "On the Validity of Metacritic in Assessing Game Value". www.eludamos.org. 2013. ^ "Movie review aggregators popular, but do they matter?". Reuters. 17 February 2012. Retrieved 8 January 2019. ^ "Test Negative". Wednesday, 27 February 2019 Bibliography[edit] Needleman, Rafe (20 September 2006). "Wize: tallies user feedback". cnet.com. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 18 July 2010. Needleman, Rafe (19 October 2006). "Still more reviews aggregators: Retrevo, DigitalAdvisor, and TheFind". cnet.com. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 18 July 2010. v t e Web syndication History Blogging Podcasting Vlogging Web syndication technology Types Art Bloggernacle Classical music Corporate Dream diary Edublog Electronic journal Fake Family Fashion Food Health Law Lifelog Litblog MP3 News Photoblog Police Political Prayer Project Reverse Travel Warblog Technology General BitTorrent Feed URI scheme Features Linkback Permalink Ping Pingback Reblogging Refback Rollback Trackback Mechanism Conversation threading Geotagging RSS enclosure Synchronization Memetics Atom feed Data feed Photofeed Product feed RDF feed Web feed RSS GeoRSS MRSS RSS TV Social Inter-process communication Livemark Mashup Referencing RSS editor RSS tracking Streaming media Standard OML OPML RSS Advisory Board Usenet World Wide Web XBEL XOXO Form Audio podcast Enhanced podcast Mobilecast Narrowcasting Peercasting Screencast Slidecasting Videocast Webcomic Webtoon Web series Anonymous blogging Collaborative blog Columnist Instant messaging Liveblogging Microblog Mobile blogging Roblog Spam blog Video blogging Motovlogging Media Alternative media Carnivals Fiction Journalism Citizen Database Online diary Search engines Sideblog Software Web directory Micromedia Aggregation News Poll Review Search Video Atom AtomPub Broadcatching Hashtag NewsML 1 G2 Social communication Social software Web Slice Related Blogosphere Escribitionist Glossary of blogging Pay per click Posting style Slashdot effect Spam in blogs Uses of podcasting