Sound made by a telephone to indicate an incoming call or text message For other uses, see API (disambiguation). A ringtone or ring tone is the sound made by a telephone to indicate an incoming call or text message. Not literally a tone nor an actual (bell-like) ring anymore, the term is most often used today to refer to customizable sounds used on mobile phones. Contents 1 Background 2 History 3 Generation software 4 Commercial sales 4.1 Types 5 Encoding formats 6 References 7 External links Background[edit] A telephone rings when the telephone network indicates an incoming call, so that the recipient is alerted of the call attempt. Landline telephones typically receive an electric alternating current signal, called power ringing or ringing signal, generated by the telephone exchange to which the telephone is connected. The ringing current originally operated an electric bell. For mobile phones, the network sends a message to the recipient's device, which may activate a sound, or a visual or vibrating indication. On a POTS interface, this signal is created by superimposing ringing voltage atop the −48 VDC already on the line. This is done at the Central Office, or a neighborhood multiplexer called a "SLC" for Subscriber Line Carrier. (SLC is a trademark of Alcatel-Lucent, but is often used generically.) Telephones with electromagnetic ringers are still in widespread use. The ringing signal in North America is normally specified at ca. 90 volts AC with a frequency of 20 hertz. In Europe it is around 60–90 VAC with a frequency of 25 Hz. Some non-Bell Company system party lines in the US used multiple frequencies for selective ringing. Ringing voltage is produced by various sources. Large central offices used motor-driven generator sets for both ringing and other signals such as dial tone and busy signals. In smaller offices, special sub-cycle[1] magnetic oscillators were used. Typically, solid-state oscillators have replaced them. Originally this voltage was used to trigger an electromagnet to ring a bell installed inside the telephone, or in a nearby mounted ringer box. Fixed phones of the late 20th century and later detect this ringing current voltage and trigger a warbling tone electronically. Mobile phones have been fully digital since the early 1990s second-generation ("2G") devices, hence are signaled to ring as part of the protocol they use to communicate with the cell base stations. While the sound produced is still called a "ring",[2] more-recently manufactured telephones electronically produce a warbling, chirping, or other sound. Variation of the ring signal can be used to indicate characteristics of incoming calls. For example, ringing bursts with a shorter interval between them might be used to signal a call from a given number. In POTS switching systems, ringing is said to be "tripped" when the impedance of the line reduces to about 600 ohms when the telephone handset is lifted off the switch-hook. This signals that the telephone call has been answered, and the telephone exchange immediately removes the ringing signal from the line and connects the call. This is the source of the name of the problem called "ring-trip" or "pre-trip", which occurs when the ringing signal on the line encounters excessively low resistance between the conductors, which trips the ring before the subscriber's actual telephone has a chance to ring (for more than a very short time); this is common with wet connections and improperly installed lines. The ringing pattern is known as ring cadence. This only applies to POTS fixed phones, where the high voltage ring signal is switched on and off to create the ringing pattern. In North America, the standard ring cadence is "2-4", or two seconds of ringing followed by four seconds of silence (33% Duty Cycle). In Australia and the UK, the standard ring cadence is 400 ms on, 200 ms off, 400 ms on, 2000 ms off. These patterns may vary from region to region, and other patterns are used in different countries around the world. Some central offices offer distinctive ring to identify which of multiple numbers on the same line is being called, a pattern once widely used on party line (telephony). In many systems, including North America Bellcore standards, Caller ID signals are sent during the silent interval between the first and second bursts of the ringing signals. The caller is informed about the progress of the call by the audible ringing signal, often called ringback tone. Power ringing and audible ringing are not synchronized. History[edit] AT&T offered seven different gong combinations for the "C" type ringer found in the model 500 and 2500 landline telephone sets. These gongs provided "distinctive tones" for hearing-impaired customers and also made it possible to distinguish the specific telephone that was ringing when several telephones were placed in close proximity.[3] A "Bell Chime" was also offered, which could be set to sound like a doorbell or to ring like a standard telephone. While rings, ringers, ring signals, or what might be viewed as the call signals which are the predecessors of ringtones, date back to the beginnings of telephony, modern ringtones appeared in the 1960s and have expanded into tunes and many customizable tones or melodies.[4] Arguably the first ringtone (in the modern sense) appeared in the movie Our Man Flint in 1966, where the head of the secret government agency had a red phone that connected directly to the President and rang with a distinctive musical ringtone.[5] A tone ringer IC: ITT SAA 1094 Following a 1975 FCC ruling which permitted third-party devices to be connected to phone lines, manufacturers produced accessory telephone ringers which rang with electronic tones or melodies rather than mechanical bells. People also made their own ringers which used the chip from a musical greeting card to play a melody on the arrival of a call.[6] One such ringer, described in a 1989 book, even features a toy dog which barks and wags its tail when a call arrives.[7] Eventually, electronic telephone ringers became the norm. Some of these ringers produced a single tone, but others produced a sequence of two or three tones or a musical melody.[8] Some novelty phones have a ringer to match, such as a duck that quacks or a car that honks its horn. The first commercial mobile phone with customizable ring tones was the Japanese NTT DoCoMo Digital Mova N103 Hyper by NEC, released in May 1996.[9][permanent dead link] It had a few preset songs in MIDI format. In September 1996, IDO, the current au, sold Digital Minimo D319 by Denso. It was the first mobile phone where a user could input an original melody, rather than the preset songs. These phones proved to be popular in Japan: a book[10] published in 1998 providing details about how to customize phones to play snippets of popular songs sold more than 3.5 million copies. The first downloadable mobile ring tone service was created and delivered in Finland in 1998 when Radiolinja (a Finnish mobile operator now known as Elisa) started their service called Harmonium, invented by Vesa-Matti Pananen.[11] Harmonium contained both tools for individuals to create monophonic ring tones and a mechanism to deliver them over-the-air (OTA) via SMS to a mobile handset. On November 1998, Digitalphone Groupe (SoftBank Mobile) started a similar service in Japan. Generation software[edit] A ring tone maker is an application that converts a user chosen song or other audio file for use as a ringtone of a mobile phone. The ringtone file is installed in the mobile phone either by direct cable connection, Bluetooth, text messaging, or e-mail. On many websites, users may create ring tones from digital music or audio. The earliest ringtone maker was Harmonium, developed by Vesa-Matti Paananen, a Finnish computer programmer, and released in 1997 for use with Nokia smart messaging.[12][13] Andy Clarke, while working for UK Phone Provider Orange, helped created the B5 Ringtone License with the UK's Mechanical-Copyright Protection Society in 1998. In 1999, Clarke registered ringtone.net and setup what is believed to be the world's first "legal" ringtone business. Scott Memphis, leader singer of Sunday Morning Sanctuary, wrote a 2010 hit entitled, "Ringtones & Lullabies" inspired by with the B5 Ringtone Licensing of 1998. Some providers have features for users to create music tones, either with a "melody composer" or a sample/loop arranger, such as the MusicDJ in many Sony Ericsson phones. These often use encoding formats only available to one particular phone model or brand. Other formats, such as MIDI or MP3, are often supported; they must be downloaded to the phone before they can be used as a normal ring tone.[original research?] When someone buys a ringtone, an aggregator (a company that sells ringtones) either creates the tune or mixes a pre-existing tune. The ringtone is sent in a special file format to the phone via SMS. If the company uses a pre-existing song, they must pay royalties to a licensing agency. A significant portion goes to the cell phone provider.[14] In 2005, "SmashTheTones", now "Mobile17", became the first third-party solution for ring tone creation online without requiring downloadable software or a digital audio editor. Later, users of Apple's iPhone could create a ringtone from a song purchased with the iTunes library.[15] Commercial sales[edit] The fact that consumers were willing to pay up to $3 for ringtones, made mobile music a profitable part of the music industry.[16] The Manhattan-based marketing and consulting firm Consect estimated ringtones generated $4 billion in worldwide sales in 2004.[13] According to Fortune magazine, ring tones generated more than $2 billion in worldwide sales during 2005.[17] The rise of sound files also contributed to the popularization of ringtones. In 2003 for example, the Japanese ringtone market, which alone was worth US$900 million, experienced US$66.4 million worth of sound file ringtone sales.[14] In 2003, the global ringtone industry was worth somewhere between US$2.5 and US$3.5 billion.[14] In 2009, the research firm SNL Kagan estimated that sales of ringtones in the United States peaked at $714 million in 2007.[18] SNL Kagan estimated U.S. sales in 2008 declined to $541 million, due in part to consumers having learned to create ringtones themselves.[16] Types[edit] Monophonic: The original ringtones play only one note at a time. Polyphonic: A polyphonic ring tone can consist of several notes at a time. The first polyphonic ring tones used sequenced recording methods such as MIDI. Such recordings specify what synthetic instrument should play a note at a given time, and the actual instrument sound is dependent upon the playback device. Later, synthesized instruments could be included along with the composition data, which allowed for more varied sounds beyond the built-in sound bank of each phone. The first mobile phones to feature polyphonic ringtones are the Korea-made Nokia 8877 and 8887.[citation needed] Truetone: A truetone, also known as realtone, mastertone, superphonic ringtone, is an audio recording, typically in a common format such as MP3 or AAC. Truetones, which are often excerpts from songs, became popular as ring tones. The first truetone service was started by au in December 2002.[19] "My Gift to You" by Chemistry was the first song to be distributed as a truetone.[20] This truetone (in Japanese chaku-uta) was released in time for Chemistry's concert tour in Japan.[21] Sing tone: A sing tone is a ring tone created in karaoke style, combining a user's recorded voice with a backing track. Encoding formats[edit] Most modern phones support ringtones in MP3 format, and other common audio formats such as AAC, Ogg Vorbis, FLAC, and MIDI are often supported as well. Less common formats include: 3GP: A multimedia container format that can be used for video ringtones. AMR: Audio compression format specialized in speech used by Nokia before mp3 became standard. eMelody: Older monophonic Ericsson format. iMelody: Monophonic format developed by Ericsson to replace eMelody. KWS: Kyocera's ringer format. MOT: An older ringer format for Motorola phones. Music Macro Language (MML), originally used in early computer and video games, later used in BASIC implementations and ringtones .nrt / .rng / .rt / .ext: Nokia's monophonic format. Nokia / SCKL / OTT: Nokia Smart Messaging format. Allows users to share ringtones via text message. PDB: Palm database. This is the format used to load ringtones on PDA phones such as the Kyocera 6035 and the Handspring Treo. PMD: Format co-created by Qualcomm and Japanese company Faith which can include MIDI, sampled (PCM) audio, static graphics, animation, text, vibration and LED events. QCP: File format generated by Qualcomm PureVoice software. Especially well-suited for simple vocal recordings. RMF: a polyphonic format with embedded audio used on Symbian and Danger Hiptop devices. RTTTL/RTX: Nokia-developed text formats for Smart Messaging. Samsung: Proprietary key press format. Siemens: Can create and read in a Siemens text file format. Siemens SEO: Siemens SEO binary format. SMAF: Yamaha music format that combines MIDI with instrument sound data (aka Module files). Filenames have the extension "MMF" or "MLD". This Format Is Used In Most Samsung's 2002-2008 Mobile Phones SRT: Sipura ringtone for Sipura Technology VoIP phones. Mobile XMF: Nokia's 2004-2013 phones support this format. References[edit] ^ "AE Bulletin 444 - Sub-Cycle Ringing Converter". www.telephonecollectors.info. ^ "ring". Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper. 2010. Retrieved 26 October 2016 – via Dictionary.com. Meaning "a call on the telephone" is from 1900; to give (someone) a ring "call on the telephone" was in use by 1910. Meaning "a ringing tone" is from 1620s; specifically "the ringing sound made by a telephone" by 1951. ^ AT&T, Bell System Practices, Section 501-250-303 Issue 4, C-Type Ringers—Maintenance., Sept. 1978. ^ "The History of Ringtones | Specialty Answering Service". The History of Ringtones | Specialty Answering Service. ^ "Men of the Apocalypse - Secret Agents | Entertainment / Media | Apocalypzia". apocalypzia.com. ^ Sokolowski, Steve (1989). "Customize Your Phone", Ch. 8 "Telephone Melody Ringer". TAB Books, Blue Ridge Summit, PA. ISBN 0-8306-9354-8. ^ Sokolowski, Steve (1989). "Customize Your Phone", Ch. 20 "Animated Telephone Ringer". TAB Books, Blue Ridge Summit, PA. ISBN 0-8306-9354-8. ^ Bigelow, Carr and Winder (2001). "Understanding Telephone Electronics", Fourth Edition. Newnes. ISBN 0-7506-7175-0. ^ (in Japanese) asahi.com, retrieved on September 6, 2008 (Cache) ^ ケータイ着メロ ドレミBOOK [Mobile Ringtones Do-Re-Mi Book] (in Japanese). July 1998. ^ "Time Magazine Europe: The Sweet Sound Of Success". ^ First ever MEF Special Recognition Award goes to the pioneer of the mobile ringtone business — "Vesku" Paananen, a June 4, 2004 press release from the Mobile Entertainment Forum ^ a b Ring My Bell, a 2005 article from The New Yorker ^ a b c Gopinath, Sumanth (2005). "Ringtones, or the auditory logic of globalization". First Monday. 10 (12). Archived from the original on 13 February 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2012. ^ Evolution of Ringtones Archived 2012-06-30 at Archive.today from SendMe Mobile ^ a b Greg Sandoval (September 3, 2009). "Apple to offer ready-made ringtones". CNET. CNN. ^ Mehta, Stephanie N. (December 12, 2005). "Wagner's ring? Way too long". Fortune. p. 40. ^ Shrinking Ringtone Sales Lead to Decline in U.S. Mobile Music Market, an August 5, 2009 press release published on the Entrepreneur magazine website ^ (in Japanese) 2002 news release on KDDI (au) official website, retrieved on September 7, 2008 ^ "The world's first truetone". okbaza.net. Retrieved March 24, 2021. ^ "「CHEMISTRY」とのコラボレーションについて". kddi.com. Retrieved March 24, 2021. External links[edit] Look up api in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Ringtones from How Stuff Works (old article, deals with monophonic ringtones) Ringtone FAQ Archived 2007-04-10 at the Wayback Machine - Consumer guide to ring tones, from Utility Consumers' Action Network (UCAN) v t e Signaling (telecommunications) Dial tone Ringtone Ringing tone Busy signal Reorder tone Disconnect tone Special information tone Off-hook tone Dual-tone multi-frequency 2600 Hz v t e Mobile phones Mobile networks, protocols Channel capacity Frequencies Multi-band Network operator list Roaming Signal SIM card dual SIM SIM lock Standards comparison Tethering VoIP WAP XHTML-MP Generations Analogue: 0G 1G Digital: 2G 3G adoption 3.5G 4G 4.5G 5G 6G General operation Features GSM services History Operating system Security phone cloning Telephony airplane mode Text messaging SMS MMS RCS Spam Tracking Web browsing Mobile devices Manufacturers 3D phone Camera phone Car phone Feature phone Projector phone Satellite phone Smartphone Form factors Bar Flip Phablet Slider Smartwatch Smartphones Android devices rooting BlackBerry 10 iPhone iOS jailbreaking Open-source mobile phones Symbian devices Windows Phone devices Mobile specific software Apps Development Distribution Management Cloud computing Commerce Banking Marketing advertising campaigns Payments contactless donating Ticketing Content Blogging Email Gambling Gaming Health Instant messaging Learning Music News Search local Social address book Television Culture Box breaking Charms Comics Dating Japanese culture Novels Ringtones silent mode Selfie Txt-spk Wallpaper Environment and health BlackBerry thumb Driving safety Electronic waste External power supply Mental health from overuse Phantom vibration syndrome Radiation and health Recycling Law Carrier IQ Legality of recording by civilians Mobile phones in prison Photography and the law Telephone tapping Texting while driving USA use restrictions while driving  Category  Portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125