This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Rise of the Gargoyles DVD Cover Genre Panic Horror Action Written by Andy Briggs Directed by Bill Corcoran Starring Eric Balfour Caroline Néron Justin Salinger Ifan Huw Dafydd Nick Mancuso Tanya Clarke Theme music composer Ned Bouhalassa Country of origin United States France Canada Romania Original language English Production Producers François Sylvestre Andreea Stanculeanu Michael Prupas Robert Halmi Sr. Cinematography Pierre Jodoin Editor Simon Webb Running time 94 minutes Production companies Media Pro Pictures Muse Entertainment Enterprises RHI Entertainment Distributor Syfy Original Movies Budget $2,000,000 Release Original network Syfy Original release June 21, 2009 (2009-06-21) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Rise of the Gargoyles (La fureur des gargouilles in France) is a 2009 television film directed by Bill Corcoran and produced for the Syfy channel. It is the 18th film in the Maneater Series. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Home media 4 External links Plot[edit] In Paris, France, two workers find a hidden chamber while digging beneath the Saint Jean André Church. They collect the valuable objects in the area but they are attacked by a creature. Meanwhile, the discredited Professor Jack Randall, who wrote a book about Gargoyles rejected by the experts, is encouraged by his friend Carol Beckham to check the place out. They sneak in the site during the night and while Carol is collecting some artifacts, Jack is recording with his camera. Out of the blue, Jack sees a winged monster coming towards him and he flees from the location with Carol, but breaks his camera. They go to a bar and a huge stone falls over onto his car. Jack takes a cab to his boarding house and Carol is attacked and beheaded by a Gargoyle at her apartment. The next morning, Jack identifies Carol's body and becomes the prime suspect of Inspector Gibert in several murders. Jack decides to seek out the reporter of a sensationalist newspaper, Nicole Ricard, and gives his tape to her cameraman Walsh. When Walsh recovers the badly shaped footage, he shows Nicole and they realize that Jack is not crazy and he had indeed seen a Gargoyle beneath the church. They decide to return to the church to investigate. Cast[edit] Eric Balfour as Prof. Jack Randall Caroline Néron as Nicole Ricard Justin Salinger as Walsh Ifan Huw Dafydd as Inspector Gibert Nick Mancuso as Father Gable Tanya Clarke as Carol Beckham Constantin Barbulescu as Workman #1 Gabriel Spahiu as Workman #2 Lucian Ciurariu as Bum Alexandra Buza as Rock Chick Flaviu Crisan as CSI Officer Paul Niculita as Gibert's Assistant Florin Busuioc as Cop Mihai Diaconu as Pizza Man Benoît Rousseau as Inspector Gibert (voice) Home media[edit] Rise of the Gargoyles was released on DVD on September 8, 2009, in North America. In Japan, it was titled as: U.M.A 2010 and released on January 8, 2010 on direct-to-DVD. External links[edit] API at IMDb v t e Maneater 2007 Blood Monkey Grizzly Rage In the Spider's Web Maneater Something Beneath Croc Eye of the Beast 2008 The Hive Black Swarm Hybrid Shark Swarm Vipers Swamp Devil Yeti: Curse of the Snow Demon 2009 Wyvern Sea Beast Carny Rise of the Gargoyles Sand Serpents Hellhounds High Plains Invaders 2011 Behemoth Ferocious Planet Roadkill 2013 Scarecrow 2015 Shark Killer The Hollow Category v t e Films directed by Bill Corcoran Incident at Victoria Falls (1991) Shattered Trust: The Shari Karney Story (1993) Quints (2000) Atomic Twister (2002) Left Behind II: Tribulation Force (2002) Safe Harbour (2007) Vipers (2008) Rise of the Gargoyles (2009) Stonerville (2011)