American voice actor For the Fight Club character named Robert Paulson, see Fight Club (novel). Rob Paulsen Paulsen in June 2011 Born Robert Frederick Paulsen III (1956-03-11) March 11, 1956 (age 65) Detroit, Michigan, U.S. Occupation Voice actor Years active 1978–present Agent SBV Talent[1] Spouse(s) Carol Anne Schnarr ​ ​(m. 1979; div. 1982)​ Parrish Todd ​(m. 1983)​ Children 1 Parent(s) Lee Paulsen Robert Frederick Paulsen Jr. Robert Frederick Paulsen III (born March 11, 1956) is an American voice actor, who has done many voice roles in various films, television shows, and video games, including Raphael and Donatello from the 1987 and 2012 animated series respectively of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff, and Pinky from Animaniacs and Pinky and the Brain,[2] Carl Wheezer from Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius and its spin-off television series The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius, Peck the Rooster from Barnyard and its spin-off television show series Back at the Barnyard, Spike in The Land Before Time films and television series, and the title character in The Mask: Animated Series. In total, Paulsen has been the voice of over 250 different animated characters and performed in over 1000 commercials. He received a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program for his role as Pinky, and three Annie Awards. Contents 1 Early life 2 Career 2.1 Early career 2.2 Live action acting 2.3 Advertising 2.4 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 2.5 Animaniacs and Pinky and the Brain 3 Roles 3.1 Animation 3.2 Video games 3.3 Other 3.4 Current roles 4 Awards and nominations 5 Public appearances 6 Personal life 7 Author 8 Filmography 8.1 Film 8.2 Television 8.3 Video games 8.4 Live-action 8.5 Internet 8.6 Theme parks 9 References 10 External links Early life[edit] Paulsen was born in Detroit, Michigan[3] to Lee and Robert Frederick Paulsen Jr. He was raised in Grand Blanc, Michigan and attended Grand Blanc High School, from which he graduated in 1974.[4] Paulsen later briefly attended University of Michigan-Flint but dropped out to pursue a career in show business.[5] Career[edit] Early career[edit] He began his voice-over career in 1983 with the mini-series G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero, where he played "Snow Job" and "Tripwire". A few years later, his career launched into more roles such as "Cobra Slavemaster" and reprising "Snow Job" and "Tripwire" on G.I. Joe, "Corky" on The Snorks, "Marco Smurf" on the later seasons of The Smurfs, "Boober" on the animated version of Fraggle Rock, "Hadji" in The New Adventures of Jonny Quest and the title character – "Saber Rider" and the villain "Jesse Blue" on Saber Rider and the Star Sheriffs. Live action acting[edit] During the 1980s, Paulsen also explored the field of live action films. His first movie was Eyes of Fire in 1983. He played supporting roles in Body Double, Stewardess School, Warlock, and Mutant on the Bounty. He appeared in television shows during this time as well, such as MacGyver and St. Elsewhere. He mentioned in an interview, regarding his role in Body Double, that he would not want his child (who was very young at the time of the interview) to see the movie, so he could not really be proud of his work.[citation needed] Advertising[edit] Paulsen became more prevalent in the world of advertising as well. In the 1980s, he had been the announcer for the sitcom Cheers and continued to secure roles as an announcer. He appeared as the voice of "Mr. Opportunity", spokesman of Honda commercials on TV and radio, the announcer for Buffalo Dick's Radio Ranch, and the spokesman for Lucky Stores, a West Coast grocery store chain, before it was acquired by Albertsons in 1998. He provided the voice of "Dog" in the Taco Bell kids meal commercials from 1996 to mid-1997, with Eddie Deezen as the voice of "Nacho" the cat. However, Paulsen's most famous advertising role was in the original commercial of the now ubiquitous Got Milk? campaign. The famous commercial, Who shot Alexander Hamilton in that famous duel?, aired in 1993, and launched the Got Milk? campaign into a monstrously successful enterprise. Paulsen continues to be one of the most sought-after commercial voice actors in the industry. He can be currently heard as the voice of singing Mr. Mini-Wheat in the Mini-Wheats commercials in Canada. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles[edit] From 1987 to 1995, Paulsen voiced Raphael and various supporting characters in the original 1987 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series. Originally starting as a five-part miniseries, the series continued for ten seasons and 193 episodes. It was a great success and became an instant pop culture symbol. Paulsen has said that Raphael's voice is very similar to his natural voice. He returned to the franchise as Donatello for the 2012 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles series on Nickelodeon, which ran for five seasons and 124 episodes from September 29, 2012 until November 12, 2017.[6] He also reprised his role as 1987 Raphael in the multiple 1987/2012 crossover episodes. Paulsen serves as the voice director for the subsequent series, Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, which premiered in July 2018.[7] Animaniacs and Pinky and the Brain[edit] Rob Paulsen with Pinky at Anthrocon 2007 Throughout the early 1990s, Paulsen continued to co-star in animated series, which allowed him to branch further into radio and television announcements and dropped live action acting from his repertoire. In 1993, he voiced "Antoine D'Coolette" in ABC's series Sonic the Hedgehog, and "Arthur", an insecure accountant in a moth costume (wings included), in the superhero series The Tick in 1995, replacing Micky Dolenz, who had originally played Arthur.[8] In 1993, he starred as the title character in both Mighty Max and The Mask. Also at this time, he starred in what became one of his most popular roles, "Yakko Warner" of Animaniacs. Paulsen also provided the voice of "Pinky" from both Animaniacs and its spin-off Pinky and the Brain, a show which won him several Annie Awards and a Daytime Emmy in 1999.[9] He also did a number of characters in Tiny Toon Adventures, including "Fowlmouth", "Arnold the Pit Bull", and "Concord Condor". In the direct-to-video movie Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation, he did the voices for "Banjo Possum", "Mr. Hitcher" (who would also appear in other episodes), and "Johnny Pew".[citation needed] Paulsen continues to voice Yakko and Pinky in the 2020 Animaniacs revival on Hulu.[10] Roles[edit] Animation[edit] Paulsen has provided voices for a great number of characters, among which are Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff and Pinky in Animaniacs, Steelbeak in Darkwing Duck, Brick and Boomer in The Powerpuff Girls, Atchan in Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi, Spooky the Tuff Little Ghost in The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper, Ogden O. Ostrich in Channel Umptee-3, Hathi in Jungle Cubs, Jack Fenton, The Box Ghost, Nicolai Technus, and The Vulture Ghosts in Danny Phantom, Carl Wheezer, Butch and Skeet in The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius, Mark Chang, his father King Grippulon, Happy Peppy Gary and Bucky McBadbat in The Fairly OddParents, Peck the Rooster in Barnyard and Back at the Barnyard, and Gordon in Catscratch. He was also the voice of Rothchild in the early episodes of Samurai Jack. Additionally, Paulsen provided the voice of P.J. Pete in Goof Troop, A Goofy Movie, and An Extremely Goofy Movie, as well as the voices of Ratchet and Dr. Debolt in the TaleSpin pilot episode and introductory TV movie Plunder & Lightning. He also did the voices of Boober Fraggle, Sprocket, and Marjory the Trash Heap in the animated version of Fraggle Rock, as well as Gwizdo in the Dragon Hunters movie. He also voiced Zeek and Joshua in K10C: Kids' Ten Commandments, Rude Dog in Rude Dog and the Dweebs, and Archie the Raccoon, A.K.A. Ze Archer, in "Mask of the Raccoon" on The Penguins of Madagascar. and also provided the voices of 2T Fru-T, Mike Ellis, Dark Comet and Ronald in the 2001 cartoon series Butt-Ugly Martians. He portrayed the voice of Chomper and Strut in The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure, Spike and Rinkus in The Land Before Time sequels and Spike in the TV series, but Spike was played anonymously in the original The Land Before Time. Paulsen also played Mo in The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water. Paulsen also voiced the robot "D.E.C.K.S." in the early 1990s TV series Wake, Rattle, and Roll. Paulsen also voiced Prescott A. Wentworth III in the Jem episode The Fan. Paulsen was best known to Transformers fans as the voices of the Autobots Air Raid, Chase, Haywire, Fastlane and Slingshot in The Transformers. Video games[edit] In video games, much voice talent has bled over from television and radio voice actors. Paulsen has appeared in video games such as Doom 3 and ClayFighter 63⅓. He played Fluffy, the Chinese-crested dog, in 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue, an Irish-talking pubtender in the 1996 video game Toonstruck, and Morte, a floating, talking skull, in Planescape: Torment, as well as Anomen Delryn in Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn and Gray Fox in Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes and both Super Smash Bros. Brawl and Super Smash Bros. Ultimate as an Assist Trophy. He provided the voice for Erik the Swift of The Lost Vikings in its second installment. He portrayed Tobli and Lian Ronso in the English version of Square Enix's Final Fantasy X-2 and has played the lead character in Bubsy. Although an extremely minor role, Paulsen has also done the voice for the Greek soldiers in God of War. He voiced Jaq and The Grand Duke from the Cinderella world in Square Enix's and Disney's Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep. In the video game The Nightmare Before Christmas: Oogie's Revenge, he did the voice of Igor. He also reprised his role as Yakko Warner, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff, and Pinky in Animaniacs: The Great Edgar Hunt. Rob Paulsen voiced the lead character, Lazarus Jones, in the PS2 game Ghosthunter, and played The Duck Avenger in Disney's PK: Out of the Shadows. Rob also voiced Alfredo Fettuccini, Bob the Ghost Pirate, Lookout and Ghost Priest in The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition. He voiced the Fox and the Mouse in the Green Eggs and Ham PC game. He also voiced Tlaloc in Tak and the Power of Juju. He has voiced The Riddler in Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes, a role he reprised in Lego Batman: The Movie – DC Super Heroes Unite. Rob is the voice of talking alien dog Beak-Beak in Armikrog. Paulsen also voices Smash Hit in Skylanders: SuperChargers and Skylanders: Imaginators.[11] Other[edit] Paulsen is also the off-camera voice of the syndicated television series Funniest Pets & People, which is seen on Superstation WGN and other television stations throughout the United States and abroad.[citation needed] Current roles[edit] Rob Paulsen at the 2006 Annie Awards. It was not long before Paulsen returned to Warner Bros. Animation, which had diverged into a new era of television serials (following what is sometimes referred to as the "Silver Age of Animation"). Paulsen appeared as "Rev Runner" of the new show Loonatics Unleashed and starred in Coconut Fred's Fruit Salad Island. He was also the voice of the character "Squeeky" on the TV show Danger Rangers. He voiced "Ichabeezer" and "Tom Celeriac" (a play on Tom Selleck) in VeggieTales in the House for Netflix. Paulsen also provides the voice for the Honda character "Mr. Opportunity." In the Rob Zombie animated film, The Haunted World of El Superbeasto, Paulsen voiced the characters "El Gato" and "Commandant Hess", among some others. He also has a role as "Ditto", one of the alien forms on Ben 10, as Rhomboid Vreedle of the Vreedle Brothers and Baz-El in Ben 10: Alien Force, two characters that he reprised, along with a new character, Magister Patelliday on Ben 10: Ultimate Alien and Ben 10: Omniverse.[citation needed] Paulsen is also the current voice of Disney character José Carioca. Rob became the new voice of "Prince Eric" of Disney's The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea since Christopher Daniel Barnes failed to reprise the role in 2000, though Barnes did return to voice the character in the Kingdom Hearts series when Paulsen was unavailable.[12] Another Disney character he is currently the voice of is Toodles from the kids show "Mickey Mouse Clubhouse". From season 3, he voiced Toodles in Happy Birthday Toodles, Road Rally, and Space Adventure, as well as every episode of season 4. He is also the voice of Peck the Rooster and other minor characters in the Nickelodeon computer-animated series Back at the Barnyard and various characters on the Disney Channel animated series The Replacements. He is the voice of Bobble in the Tinker Bell movies. Paulsen also played the titular character for an animated web series based on the video game Bravoman for Namco Bandai's ShiftyLook division.[13] Awards and nominations[edit] Paulsen has been nominated for an Annie Award for his role of Pinky for 4 consecutive years, which he won in 1996, 1997, and 1999. In 1999, he also won the Daytime Emmy Award for voicing Pinky.[citation needed] In 2004, he was nominated for his role of the Troubadour in Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers, and in 2005, he was nominated for his role in The Happy Elf.[citation needed] Public appearances[edit] Paulsen at the 2011 San Diego Comic-Con International Paulsen has been a regular industry guest and featured panelist at San Diego Comic-Con International over the past several years. He has also appeared at animation industry-related events, such as the World Animation Celebration Online in 1998, among many others. He has also been a guest at several anime conventions, including JACON, Mikomicon, and Anime Overdose. Paulsen was a guest of honor at Anthrocon in 2007. He has recently started doing "Rob Paulsen Live" seminars across the U.S. to talk of his career, sign autographs, and talk with fans. Sometimes, people in attendance would request him to sing the famous Yakko's World number, where he sings all the nations of the world with his Yakko voice in a fast-paced delivery without rehearsing. In May 2011, working with social media and web producer Chris Pope, Paulsen rolled out a brand new website RobPaulsenLive.com, as well as a weekly audio podcast called Talkin' Toons with Rob Paulsen, which started out being managed and deployed by The Tech Jives Network,[14] before moving to be part of Nerdist Industries' Nerdist Podcast Network. Some episodes were recorded before a live audience at The Improv in Hollywood, California, while later ones were recorded at the Nerdist Showroom. The show is on indefinite hiatus following the March 23, 2019 episode the Dante Basco.[15] In June 2011, Paulsen made announcements that he was taking his show on the road with his "Lots of laughs and autographs" tour. Working closely with a team that included Chris Pope, his publicist, and others he made his first successful tour in Atlanta, Georgia, which happened on July 30, 2011, and another in Dallas, Texas on September 17, 2011, that required two seminars, one in the afternoon and one in the evening, as they were so popular.[16] Personal life[edit] This section of a biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Paulsen was married twice. He first married Carol Anne Schnarr in 1979, they divorced in 1982 after three years of marriage.[citation needed] Paulsen married his second wife Parrish Todd, a photographer, in 1983.[17] Together they have a son, Ashton "Ash" Paulsen.[17][18] In an interview with a Chicago TV station, Paulsen described himself as "a singer who decided to become an actor."[19] Growing up in Grand Blanc, Michigan,[19] Paulsen sang in choirs throughout his youth and adolescence and began performing in plays in grammar schools. However, his idol growing up was Gordie Howe of the Detroit Red Wings; he considered the arts to be a secondary career choice, primarily interested in becoming a professional hockey player. Paulsen has long supported charity organizations and donated considerably for cancer research. He has worked a lot for GOALmodels, a program for adolescents, and is a sponsor of Camp Will-A-Way, a camp for mentally and physically disabled children. Paulsen also donates funds from autographs to the Wounded Warrior Project and Operation Smile. In February 2016, Paulsen was diagnosed with Stage III throat cancer. Paulsen has since undergone treatment, and his cancer is now in remission.[20] Author[edit] Following his battle with cancer, Paulsen wrote a memoir Voice Lessons: How a Couple of Ninja Turtles, Pinky, and an Animaniac Saved My Life.[21] He has continued his speaking and performing tour in part to promote his book but also discuss his experiences. Filmography[edit] Paulsen voices most of the characters with his original accent which is American, but he used an English accent to voice Strut in The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure and Brunch in Scooby-Doo and the Reluctant Werewolf while using a Scottish accent to voice Bobble in the Tinker Bell movies. In his role as Pinky, Paulsen used an exaggerated Cockney accent, especially in earlier episodes. He even used a Brooklyn accent for Reuben (Experiment 625) in Lilo & Stitch: The Series. Film[edit] 101 Dalmatians II: Patch's London Adventure – Danny A Goofy Movie – P.J. An Extremely Goofy Movie – P.J. Pete Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet the Wolfman – Mr. Rochelle The Ant Bully – Beetle Balto II: Wolf Quest – Muru (singing voice), Terrier, Sumac, Wolverine #2 Barnyard – Peck, Pizza Twin #1 Batman: Gotham Knight – Sal Maroni Batman and Harley Quinn – Harold Goldblum, Min & Max Bat Thumb – No Face, Commissioner Cathy – Irving Hillman Cathy's Last Resort – Irving Hillman Cathy's Valentine – Irving Hillman Cinderella II: Dreams Come True – Jaq/Grand Duke/The Baker/Sir Hugh/Bert/Flower Vendor Cinderella III: A Twist in Time – The Grand Duke and Jaq Changeland – "Dad" Charlotte's Web 2: Wilbur's Great Adventure – Farley Cranberry Christmas – Mr. Whiskers Dragon Hunters – Gwizdo Elvira's Haunted Hills – Adrian The Fox and the Hound 2 – Chief, Additional Voices[citation needed] The GodThumb – Mickey, Toll Booth Guard G.I. Joe: The Movie – Snow Job Hamburger: The Motion Picture – Security Guard Happily N'Ever After – Amigo 2 (credited as Robert F. Paulsen III) The Happy Elf – Eubie The Haunted World of El Superbeasto – El Gato/Commandant Hess Hoodwinked Too! Hood vs. Evil – Johann, Bad Shatner, Bad Kelley The Hunchback of Notre Dame – Frollo's Soldiers I'm Mad – Yakko Warner, Dr. Scratchansniff Jetsons: The Movie – Additional Voices Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Carl Wheezer, Ebenezer Wheezer, Martha Wheezer, Kid in Classroom Jonny's Golden Quest – Hadji Jonny Quest vs. The Cyber Insects – Hadji Singh / 425 Lady and the Tramp II: Scamp's Adventure – Otis The Jimmy Timmy Power Hour series – Carl Wheezer The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure – Spike / Strut / Chomper The Land Before Time III: The Time of the Great Giving – Spike / Kosh The Land Before Time IV: Journey Through the Mists – Spike The Land Before Time V: The Mysterious Island – Spike The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire – Rinkus and Spike The Land Before Time VIII: The Big Freeze – Spike and Stegosaurus Leader The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water – Spike,[22] Mo,[22] The Land Before Time X: The Great Longneck Migration – Spike The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses – Spike/Kosh The Land Before Time XII: The Great Day of the Flyers – Spike/Mo/Guido/Kosh The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends – Spike/Beipiaosaurus #4 The Land Before Time XIV: Journey of the Brave – Spike Lego Batman: The Movie – DC Super Heroes Unite – Riddler Leroy & Stitch – Reuben, Squeak, Additional Voices The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea – Prince Eric The Little Mermaid: Ariel's Beginning – Ink Spot the octopus and Swifty the shrimp Lone Wolf McQuade – Man at festival Mannequin – Cop #4 Mickey's Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse – Jaq and additional voices Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers – Troubadour Mickey's House of Villains – Hades (singing only) Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas – Additional Voices Mulan II – Prince Jeeki Otra Película de Huevos y un Pollo – Confi The Perfect Match – John Wainwright The Pirate Fairy – Bobble Pixie Hollow Games – Bobble, Buck Pocahontas II: Journey to a New World – Additional Voices Porco Rosso – Additional Voices The Powerpuff Girls Movie – Hota Wata, Killa Drilla, The Doot Da Doot Da Doo Doos (uncredited), Blah-Blah Blah-Blah (uncredited) Return to Never Land – Pirates Rusty Rockin' with Judy Jetson – Sky Rocker Scooby-Doo! and the Reluctant Werewolf – Brunch Scooby-Doo! in Arabian Nights – Prince Scooby-Doo Meets the Boo Brothers – Shreako and Dispatcher Scooby-Doo! Music of the Vampire – Vampire Actor #2, the Sheriff, and Teen Vampire Spaceballs – Soldier voices[23] The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge Out of Water – Seagull Stitch! The Movie – Reuben, Additional Voices Steel Magnolias – Delivery Guy Teacher's Pet – Ian Wazselewski Tinker Bell – Bobble Tinker Bell and the Lost Treasure – Bobble, Grimsley, Mr. Owl Tinker Bell and the Great Fairy Rescue – Bobble Secret of the Wings – Bobble Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation – Fowlmouth, Johnny Pew, Mr. Hitcher, Banjo Possum, Hotel Manager and the Bike Carrier Tom and Jerry: Blast Off to Mars – Computer Voice, Worker #1, Worker #2 Tom and Jerry: The Fast and the Furry – Irving, Dave Tom and Jerry and the Wizard of Oz – Hickory/Tin Man Tom and Jerry: Back to Oz – Hickory/Tin Man Top Cat and the Beverly Hills Cats – James the Chauffeur, Lester Pester, Tour Bus Driver Tweety's High-Flying Adventure – Sphinx, Ship Crewman, Casino Cat, Additional Voices Wakko's Wish – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff Yogi and the Invasion of the Space Bears – Zor Two Yogi the Easter Bear – Easter Bunny, Male Ranger Television[edit] ABC Weekend Special – Spike Funnybunny, Moe Weasel, Policeman The Addams Family – Mr. Normanmeyer, Van Swash, Additional Voices Adventures from the Book of Virtues – Peter, Classmate The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Carl Wheezer, Ebenezer Wheezer, Martha Wheezer, Butch Pakovski, Principal Willoughby, Skeet, Additional Voices Aladdin – Omar All Hail King Julien – Brodney, Captain Ethan, Lil Arms Magee, One Eyed Simon, Brendan the Butterfly, DJ, Narrator, Snake, Recorded Voice, Additional Voices American Dragon: Jake Long – Groom, Additional Voices The Angry Beavers – Terrence Animaniacs – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto von Scratchansniff, Additional Voices Animaniacs (2020 TV series) – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto von Scratchansniff Attack of the Killer Tomatoes – Mummato, Tomato Worm The Batman – Kid Batman: The Animated Series – Jay ("I've Got Batman in My Basement") Back at the Barnyard – Peck, RoboPeck, Skunky, Joey, Badger, Pizza Twin #1 Ben 10 – Ditto Ben 10: Alien Force – Baz-El, Rhomboid Vreedle Ben 10: Ultimate Alien – Baz-El, Rhomboid Vreedle, Magister Patelliday Ben 10: Omniverse – Magister Patelliday, Rhomboid Vreedle, Ditto, Captain Kork, Tummy Head, Gorvan, Phil, Gutrot Biker Mice from Mars – Throttle, Fred the Mutant, Additional Voices Biker Mice from Mars (2006 TV series) – Throttle, Hairball, Additional Voices The Blues Brothers Animated Series – Benny Fingers, Doctor The Boondocks (TV series) – The Art Teacher, Additional Voices Bubsy: What Could Possibly Go Wrong? – Bubsy Bobcat Bump in the Night – Squishington Butt-Ugly Martians – 2-T Fru-T, Mike, Ronald Buzz Lightyear of Star Command – AP-06, Additional Voices Can You Teach My Alligator Manners? – Al Capitol Critters – Additional Voices The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper – Spooky the Tuff Little Ghost CatDog – Hotdog, Hamburger (Meat, Dog's Friends), Additional Voices Catscratch – Gordon Quid Cédric – Nicholas Centerville – Mitch & Brad Challenge of the GoBots – Additional Voices Channel Umptee-3 – Ogden Ostrich ChalkZone – Vinnie Raton, Walrus, Craniac Chip 'n Dale Rescue Rangers – Captain Finn, Flash The Wonder Dog, Chief Marley, Shakabaka, Darby Spree Chowder – VG, Dom, Additional Voices Coconut Fred's Fruit Salad Island – Coconut Fred Codename: Kids Next Door – Rupert Puttkin/The Great Puttinsky, Shaunie Fulbright, Robin Food, Mr. Mogle, Additional Voices The Crow: Stairway to Heaven – James Curious George – Compass, Charkie, Mr. Glass, Mr. Reloj, Additional Voices Dan Dare: Pilot of The Future – The Mekon Danger Rangers – Squeaky Danny Phantom – Jack Fenton, Nicolai Technus, The Box Ghost Darkwing Duck – Steelbeak Dave the Barbarian – Malsquando, Additional Voices Denver, the Last Dinosaur – Nick, Chet Detention – Uncle Kelly Dexter's Laboratory – Major Glory, Puppet Pal Mitch, Additional Voices Dino-Riders – Faze, Kameelian Disney's Adventures of the Gummi Bears – Gusto Gummi Disney's House of Mouse – José Carioca Disney's Sheriff Callie's Wild West – Tricky Travis Doc McStuffins – Sir Kirby Duck Dodgers – Mac Gopher, Porko, Captain Peters, Axl Gator DuckTales – Gladstone Gander DuckTales (2017 TV series) – Gibbous El Tigre: The Adventures of Manny Rivera – Additional Voices Elena of Avalor – Macoco Eloise: The Animated Series – Bill The Fairly OddParents – Mark Chang, Happy Peppy Gary, King Gripullon, Bucky McBadbat, Mr. Ed Ledly, Additional Voices Fish Hooks – Magic Hamster Mirror, Additional Voices Fish Police – Richie The Flintstone Kids – Additional Voices Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends – Additional Voices Fraggle Rock: The Animated Series – Boober Fraggle, Sprocket, Marjory the Trash Heap, Henchy Fraggle, Rhinestone Doozer, Additional Voices Freakazoid! – Yakko Warner, Additional Voices Funniest Pets & People – Announcer Gargoyles – Helios Gary the Rat – Additional Voices Generator Rex – Providence Agent Jackson, Providence Tech, Additional Voices "The George Lucas Talk Show" – Self, episode: Streamers of the Lost Art (of Conversation) G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (1985 TV series) – Snow Job, Tripwire, Flash (ARAH), World War I American Warrior, Cobra slavemaster Goof Troop – P.J. Pete, Additional Voices Gravity Falls – Additional Voices The Greatest Adventure: Stories from the Bible – Moki Green Eggs and Ham – Little Snerz, Pool Shark Green Lantern: The Animated Series – Goggan, Bumpy The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy – Tooth Fairy, Additional Voices Half-Shell Heroes: Blast to the Past – Donatello, Additional Voices Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law – Baba Looey, Kids, Announcer Henry Hugglemonster – Denzel Dugglemonster Higglytown Heroes – Barber Hero Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi – Atchan, Additional Voices The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange – Broccoli Alien Overlord, Marshmallow Warriors, Dr. Sigmund Fruit, Dr. Fruitenstein, Thomas Jefferson, Rock, Apricot, President Dane, Junior Histeria! – Mr. Smartypants, Sammy Melman, Additional Voices I Am Weasel – Stevie, Admiral Algebra Doll Jackie Chan Adventures – Magister #2, Punk Magister Jake and the Never Land Pirates – Bobble Jem – Prescott A. Wentworth III The Jetsons – Gus Guesser, Blinky "Boy Boy Nova" Sunspot, Hall Monitor Johnny Bravo – Green Swoosh Jungle Cubs – Hathi, Akela, Additional Voices Justice League – Lightray K10C: Kids' Ten Commandments – Zeek, Josephat, and Joshua Kim Possible – François, Prince Wally, Dallas, Hank Perkins, Vinnie Wheeler, Additional Voices Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness – Han Sr. The Land Before Time – Spike/Ruby's Father/Angry Apatosaurus #1/Hidden Runner/Mo/Milo/Stegosaurus Leader/Guido/Lambeosaurus The Legend of Prince Valiant – Robert Draconarius, Prince Edwin, Soldier The Legend of Tarzan – Radio Voice The Life and Times of Juniper Lee – 10th Level Warlock, Leonard the Goblin, Additional Voices Lilo & Stitch: The Series – Reuben, Squeak, Houdini Loonatics Unleashed – Rev Runner, Gorlop, Mr. Leghorn (2nd Time) The Looney Tunes Show – Mac Gopher, Chuck Berost The Loud House – Lane Loud, Mrs. Coconuts, Senior Announcer, and Seymour Mad – Lex Luthor, Various The Magician – Cosmos, Sonny Boy The Mask: Animated Series – Stanley Ipkiss/The Mask Megas XLR – V'arsin Mickey and the Roadster Racers – José Carioca (2017–2018) Mickey Mouse – Referee Mickey Mouse Clubhouse – Toodles Mickey Mouse Funhouse – Funny the Funhouse Mickey Mouse Works – José Carioca Midnight Patrol: Adventures in the Dream Zone – Nightmare Prince The Mighty B! – Additional Voices Mighty Ducks – Shecky 'The Comedian' Carter, Dr. Swindle Mighty Max – Mighty Max Mrs. Munger's Class – Rock and Lance My Friends Tigger & Pooh – Raccoon The New Adventures of Jonny Quest – Hadji New Kids on the Block – Additional Voices The New Woody Woodpecker Show – Additional Voices The New Yogi Bear Show – La Bamba Bear Oh Yeah! Cartoons – Mother Goose, Home Owner Ozzy & Drix – Travis Lum, Backseat, Chief Maximus The Penguins of Madagascar – Ad Executive #1, Technician, Archie the Raccoon, Stockbroker, Guy #1, Stockbroker #1, Scout #1, Lobster #1, Kid Kazoo (voice) Pepper Ann – Larry, Danny Phantom 2040 – Sean One, Heisenberg, Additional Voices Phineas and Ferb – Additional Voices Pinky and the Brain – Pinky Pinky, Elmyra & the Brain – Pinky Planet Sheen – Doppy Dopweiler The Plucky Duck Show – Mr. Bughari, Furrball, Additional Voices Poochini's Yard – Additional Voices Pound Puppies – King (AKA No-Name) (uncredited) Pound Puppies (2010) – Pet Delivery Guy, Suds, Yakov The Powerpuff Girls – Brick, Boomer, Additional Voices Power Eons: Super Legends – Demeon (Ninja Storm) ProStars – Additional Voices A Pup Named Scooby-Doo – Professor Digby/Were-Doo Quack Pack – Nigel Nightshade Random! Cartoons – Solomon Fix, Danny, Tickle Monster, Handycat, Drillbit, and Flavio Randy Cunningham: 9th Grade Ninja – Jacques The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest – Hadji, Additional Voices The Replacements – Phil Mygrave, Fabian Le'Tool, Mr. Vanderbosh, Dr. Scorpius, Additional Voices Recess – Additional Voices Regular Show – Additional Voices Rick and Morty – Snowball Road Rovers – Gas Station Attendant Robot Chicken – S08E01 Garbage Sushi: Jesus, Dinosaur Train Singer, Little Match Girl's Father Robot and Monster – Bob, Scale Rocko's Modern Life – Additional Voices Rude Dog and the Dweebs – Rude Dog, Additional Voices Saber Rider and the Star Sheriffs – Saber Rider, Jesse Blue Sabrina: The Animated Series – Uncle Zamboni Samurai Jack – Rothchild Savage Dragon – Octopus Scooby-Doo! Ghastly Goals – Julio[24] Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated – Winslow Fleach, Radio Newsman Scruff – the Rats The Secret Saturdays – Baron Finster, Car Driver Slimer and the Real Ghostbusters – Robby, Additional Voices The Smurfs – Marco Smurf (1985) Snorks – Corky Sonic the Hedgehog – Antoine D'Coolette[24] South Park – Additional Voices Space Cats – Thomas 'Tom' Spacecat, Chelsie Pipshire Spider-Man – Morris Bench / Hydro-Man Squirrel Boy – Rodney J. Squirrel (pilot) Star vs. the Forces of Evil – Gustav / Charlie Booth Stripperella – Carl, Milton Gibbs SpongeBob SquarePants – Glove World officer (Episode: "Escape from Beneath Glove World"; uncredited)[25] Disney's The Emperor's New School – Overachiever’s Club Member The Super Hero Squad Show – Werewolf by Night, Baron Strucker Super Secret Secret Squirrel – Anteater, Snooper and Blabber SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron – Hard Drive, Al The Sylvester & Tweety Mysteries – Mechanic Tak and the Power of Juju – Party Juju, Judge Juju, Gillbert TaleSpin (Plunder & Lightning) – Ratchet and Dr. Debolt Tasty Time with ZeFronk – Frankie "ZeFronk" Taz-Mania – Digeri Dingo, Francis X. Bushlad, Axl Gator, Timothy Platypus, Marvin the Martian Teacher's Pet – Ian Wazselewski Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles – Raphael, Donatello 1987 – Raphael, 2012 Donnie, Zach the Fifth Turtle, Wingnut, HiTech, The Grybyx, Mister Ogg, Professor Sopho, Tokka, additional voices 2012 – Donatello, Speed Demon Donnie, Metalhead, 80's Raphael, Shopkeeper, Cat Owner, Other Guy, Sir Paul, Triceraton Pilot, Sumo Glen, Triceraton Commander, additional voices Rise of the TMNT – Foot Lieutenant Teen Titans – The Source, Quiz Monkey Host, Stunt Show Host Teen Titans Go! – Yakko Warner, Pinky The Upside Down Show – Cactus ThunderCats – Shen, Rezard The Tick (1994 TV series) – Arthur (Season 2 and Season 3), Brainchild (1st Time), Crusading Chameleon, Captain Mucilage, The Forehead, The Terror Tigger & Pooh and a Musical, Too- Raccoon The Transformers – Air Raid, Chase, Fastlane, Slingshot This Just In! – Jimmy Fallon Time Squad – Buck Tuddrussel Timon & Pumbaa – Banzai, Cheetata Tiny Toon Adventures – Arnold the Pitbull, Banjo the Woodpile Possum, Blink Winkleman, Concord Condor, Cooper DeVille, Fowlmouth, Foxy, Sneezer's Dad, Peter Hastings, Vanilla Lice, Beaky Buzzard and Furrball Tom & Jerry Kids – Additional Voices Totally Spies – Diminutive Smalls (Season 1), Asian guard TripTank – John, Groom, Dad T.U.F.F. Puppy – Bird Brain Ultimate Spider-Man – Batroc the Leaper, Boomerang, Additional Voices[24][26] Wake, Rattle, and Roll – D.E.C.K.S The Weekenders – Cousin Phillip, Carl What's New, Scooby-Doo? – Avery Orenthal, Government Agent, Jamison Steven Ripley, Travis Knox Where's Wally?: The Animated Series – Additional Voices Wild West C.O.W.-Boys of Moo Mesa – Cacklin' Kid Wildfire – Additional Voices The Wizard of Oz – Additional Voices Yo Yogi! – Dick 'Dickie' Dastardly, Chuck Toupee, Super Snooper, Robin Hood, Waiter, Wee Willie the Gorilla, Additional Voices VeggieTales – Mr. Finnegan J. Beet VeggieTales in the House – Ichabeezer, Bacon Bill, Junior's Dad, Tom Celeriac, Additional Voices. Video games[edit] Animaniacs Game Pack – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff Animaniacs: The Great Edgar Hunt – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff Animaniacs: Ten Pin Alley – Yakko Warner, Pinky, Dr. Otto Scratchansniff 102 Dalmatians: Puppies to the Rescue – Fluffy Armed and Dangerous – Captain 2, Grunt, Kato Armikrog – Beak-Beak, PresidANTs Baldur's Gate – Kivan, Volo, Prism, Telmen Baldur's Gate II – Shadows of Amn – Anomen Delryn, Saerk Farrahd, Biff the Understudy, Qadeel Barnyard – Peck Biker Mice from Mars – Throttle, Hairball, Claw Tooper Blazing Dragons – Mervin the Magician, Inventor of Baseball Bubsy 2 – Bubsy Bobcat Bubsy in Fractured Furry Tales – Bubsy Cedric's Basics In Education & Learning – Cedric Cat Clay Fighter 63 1/3 – Bonkers Disney's PK: Out of the Shadows – PK Doom 3 – Research Director Larry Bullman The Fairly OddParents: Breakin' da Rules – King Gripploun, Dog Catcher, Fairy Judge, Guard, Anti-Fairies, Squirrelly Scouts, Arthur, Gilded Arches The Fairly OddParents: Shadow Showdown – Mark Chang, Oberon, Quince, Ape King, Chamberlain, The Shadow Final Fantasy X-2 – Tobli, Additional Voices FusionFall – Major Glory Ghosthunter – Officer Lazarus Jones Giants: Citizen Kabuto – Timmy the Smartie God of War – Greek Soldier The Incredibles: Rise of the Underminer – The Crustodian Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius – Carl Wheezer, Yokian Fleet Commander, Yokian 1, Yokian 2, Yokian 3, Retroland Worker, Ultra-Lord (PC Version only) Jimmy Neutron vs. Jimmy Negatron – Carl Wheezer, The Herminator, Sporko's Employee, Sparko's Owner Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep – Jaq, Grand Duke Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes – Riddler Lost Odyssey – Technician Amures Metal Arms: Glitch in the System – Mil Grunts Metal Gear Solid: The Twin Snakes – Gray Fox (English dub) Nickelodeon Toon Twister 3D – Carl Wheezer Nicktoons Unite – Carl Wheezer Orion Burger – Wilbur Wafflemeier Planescape: Torment – Mortimer 'Morte' Rictusgrin Sacrifice – Zyzyx The Secret of Monkey Island: Special Edition – Bob, The Lookout, Alfredo Fettucini Skylanders: SuperChargers – Smash Hit Skylanders: Imaginators – Smash Hit The Sopranos: Road to Respect – Gil SpongeBob SquarePants featuring Nicktoons: Globs of Doom – Technus, Carl Wheezer, Traloc Super Smash Bros. Brawl – Gray Fox Super Smash Bros. Ultimate – Gray Fox Tak: The Great Juju Challenge – Dead Juju, Head 2, Tlaloc Tak and the Power of Juju – Tlaloc, Head 2, Dead Tak 2: The Staff of Dreams – Tlaloc, Dead Juju, Giant Misunderstanding Juju Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles video games – Raphael, Donatello Nickelodeon's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles – Donatello Portal Power –Donatello, 80's Raphael Turtles in Time – Raphael Toonstruck – Lugnut, Mee, Barman Live-action[edit] Big Time Rush – C.A.L. (uncredited), Parrot, Sam Selmart Body Double – Cameraman Comic Book: The Movie – Himself Eyes of Fire – Jewell Buchanan I Know That Voice – Himself[27] Hamburger: The Motion Picture – Security Guard MacGyver – Rogers Rosie – Texry "Hee Haw" Rose (13 episodes) Stewardess School – Larry Falkwell St. Elsewhere – Ryan S. Hope Warlock – Gas Station Attendant Internet[edit] Bravoman – Bravoman, Alpha Man, Additional Voices Sock Puppet Theatre – Various Voices Nostalgia Critic – Himself, Pinky Nickelodeon Animation Podcast – Himself (Episode 13, 35, 41) Demo Reel – Himself Speech Bubble – Himself[28] Theme parks[edit] Jimmy Neutron's Nicktoon Blast (2003) – Carl Wheezer Gran Fiesta Tour Starring The Three Caballeros (2007) – José Carioca References[edit] ^ Szabo, Barbara (March 7, 2007). "Talent Agent Lectures for Mary Pickford Series". Corsair Newspaper – Santa Monica College. Retrieved October 19, 2014 – via California Digital Newspaper Collection. ^ Forman, Ross (November 8, 1994). "Cartoon-voice Actor Is All Talk". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved August 28, 2010. ^ https://robpaulsenlive.com/about-us/ ^ https://blogs.lib.msu.edu/red-tape/2017/oct/october-10-1954-rob-paulsen-iii-born/ ^ Rosbury, Alison (January 4, 2016). "Laughter is the Best Medicine Q&A with Rob Paulsen". MyCity Magazine. Retrieved October 21, 2019. ^ Williamson, Anna (September 28, 2012). "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles' – preview". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 10, 2019. ^ Petski, Denise (November 2, 2017). "'Rise Of The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles': Ben Schwartz, Kat Graham Among Voice Cast". Deadline. Retrieved March 10, 2019. ^ Hogan, Ron (April 4, 2019). "The Tick: The History of a Laugh-Out-Loud Superhero Satire". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on 31 October 2019. Retrieved 2019-12-11. ^ Nordine, Michael (2018-11-18). "'Pinky and the Brain' Voice Actors Hint at Reboot: 'If We Get Our Show Back…'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 2019-12-11. ^ Pastrick, Chris (October 9, 2019). "Original voices set to return for 'Animaniacs' reboot on Hulu". The Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 9, 2019. ^ Kickstarter (June 4, 2013). "V.O. Spotlight – Rob Paulsen". Retrieved 2013-06-20. ^ Behind the Voice Actors: Prince Eric Behind the Voice Actors, Retrieved January 5, 2015 ^ "CCI: ShiftyLook Announces New Webcomics, Animated Projects". ComicbookResources.com. Retrieved 15 December 2012. ^ "Talking Toons with Rob Paulsen on TechJives.net". Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ "Talking Toons with Rob Paulsen on Nerdist Industries". Nerdist Industries. Retrieved 17 December 2019. ^ Lucas Ackley & Chris Robison. "Rob Paulsen comes to Atlanta by BigShinyRobot.com". Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ a b By N.F. Mendoza (1995-12-17). "It's a Living : Voices From Within : How Rob Paulsen Gives Life to his Cartoon Characters". latimes.com. Retrieved 2019-12-19. ^ Lawson, Tim (2004). The Magic Behind the Voices: A Who's Who of Cartoon Voice Actors. Persons. ISBN 9780786486946. ^ a b "Rob Paulsen of Grand Blanc voicing holiday special". MLive.com. Retrieved 20 October 2014. ^ Radio, Southern California Public (21 December 2016). "Voice actors: Unseen heroes of film and TV, Part II". ^ Paulson, Rob (October 8, 2019). Voice Lessons: How a Couple of Ninja Turtles, Pinky, and an Animaniac Saved My Life. Viva Editions. p. 264. ISBN 978-1632280664. ^ a b Charles Grosvenor (producer, director) (2002). The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water (Film). Universal Studios. ^ @yakkopinky (July 29, 2012). "My voice, yes. RT @kaarval: @yakkopinky were you really in spaceballs???" (Tweet) – via Twitter. ^ a b c "Rob Paulsen (visual voices guide)". BTVA. Retrieved 8 March 2021. A green check mark indicates that a role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of a title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its opening and/or closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.CS1 maint: postscript (link) ^ https://web.archive.org/web/20190410224309/https://www.instagram.com/p/BwF42IlA4uw/ ^ "Burrito Run". Ultimate Spider-Man. Season 3. Episode 17. July 28, 2015. Disney XD. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "I Know That Voice, A Documentary About the World of Voice Acting". Laughing Squid. Retrieved October 6, 2014. ^ Butch Hartman Ep. 7 – FULL Rob Paulsen Podcast – with Butch and Jace on YouTube External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rob Paulsen. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Official website Rob Paulsen at SBV Talent Rob Paulsen Talkin' Toon Live Weekly Video Podcast on Ustream API at IMDb Rob Paulsen at Voicechasers.com v t e Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program Lily Tomlin (1995) Nathan Lane (1996) Louie Anderson (1997) Louie Anderson (1998) Rob Paulsen (1999) James Woods (2000) Nathan Lane (2001) Charles Shaughnessy (2002) Gregory Hines (2003) Joe Alaskey (2004) Henry Winkler (2005) Maile Flanagan (2006) Eartha Kitt (2007) Eartha Kitt (2008) Jim Ward (2009) Eartha Kitt (2010) Danny Jacobs (2011) June Foray (2012) David Tennant (2013) Hayley Faith Negrin (2014) Danny Jacobs (2015) Jeff Bennett (2016) Kelsey Grammer (2017) Tom Kenny (2018) Jay Baruchel (2019) Tom Kenny (2020) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125