Film genre "Love film" redirects here. For the UK-based video service, see LoveFilm. For other uses, see Romance. Tyrone Power passionately embraces Alice Faye in the 1938 film Alexander's Ragtime Band. Romance films or romance movies are romantic love stories recorded in visual media for broadcast in theaters and on TV that focus on passion, emotion, and the affectionate romantic involvement of the main characters and the journey that their love takes them through dating, courtship or marriage. Romance films make the romantic love story or the search for strong and pure love and romance the main plot focus. Occasionally, romance lovers face obstacles such as finances, physical illness, various forms of discrimination, psychological restraints or family that threaten to break their union of love. As in all quite strong, deep, and close romantic relationships, tensions of day-to-day life, temptations (of infidelity), and differences in compatibility enter into the plots of romantic films.[1] Romantic films often explore the essential themes of love at first sight, young with older love, unrequited romantic love, obsessive love, sentimental love, spiritual love, forbidden love, platonic love, sexual and passionate love, sacrificial love, explosive and destructive love, and tragic love. Romantic films serve as great escapes and fantasies for viewers, especially if the two people finally overcome their difficulties, declare their love, and experience life "happily ever after", implied by a reunion and final kiss. In romantic television series, the development of such romantic relationships may play out over many episodes or different characters may become intertwined in different romantic arcs. Screenwriter and scholar Eric R. Williams identifies Romance Films as one of eleven super-genres in his screenwriters’ taxonomy, claiming that all feature length narrative films can be classified by these super-genres. The other ten super-genres are Action, Crime, Fantasy, Horror, Science Fiction, Slice of Life, Sports, Thriller, War and Western.[2] Contents 1 Subgenres 1.1 Historical romance 1.2 Romantic drama 1.3 Chick flick 1.4 Bromantic comedy 1.5 Romantic comedy 1.6 Romantic action 1.7 Romantic thriller 1.8 Gothic romance 1.9 Romantic fantasy 1.10 Paranormal romance 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Subgenres[edit] Poster for Gone With the Wind (1939). Historical romance[edit] Main article: Historical romance Also known as Epic romance, this is a romantic story with a historical period setting, normally with a turbulent backdrop of war, revolution or tragedy. This includes films such as Titanic, Gone with the Wind, Reds, Doctor Zhivago and Cold War (Zimna wojna). Romantic drama[edit] Romantic dramas usually revolve around an obstacle which prevents deep and true love between two people. Music is often employed to indicate the emotional mood, creating an atmosphere of greater insulation for the couple. The conclusion of a romantic drama typically does not indicate whether a final romantic union between the two main characters will occur. Some examples of romantic drama films are Casablanca, Before Midnight, The Artist, Slumdog Millionaire, Up in the Air, Gloria Bell, Before Sunset, Before Sunrise , Shakespeare in Love, The Bridges of Madison County, The English Patient, María Candelaria, Daughters of the Dust, Sommersby, Coming Home, Big Night, Memoirs of a Geisha, Last Tango in Paris, Water for Elephants, On the Waterfront, Love Story, Man's Way with Women, Like Water for Chocolate (film) and Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge. Same-sex romantic dramas, which tackle LGBT issues include Brokeback Mountain, Blue Is the Warmest Colour and Call Me by Your Name.[3] Chick flick[edit] Main article: Chick flick Chick flick is a term often associated with romance films as many are targeted to a female audience.[4][5] Although many romance films may be targeted at women, this is not a defining characteristic of a romance film and a chick flick does not necessarily have a romance as a central theme, revolve around the romantic involvement of characters or even contain a romantic relationship. As such, the terms cannot be used interchangeably. Films of this genre include Gilda, The Lost Weekend, The Red Shoes (1948 film), Sense and Sensibility (film), Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, Dirty Dancing, The Notebook, Dear John, A Walk to Remember, and Romeo + Juliet. Bromantic comedy[edit] Main article: Bromantic comedy A bromantic comedy is a comedy film genre that takes the formula of the typical “romantic comedy” but focuses on close male friendships.[6] The word “bromance” is a close but non-sexual relationship between two or more men.[7] Notable bromantic comedy films are Shaun of the Dead, Superbad, I Love You, Man, Step Brothers, Bull Durham, and About a Boy (film).[8] Popular and common elements or themes of bromantic comedies include; male bonding, bromance, and conflicts with walter white bonding, with the addition of humour.[9] Aspects of bromantic comedies, including male camaraderie, were first seen in Barry Levinson's 1982 film Diner.[10] Romantic comedy[edit] Main article: Romantic comedy Romantic comedies are films with light-hearted, humorous plotlines, centered on romantic ideals such as that true love is able to surmount most obstacles. Humour in such films tends to be of a verbal, low-key variety or situational, as opposed to slapstick.[11] Films within this genre include City Lights, A Night at the Opera, It Happened One Night, The Philadelphia Story, Roman Holiday, The Big Sick, Enough Said, Lost In Translation, To All the Boys I've Loved Before, Four Weddings and a Funeral, Dave (film), Say Anything..., Moonstruck, As Good as It Gets, Something's Gotta Give, When Harry Met Sally..., Annie Hall, Manhattan, The Apartment and Pablo and Carolina. Romantic action[edit] Romantic action is a film that blend romance and action. Examples include Foreign Correspondent, The Best Years of Our Lives , The Adventures of Robin Hood, From Here to Eternity, The Quiet Man, The Torch (film), The Town, Killers, Knight and Day, Mr. & Mrs. Smith, This Means War and The Bounty Hunter. Romantic thriller[edit] Main article: Romantic thriller Romantic thriller is a genre of film which has a storyline combining elements of the romance film and the thriller genre. Some examples of romantic thriller films are To Catch a Thief, Vertigo (film), The Adjustment Bureau, West Side Story, The Phantom of the Opera, The Tourist, The Crying Game, Unfaithful, and Wicker Park.[12] Gothic romance[edit] Main article: Gothic romance film Gothic romance is a film genre which includes gothic elements and affirms feminine experiences, perceptions and interpretations of their “fear, anger, and distrust of patriarchal order”.[13] A key feature of gothic romance films is the “Bluebeard motif”. This typically refers to secrets or forbidden rooms or areas in a house, which represent female protagonists’ repressions. This common characteristic is based on a variation of the Bluebeard folktale of a wealthy man who forbids his new wife from entering his castle's underground chamber, to which she finds the corpses of his many former wives. Some examples of gothic romance films include Crimson Peak, Rebecca, Suspicion and Gaslight. Romantic fantasy[edit] Main article: Romantic fantasy Romantic fantasies describe fantasy stories using many of the elements and conventions of the romance genre. Some examples include The Lady Eve, Top Hat, The Umbrellas of Cherbourg (Les Parapluies de Cherbourg), Singin' in the Rain, Groundhog Day (film), Enchanted, Cinderella, Beauty and the Beast (2017 film), Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind, Midnight in Paris, and Her.[14] Paranormal romance[edit] Paranormal romance is a popular genre of film which features romantic relationships between humans and supernatural creatures.[15] Popular tropes include vampirism, time-travel, ghosts and psychic or telekinetic abilities - i.e. things that cannot be explained by science.[16] The genre originated in literature and moved on to the screen in the early 2000s, following the success of the Twilight Saga adaptations from Stephanie Meyer’s books.[17] By 2007–8, film studios were producing various paranormal romance films, many adapted from novels.[17]  Examples of paranormal romance films include The Shape of Water, Warm Bodies, The Twilight Saga, Emerald Green, Vampire Academy, I Am Dragon and The Exterminating Angel.[18] See also[edit] List of romance films AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions Romantic comedy Drama film Interracial romance film Romance novel Romance (love) References[edit] ^ "Romance films". Filmsite.org. Retrieved 10 November 2016. ^ Williams, Eric R. (2017). The screenwriters taxonomy : a roadmap to collaborative storytelling. New York, NY: Routledge Studies in Media Theory and Practice. ISBN 978-1-315-10864-3. OCLC 993983488. ^ Dixon, Wheeler W. (2000), Film genre 2000: new critical essays, The SUNY series, cultural studies in cinema/video, SUNY Press, p. 238, ISBN 0-7914-4514-3 ^ Simpson, John, ed. (2009). Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition, on CD-ROM Version 4.0. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-956383-8. ^ Stevenson, Angus; Lindberg, Christine A., eds. (2010). New Oxford American Dictionary, Third Edition. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 300. ISBN 978-0-19-539288-3. ^ "Patterson, John Edward, (died 4 April 1919), littérateur", Who Was Who, Oxford University Press, 2007-12-01, doi:10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u201429 ^ "Reading the bromance: homosocial relationships in film and television". Choice Reviews Online. 52 (2): 52–0739-52-0739. 2014-09-22. doi:10.5860/choice.52-0739. ISSN 0009-4978. ^ "Best "Bro" Movies (Bromance)". IMDb. Retrieved 2019-11-27. ^ Moss, Chris (2016-02-01). "A fine bromance: the 12 rules of male friendship". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 2019-11-27. ^ Macdougall, John (2014-01-18). "The New Yorker & Me: Barry Levinson's "Diner": Kael vs. Wolcott". The New Yorker & Me. Retrieved 2019-11-27. ^ "Romantic Comedy". AllRovi. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2016. ^ "Wicker Park (2004)". AllRovi. Archived from the original on 27 October 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2016. ^ Waldman, Diane (1984). ""At Last I Can Tell It to Someone!": Feminine Point of View and Subjectivity in the Gothic Romance Film of the 1940s". Cinema Journal. 23 (2): 29–40. doi:10.2307/1225123. JSTOR 1225123. ^ William C. Robinson (October 2004). "A Few Thoughts on the Fantasy Genre". University of Tennessee, Knoxville. Retrieved 18 January 2009. ^ Panse, S.; Rothermel, D. (2014-04-24). A Critique of Judgment in Film and Television. Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-01418-4. ^ Tobin-McClain, Lee (2000). "Paranormal Romance: Secretsof the Female Fantastic". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 11 (3 (43)): 294–306. ISSN 0897-0521. JSTOR 43308461. ^ a b Crawford, Joseph. (2014). The twilight of the Gothic. Vampire fiction and the rise of the paranormal romance. University of Wales Press. ISBN 978-1-78316-064-8. OCLC 894201495. ^ "paranormal romance". IMDb. Retrieved 2019-11-27. External links[edit] IMDb guide to Romance movies v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125