This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Persian. (November 2020) Click [show] for important translation instructions. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Persian Wikipedia article at [[:fa:]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated page}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. The Seven Labors of Rustam (Persian: هفت خان رستم‎, romanized: Haftkhān-e-Rostam) are a series of acts carried out by the greatest of the Iranian heroes, Rostam, This story was retold by Ferdowsi in his epic poem, Shahnameh. Seven Labours, is seven difficult steps that Rostam did. In his labors, Rostam was often accompanied only by his horse, Rakhsh. In two of his labors, he was also accompanied by a champion, Olad. The Haftkhān[edit] According to the traditional narrative, the story starts when Kay Kāvus's expedition to Mazandaran fails, and the army are captured by the Divs. Rostam engages to liberate them, and proceeds by the labors. The traditional order of the labors is: The First Labor: The First Labor Rostam goes to sleep among the reeds. In a short space, a fierce lion appears, and attacks his horse Rakhsh with violence; but Rakhsh very speedily with his teeth and heels tries to kill the lion. Rostam, awakened by the confusion, and seeing the dead lion and the wounded Rakhsh before him, heals his favorite companion. Then, he remounts Rakhsh, and proceeds on his journey towards Mazanderan. The Second Labor: Rostam enters a desert, in which no water is to be found. Both horse and rider become oppressed with thirst and therefore, Rostam prays to God. Under the influence of a raging sun, Rostam sees a sheep pass by, which he hails as the harbinger of good. Rising up and grasping his sword in his hand, he follows the animal, and comes to a fountain of water, where he devoutly returns thanks to God for the blessing which had preserved his existence. The Third Labor: Rostam kills a dragon. 17th-century Persian manuscript. At midnight a monstrous dragon serpent issues from the forest; Rakhsh retires towards his master, and neighs and beats the ground so furiously, that Rostam is awakened. Looking round on every side, however, he sees nothing as the dragon had vanished, and he goes to sleep again. The dragon again appears, and the faithful horse tries to rouse his sleeping master. Rostam again is awakened, and is again angry; but at this moment sufficient light is providentially given for him to see the prodigious cause of alarm. Rostam succeeds to slay the dragon. The Fourth Labor: Rostam, having resumed the saddle, continues his journey through an enchanted territory, and in the evening comes to a beautifully green spot, refreshed by flowing rivulets, where he finds, to his surprise, a ready roasted deer, and some bread and salt. He sits down near the enchanted provisions, which vanished at the sound of his voice, and presently a tambourine meets his eyes, and a flask of wine. Taking up the instrument, he plays upon it, and chants a ditty about his own wanderings, and the exploits which he most loves. The song happens to reach the ears of a sorceress, who, arrayed in all the charms of beauty, suddenly approaches him, and sits down by his side. The champion put up a prayer of gratitude for having been supplied with food and wine, and music, in the desert of Mazanderan, and not knowing that the enchantress was a demon in disguise, he places in her hands a cup of wine in the name of God; but at the mention of the Creator, the enchanted form is converted into a black fiend. Seeing this, Rostem throws his lasso, and secures the demon; and, drawing his sword, at once cut the body in two equal parts. The Fifth Labor: by Mohammadreza Ghorbani Rostam conquers the Mazandarani champion Olad Div, who describes the caves of the demons. The Sixth Labor: Arzhang in Shahnameh of Shah Tahmasp Rostam enters the city of Mazanderan, and releases Kai Kavus, though still blind by the sorcery of the demons and killed Arzhang Div. The Seventh Labor: Rostam killed Div-e-Sepid Rostam fight Div-e-Sepid Rostam overthrows and kills Div-e-Sepid, the White Demon. The blood of the White Demon's heart restores Kai Kavus's sight. Rostam also kills the magician king of Mazandaran (not to be confused with Mazandaran Province) and returns to Estakhr accompanied by the Shah. See also[edit] Esfandiyār's Seven Labors another story of Shahnameh like this story. Seven difficult labor that Esfandiyār did. Sources and references[edit] Abolqasem Ferdowsi, Dick Davis trans. (2006), Shahnameh: The Persian Book of Kings ISBN 0-670-03485-1, modern English translation (abridged), current standard Warner, Arthur and Edmond Warner, (translators) The Shahnama of Firdausi, 9 vols. (London: Keegan Paul, 1905-1925) (complete English verse translation) Shirzad Aghaee, Nam-e kasan va ja'i-ha dar Shahnama-ye Ferdousi(Personalities and Places in the Shahnama of Ferdousi, Nyköping, Sweden, 1993. ( ISBN 91-630-1959-0) Jalal Khāleghi Motlagh, Editor, The Shahnameh, to be published in 8 volumes (ca. 500 pages each), consisting of six volumes of text and two volumes of explanatory notes. See: Center for Iranian Studies, Columbia University. v t e Ferdowsi Books Shahnameh Places Ferdowsi Metro Station Ferdowsi Square, Tehran Ferdowsi Street Ferdowsi Street, Tabriz Ferdowsi University of Mashhad Tomb of Ferdowsi Lands Ghazni List of places in Shahnameh Turan Tus Zabulistan Organizations Firdeusi Institute People Abolhassan Sadighi Abu-Mansur Daqiqi Asadi Tusi Bondari Esfahani Hooshang Seyhoun Julius von Mohl Keikhosrow Shahrokh Mir Jalaleddin Kazzazi Mohammad-Ali Eslami Nodooshan Mohammad-Amin Riahi Memorial Ferdowsi millennial celebration Ferdowsi millennial celebration in Berlin Firdousi (crater) Depictions in others' Works Ferdowsi (film) A New Prologue to the Shahnameh Related Abu-Mansuri Shahnameh Bizhan Nama Borzu Nama Derafsh Kaviani Kurdish Shahnameh Persian art Persian mythology Persians and I Rostam and Sohrab (opera) Rustam and Zohrab Rustom O Sohrab Category Book Template v t e Shahnameh of Ferdowsi Characters Pishdadian Keyumars Hushang Tahmuras Jamshid Fereydun Iraj Manuchehr Nowzar Zaav Garshasp Kayanian Kay Kawād Kay Kāvus Kay Khosrow Kay Lohrasp Goshtasb Kay Bahman Humay Chehrzad Kay Darab Dara Male characters Jamasp Siamak Shahrasp Abtin Kayanoush Kāve Arash Salm Tur Qobád Qaren Tous Gostaham Gershasp Nariman Sām Zāl Rostam Sohrab Esfandiyār Pashotan Faramarz Fariborz Siyâvash Farud Zangay-i Shavaran Kashvad Goudarz Giv Bizhan Rohham Bahram Hojir Gorgin Zavara Shaghad Rostam Farrokhzād Female characters Faranak Arnavāz Shahrnāz Sindukht Rudaba Sudabeh Tahmina Banu Goshasp Gordafarid Farangis Manizheh Katāyoun Tazian Mardas Zahhak Mehrab Kaboli Turanian Zadashm Pashang Aghrirat Garsivaz Afrasiab Tageuo Shideh Arjasp Viseh Piran Houman Barman Nastihan Biderafsh Clans and families Kashvadian House of Goudarz House of Viseh House of Nowzar House of Sasan House of Sām Creatures and animals Akvan Div Kharvazan Div Arzhang Div Div-e Sepid Koulad-Ghandi Huma bird Simurgh Rakhsh Shabdiz Shabrang White Elephant Places Iran Turan Zabulistan Sistan Kabul Balkh Ctesiphon Estakhr Mazandaran Alborzkouh Mount Damavand Tammisha Kasa-Roud ... Structures Dez-i Gonbadan Dez-i Roein Dezh-i sepid Dezh-i Bahman Dezh-i Alanan Gang-Dez Manuscripts Baysonghor Shahnameh Shahnameh of Shah Tahmasp Florence Shahnameh Shahnameh of Rashida Windsor Shahnameh Great Mongol Shahnameh (or Demotte) Shahnameh of Ghavam al-Din Davari Shahnameh See also Daqiqi Abu-Mansuri Shahnameh Derafsh Kaviani Babr-e Bayan Zal and Rudabeh Rostam and Sohrab Rostam and Esfandiyar Rostam's Seven Labours Davazdah Rokh Khosrow and Shirin Bijan and Manijeh Persian mythology Category This article related to the Shahnameh is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e