Heraldic and vexillogical symbol in the form of a diagonal cross "X-cross" redirects here. For the film, see X-Cross. Not to be confused with Saltair (disambiguation). A diagonal cross (decussate cross, saltire, St. Andrew's Cross) A saltire, also called Saint Andrew's Cross or the crux decussata,[1] is a heraldic symbol in the form of a diagonal cross, like the shape of the letter X in Roman type. The word comes from the Middle French sautoir, Middle Latin saltatoria ("stirrup").[2] From its use as field sign, the saltire came to be used in a number of flags, in the 16th century for Scotland and Burgundy, in the 18th century also as the ensign of the Russian Navy, and for Ireland. Notable 19th-century usage includes some of the flags of the Confederate States of America. It is also used in the flag of Jamaica and on seals, and as a heraldic charge in coats of arms. The term saltirewise or in saltire refers to heraldic charges arranged as a diagonal cross. The shield may also be divided per saltire, i.e. diagonally. A warning sign in the shape of a saltire is also used to indicate the point at which a railway line intersects a road at a level crossing. In Unicode, a decussate cross is encoded at U+2613 ☓ SALTIRE (HTML &#9747;). Contents 1 Heraldry and vexillology 1.1 Scotland 1.2 Cross of Burgundy 1.3 Gascony 1.4 Maritime flags 1.5 Others 2 Christian symbol 3 Other 4 Gallery 4.1 Coats of arms 4.2 Flags 4.3 Military insignia 4.4 Orders 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Heraldry and vexillology[edit] Further information: Crosses in heraldry § Ordinary cross Coat of arms of the counts of Ötingen (Oettingen): Azure a bordure vair ancien gules and or, a saltire argent over all (attested from as early as 1180,[3] here in the depiction in the Zürich armorial, c. 1340). The saltire is one of the so-called ordinaries, geometric charges that span throughout (from edge to edge of) the shield. As suggested by the name saltire ("stirrup"; in French: sautoir, in German: Schragen), the ordinary in its early use was not intended as representing a Christian cross symbol. The association with Saint Andrew is a development of the 15th to 16th centuries. The Cross of Burgundy emblem originates in the 15th century, as a field sign, and as the Saint Andrew's Cross of Scotland was used in flags or banners (but not in coats of arms) from the 16th century, and used as naval ensign during the Age of Sail. When two or more saltires appear, they are usually blazoned as couped (cut off). For example, contrast the single saltire in the arms granted to G. M. W. Anderson[a]—with the three saltires couped in the coat of Kemble Greenwood.[b] Diminutive forms include the fillet saltire,[c] usually considered half or less the width of the saltire, and the saltorel, a narrow or couped saltire. A field (party) per saltire is divided into four areas by a saltire-shaped "cut". If two tinctures are specified, the first refers to the areas above (in chief) and below (in base) the crossing, and the second refers to the ones on either side (in the flanks).[d] Otherwise, each of the four divisions may be blazoned separately. The phrase in saltire or saltirewise is used in two ways: Two long narrow charges "in saltire" are placed to cross each other diagonally. Common forms include the crossed keys found in the arms of many entities associated with Saint Peter and paired arrows.[e] When five or more compact charges are "in saltire", they are arranged with one in the center and the others along the arms of an invisible saltire.[f][g] Division of the field per saltire was notably used by the Aragonese kings of Sicily beginning in the 14th century (Frederick the Simple), showing the pales of Aragon and the "Hohenstaufen" eagle (argent an eagle sable). Scotland[edit] Flag of Scotland The Flag of Scotland, called The Saltire or Saint Andrew's Cross, is a blue field with a white saltire. According to tradition, it represents Saint Andrew, who is supposed to have been crucified on a cross of that form (called a crux decussata) at Patras, Greece. The Saint Andrew's Cross was worn as a badge on hats in Scotland, on the day of the feast of Saint Andrew.[1] In the politics of Scotland, both the Scottish National Party and Scottish Conservative Party use stylised saltires as their party logos, deriving from the flag of Scotland. Prior to the Union the Royal Scots Navy used a red ensign incorporating the St Andrew's Cross; this ensign is now sometimes flown as part of an unofficial civil ensign in Scottish waters. With its colours exchanged (and a lighter blue), the same design forms part of the arms and flag of Nova Scotia (whose name means "New Scotland"). Cross of Burgundy[edit] Cross of Burgundy The Cross of Burgundy, a form of the Saint Andrew's Cross, is used in numerous flags across Europe and the Americas. It was first used in the 15th century as an emblem by the Valois Dukes of Burgundy. The Duchy of Burgundy, forming a large part of eastern France and the Low Countries, was inherited by the House of Habsburg on the extinction of the Valois ducal line. The emblem was therefore assumed by the monarchs of Spain as a consequence of the Habsburgs bringing together, in the early 16th century, their Burgundian inheritance with the other extensive possessions they inherited throughout Europe and the Americas, including the crowns of Castile and Aragon. As a result, the Cross of Burgundy has appeared in a wide variety of flags connected with territories formerly part of the Burgundian or Habsburg inheritance. Examples of such diversity include the Spanish naval ensign (1506-1701), the flag of Carlism (a nineteenth century Spanish conservative movement), the flag of the Dutch capital of Amsterdam and municipality of Eijsden, the flag of Chuquisaca in Bolivia and the flags of the US states of Florida and Alabama. Gascony[edit] Flag of Gascony Lo Sautèr (the Saltire) The Gascony does not have any institutional unity since the 11th century, hence several flags are currently used on the territory. The legend says that this flag appeared in the time of pope Clément III to gather the Gascons during the Third crusade (12th century). That flag, sometimes called "Union Gascona" (Gascon Union), contains the St Andrew's cross, the patron saint of Bordeaux and the red color of English kingdom, who reigned over Gascony from 12th to mid-15th century. In the tome 14 of the Grande Encyclopédie, published in France between 1886 and 1902 by Henri Lamirault, it is written that during the hard times of the Hundred Years' War and the terrible struggles between the Armagnacs, representing the national party (white cross) and the Burgundians, allied to the English (red cross and red Saint-Andrews' cross), the flag of the victorious English ends up gathering, in 1422, under Henri VI, on its field the white and red crosses of France and England, the white and red Saint-Andrew's crosses of Guyenne and Burgundy. [10] That saltire is also represented in the pattern of some talenquères in many bullrings in Gascony.[11] St Andrew's flag, used by the Russian Navy Maritime flags[edit] The naval ensign of the Imperial Russian (1696–1917) and Russian navies (1991–present) is a blue saltire on a white field. The international maritime signal flag for M is a white saltire on a blue background, and indicates a stopped vessel. A red saltire on a white background denotes the letter V and the message "I require assistance". Others[edit] The Brazilian cities of Rio de Janeiro and Fortaleza also use a blue saltire on a white field, with their coats-of-arms at the hub. The flags of the Spanish island of Tenerife and the remote Colombian islands of San Andrés and Providencia also use a white saltire on a blue field. Saltires are also seen in several other flags, including the flags of Grenada, Jamaica, Alabama, Florida, Jersey, Logroño, Vitoria, Amsterdam, Breda, Katwijk, Potchefstroom, The Bierzo and Valdivia, as well as the former Indian princely states of Khairpur, Rajkot and Jaora. The design is also part of the Confederate Battle Flag and Naval Jack used during the American Civil War (see Flags of the Confederate States of America). Arthur L. Rogers, designer of the final version of the Confederate National flag, claimed that it was based on the saltire of Scotland.[12] The saltire is used on modern-day Southern U.S. state flags to honour the former Confederacy.[13] Christian symbol[edit] Anne Roes (1937) identifies a design consisting of two crossing diagonal lines in a rectangle, sometimes with four dots or balls in the four quarters, as an emblem or vexillum (standard) of Persepolis during the 3rd to 2nd centuries BC. Roes also finds the design in Argive vase painting, and still earlier in button seals of the Iranian Chalcolithic. Roes also notes the occurrence of a very similar if not identical vexillum which repeatedly occurs in Gaulish coins of c. the 2nd to 1st century BC, in a recurring design where it is held by a charioteer in front of his human-headed horse.[14] A large number of coins of this type (118 out of 152 items) forms part of the Les Sablons hoard of the 1st century BC, discovered in Le Mans between 1991 and 1997, associated with the Cenomani.[15] The same design is found on coins of Christian Roman emperors of the 4th to 5th centuries (Constantius II, Valentinian, Jovian, Gratianus, Valens, Arcadius, Constantine III, Jovinus, Theodosius I, Eugenius and Theodosius II). The letter Χ (Chi) was from an early time used as a symbol for Christ (unrelated to the Christian cross symbol, which at the time was given a T-shape). The vexillum on imperial coins from the 4th century was sometimes shown as the Labarum, surmounted by or displaying the Chi-Rho monogram rather than just the crux decussata. The emblem of the crux decussata in a rectangle, sometimes with four dots or balls, re-appears in coins the Byzantine Empire, in the 9th to 10th centuries. Roes suggested that early Christians endorsed its solar symbolism as appropriate to Christ.[16] Gold stater of the Cenomani, on the reverse an androcephalous horse led by a charioteer extending a vexillum in front of it, riding over a fallen enemy. Coin of Theodosius I (393–395), with a vexillum displaying a crux decussata Coin of Theodosius II (425–429), showing the emperor with globus cruciger and with the same vexillum The association with Saint Andrew develops in the late medieval period. The tradition according to which this saint was crucified on a decussate cross is not found in early hagiography. Depictions of Saint Andrew being crucified in this manner first appear in the 10th century, but do not become standard before the 17th century.[17] Reference to the saltire as "St Andrew's Cross" is made by the Parliament of Scotland (where Andrew had been adopted as patron saint) in 1385, in a decree to the effect that every Scottish and French soldier (fighting against the English under Richard II) "shall have a sign before and behind, namely a white St. Andrew's Cross".[18] Saint Andrew martyred on a decussate cross (miniature from an East Anglian missal, c. 1320) Saint Andrew holding his cross on a Taler of Ernest Augustus, Elector of Brunswick-Lüneburg (1688) Other[edit] Main article: X mark Chemical hazard The diagonal cross (decussate cross) or X mark is called "saltire" in heraldic and vexillological contexts. A black diagonal cross was used in an old European Union standard as the hazard symbol for irritants (Xi) or harmful chemicals (Xn). It indicated a hazard less severe than skull and crossbones, used for poisons, or the corrosive sign. The Maria Theresa thaler has a Roman numeral ten to symbolize the 1750 debasement of the coinage, from 9 to 10 thalers to the Vienna mark (a weight of silver). A diagonal cross known as "crossbuck" is used as the conventional road sign used to indicate the point at which a railway line intersects a road at a level crossing, called a in this context. A white diagonal cross on a blue background (or black on yellow for temporary signs) is displayed in UK railway signalling as a "cancelling indicator" for the Automatic Warning System (AWS), informing the driver that the received warning can be disregarded. In Cameroon, a red "X" placed on illegally constructed buildings scheduled for demolition is occasionally referred to as a "St Andrew's Cross". It is usually accompanied by the letters "A.D." ("à détruire"—French for "to be demolished") and a date or deadline. During a campaign of urban renewal by the Yaoundé Urban Council in Cameroon, the cross was popularly referred to as "Tsimi's Cross" after the Government Delegate to the council, Gilbert Tsimi Evouna.[19] In traditional timber framing a pair of crossing braces is sometimes called a saltire or a St. Andrew's Cross.[20] Half-timbering, particularly in France and Germany, has patterns of framing members forming many different symbols known as ornamental bracing.[21] Gallery[edit] Coats of arms[edit] Gules a saltire argent (Neville) Azure a saltire or (Saint Alban's Cross, St Albans 1634)[22] Argent a saltire azure (Katwijk) Per saltire azure and argent, a saltire gules (Gage of Hengrave) Argent on a saltire engrailed sable nine annulets of the field (Earl of Scarsdale) Quarterly 1st & 4th: Barry of six [seven] vair and gules; 2nd & 3rd: Gules, a saltire vair (Henry Beaumont of Devon, d.1591) Argent a saltire floretty gules (Busséol) Gules a fillet saltire couped argent above a wheel of the same (Klein-Winternheim) Coat of arms of the San Andrés Archipelago saltirewise Gules two keys in saltire argent (Coats of arms of the Holy See and Vatican City) Gules a cross saltire and orle of chains linked together or, in the fess point an emerald vert (Kingdom of Navarre) Gules two keys argent saltirewise (Papal coat of arms for Pope Nicholas V, 1447) Argent five martlets saltirewise sable on a chief azure three ducal crowns or (Bodley) Vert bordure or a caduceus argent and or and a cornucopia or with fruits and vegetables proper saltirewise (Coat of arms of Kharkiv, Ukraine) Vert bordure or a torch and a caduceus or saltirewise (Federal Customs Service of Russia) in supporters Papal coat of arms for Pope Innocent VIII with the Keys of Peter saltirewise (Wernigerode Armorial, c. 1490) Royal Coat of Arms of Spain (1700–1761)[23] Coat of arms of Spain (1874–1931)[23] Coat of arms of Barbados with Sugar Cane held saltirewise. Coat of arms of the House of Braganza. Flags[edit] Jamaica's flag {Flag of Jamaica) Vatican City's flag (Flag of Vatican City) Saint Alban's flag (13th century) Naval flag of the Kingdom of Sicily (after Guillem Soler c. 1380), inheriting the per saltire division from the royal coat of arms. Flag of Scotland (c. 1507)[24] Flag of Gascony (15th century?[10]) Cross of Burgundy Flag, Duchy of Burgundy and Burgundian Netherlands (15th century) Cross of Burgundy Flag, Spanish Empire (16th century) Tercio de la Liga (1571) Saint Patrick's Flag (1783) Union Jack (1606) Union Jack in Scotland (1606) Union Jack (1801) Unknown Tercio flag (appears near commander Ambrogio Spinola in the painting "The Surrender of Breda" of Diego Velázquez) (1621) Tercio de Alburquerque (1643) Tercio Morados Viejos (1670) Tercio Amarillos Viejos (1680) Coatzacoalcos, Veracruz Tampico, Tamaulipas Scottish Covenanter flag (17th century) Flag of Argyll's Rising (1685) St Andrew's flag of the Russian Navy and Imperial Russian Navy (1712) St Andrew's flag of the Russian Navy (1992) Flag of Congress Poland (1815) Flag of Nova Scotia (1858) Confederate Army of Northern Virginia battle flag (1863–1865) Confederate Naval jack (1863–1865) Flag of Shanghai Municipal Council, Shanghai International Settlement (1869 – c. 1917) Flag of Shanghai Municipal Council, Shanghai International Settlement (c. 1917 – 1943) Flag of the South African Republic ("Burgers Flag") (1874–1875), also flag of Potchefstroom. Flag of Peru (1821–1825) Flag of Rio de Janeiro (1908) Flag of the Empire of China (1915–1916) White Army General Markov's Regiment flag (1917–1922) Naval flag of the Far Eastern Republic (1921–1922) Flag of Fortaleza (1958) Flag of Jamaica (1962) Flag of Katwijk (1970) Flag of Grenada (1974) Flag of Amsterdam (1975) Flag of the Basque Country (the Ikurriña) (1978) Flag of Newfoundland and Labrador (1980) Flag of Jersey (1981) Flag of Burundi (1982) Flag of Tenerife (1989) Flag of the Federal Customs Service of Russia (1994) Flag of the Russian Coast Guard (2008) Flag of Arkhangelsk Oblast (2009) Flag of Katwijk (2009) Flag of Novorossiya (2014) Auto racing disqualification flag International Code of Signals Mike Victor US states Flag of Alabama (1895) Flag of Florida (1868) Flag of Mississippi (1894–2020) Military insignia[edit] Tactical Recognition Flash of the Royal Regiment of Scotland Spanish Air Force fin flash Bulgarian Air Force roundel (1941–1944) Bayonets in saltire create Roman numeral X for the US Army's 10th Mountain Division. Orders[edit] Order of the Thistle Order of St Patrick Military Order of William Order of St Andrew See also[edit] Christian cross Cross of Saint Peter Crossbuck Nordic cross Saint George's Cross Saint Patrick's Saltire X mark Notes[edit] ^ Or on a saltire engrailed Azure two quill pens in saltire Argent enfiling a Loyalist military coronet Or[4] ^ Sable a chevron Erminois cotised between three saltires couped Or[5] ^ The coat of the South African National Cultural and Open-air Museum: Or; an ogress charged with a fillet saltire surmounted by an eight spoked wheel or, and ensigned of a billet sable; a chief nowy gabled, Sable ^ The coat of the Sandwell Metropolitan Borough Council: Per saltire Vert and Or four Fers de Moline counterchanged in fess point a Fountain.[6] ^ Suffolk County Council's Gules a Base barry wavy enarched Argent and Azure issuant therefrom a Sunburst in chief two Ancient Crowns enfiled by a pair of Arrows in saltire points downwards all Or[7] ^ Winchester City Council: Gules five castles triple towered, in saltire, argent, masoned proper the portcullis of each part-raised, or, and on either side of the castle in fess point a lion passant guardant that to the dexter contourny Or[8] ^ The arms of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America: Argent; a quarter azure charged with nine cross crosslets in saltire argent, overall a cross gules[9] References[edit] ^ "Crux decussata". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Merriam-Webster, Inc. Retrieved July 24, 2018. ^ Heraldic use 13th century (attested 1235, Huon de Méry, Tournoiemenz Antecrist, v. 654). In 1352 also of a particular form of stirrup (Comput. Steph. de la Fontaine argent, du Cange s.v. "saltatoria"). 15th-century use in the sense of a barrier of wooden pegs arranged crosswise, preventing the passage of livestock that can still be jumped by people. "sautoire" in TLFi; see also "saltire" at etymonline.com. ^ Berhard Peter, Die Wappen des Hauses Oettingen (2010–2016). ^ "Anderson, George Milton William [Individual]". Archive.gg.ca. 2005-07-28. Retrieved 2012-09-09. ^ "Greenwood, Kemble [Individual]". Archive.gg.ca. 2005-07-28. Retrieved 2013-10-25. ^ "Civic Heraldry Of England And Wales-West Midlands". Civicheraldry.co.uk. Retrieved 2012-09-09. ^ "Civic Heraldry Of England And Wales - East Anglia And Essex Area". Civicheraldry.co.uk. Retrieved 2012-09-09. ^ "Civic Heraldry Of England And Wales - Cornwall And Wessex Area". Civicheraldry.co.uk. Retrieved 2012-09-09. ^ "Logos, Shields & Graphics". ^ a b https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k24649b/f1071.item ^ https://twitter.com/Pickwicq/status/701400643932545024/photo/1 ^ Coski, John M. (2005). The Confederate Battle Flag: America's Most Embattled Emblem. United States of America: First Harvard University Press. pp. 17–18. ISBN 978-0-674-01722-1. ^ Coski, John M. (2005). The Confederate Battle Flag: America's Most Embattled Emblem. United States of America: First Harvard University Press. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-674-01722-1. ^ Roes (1937), footnote 15, citing Henri de La Tour, Atlas de monnaies gauloises (1892), plates xxi, xxiii, coins of the Aulerci Diablintes, Aulerci Cenomani and Osismii. ^ Trésors monétaires, volume XXIV, BNF, 2011. ^ Anne Roes, "An Iranian standard used as a Christian symbol", The Journal of Hellenic Studies, 57.2 (1937), pp. 248–51 ^ Cudith Calvert, "The Iconography of the St. Andrew Auckland Cross", The Art Bulletin 66.4 (December 1984:543–555) p. 545, note 12, citing Louis Réau, Iconographie de l'art chrétien III.1 (Paris) 1958:79. ^ The Records of the Parliaments of Scotland to 1707, K.M. Brown et al. (eds.), St Andrews (2007-2019), 1385/6/4 "ordinance made in council concerning the French army": Item, que tout homme, Francois et Escot, ait un signe devant et derrere cest assavoir une croiz blanche Saint Andrieu et se son jacque soit blanc ou sa cote blanche il portera la dicte croiz blanche en une piece de drap noir ronde ou quarree. ^ "Célestin Obama. Tsimi Evouna s'attaque aux édifices publics, Le Messager, 23 Sept 2008". Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Hansen, Hans Jürgen, and Arne Berg. Architecture in wood; a history of wood building and its techniques in Europe and North America. New York: Viking Press, 1971. Print. ^ Rudolf Huber and Renate Rieth, Glossarium Artis, 10, Holzbaukunst - Architecture en Bois - Architecture in Wood. Munich, Germany: Saur. 1997. 55. ISBN 3-598-10461-8 ^ "CIVIC HERALDRY OF ENGLAND AND WALES - HERTFORDSHIRE". www.civicheraldry.co.uk. ^ a b *Álvarez Abeilhé, Juan. La bandera de España. El origen militar de los símbolos de España. Revista de historia militar Año LIV (2010). Núm extraord. Madrid: Ministerio de Defensa. ISSN 0482-5748. PP. 37-69. ^ As a naval flag for the carrack Great Michael. As square flag carried by heraldic supporters c. 1542. National Library of Scotland (1542). "Plate from the Lindsay Armorial". Scran. Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. Retrieved 2009-12-09.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Chambers, Ephraim, ed. (1728). Cyclopædia, or an Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (1st ed.). James and John Knapton, et al. Missing or empty |title= (help) External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources v t e Vexillology Basic topics Vexillography Glossary of vexillology Heraldry Tincture Vexilloid Design features British ensign Canadian pale Canton Chevron Heraldic flag Nordic cross Pride flag Saltire Southern cross Spanish fess Triband Tricolour Color schemes Pan-African Pan-Arab Pan-Slavic Tinctures in heraldry Organizations Argentina Vexillology Association Australian National Flag Association Croatian Heraldic and Vexillological Association Flag Institute Flags of the World Genealogical Society of Ireland Great Waters Association of Vexillology International Federation of Vexillological Associations Italian Centre of Vexillological Studies Macedonian Heraldry Society Nordic Flag Society North American Vexillological Association Southern African Vexillological Association Spanish Society of Vexillology State Council of Heraldry Ukrainian Heraldry Society William Crampton Library v t e Lists of flags Master list Reference list State-related Arab states Civil flag Country Date of Adoption Formerly independent Heads of state Historical flags State flag State flags and ensigns Sovereign Special and fictional Unrecognized Mobile military Armed Forces Army & Ground Forces Air Forces Air Forces Roundels Air Forces Fin Flashes Border & Coast Guard Forces Maritime Ministry of Defense Naval Ensigns Naval Jack Police Flag Mobile civilian Civil air Civil and Merchant Navy Civil ensign Pilot boat flags and ensigns Yacht flags and ensigns Other entities Active autonomist and secessionist movements Cities Country subdivisions Cultural Dependent territories Ethnic Gay pride and Lesbian Bisexual Transgender flags Micronations Political Religious By design By elements Animals Astronomical Bicolor Borders British ensigns Buildings Canton Circles Color by number by combination Crescents Crosses (Nordic) Devices Diamonds Geographical Headgear Inscriptions Arabic English Latin Russian Spanish Nautical Plants Solids Stars Triangles Tribands Two-sided Weapons By shape Non-quadrilateral Proportions By nations Argentina Armenia Australia state governors Austria states Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada lieutenant governors Chile China Hong Kong Macau Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Dem. Rep. Congo Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France regions Brittany Île-de-France Occitanie French Empire Germany states districts municipalities Georgia Greece Haiti Hungary Iceland India states Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan prefectures municipalities Kazakhstan Kenya Korea North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malaysia Mauritius Mexico Malta Moldova Morocco Montenegro Myanmar Netherlands provinces municipalities New Zealand Nepal North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines provinces Poland naval and maritime voivodeships Portugal Romania Russia federal subjects Sakha Russian Navy Serbia Kosovo Singapore South Africa Soviet Union republics Soviet Navy Spain autonomous communities provinces Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Cornwall Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands British Empire United States states and territories Puerto Rico CSA Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) By continent Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries. v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories  Heraldry portal v t e Christian cross variants In modern use Anchored/Saint Clement's Cross Anuradhapura cross Cross of the Archangels Archiepiscopal cross Armenian Cross Arrow/Barby Cross Bolnisi cross Cross bottony Branch cross Bulgarian cross Byzantine cross Calvary cross Canterbury cross Catherine wheel Celtic cross Cercelée Cross of Saint Chad Coptic cross Cross crosslet Cross crosslet fitchy Crucifix Cruciform halo Double cross Eastern Syriac cross Cross of the Evangelists Short Sword Cross fleury Cross fleury fitchy Saint Florian Cross Forked cross Cross fourchy Fylfot Saint George's Cross Globus cruciger Gnostic cross Grapevine/Saint Nino's Cross Greek cross Greek Orthodox cross Huguenot cross Saint James/Santiago Cross Cross of Jeremiah Jerusalem/Crusaders' cross Jerusalem cross (variant) Kingdom of Jerusalem cross Cross of Saint John Latin (Roman) cross Macedonian Cross Maltese cross Marian Cross Maronite cross Cross moline Nordic Cross Cross of Novgorod Occitan cross Papal cross Cross patonce Saint Patrick's Saltire Cross pattée Cross pattée fitchée Patriarchal cross Cross of Saint Peter Cross of Saint Philip Pommy cross Portate cross/Cross of Saint Gilbert Cross potent Cross quadrate Ringed cross Russian cross Russian Orthodox cross Cross of Salem Saltire/Saint Andrew's Cross Serbian cross Serbian Orthodox cross Saint Thomas Cross Tau Cross/Saint Anthony's Cross Western Syriac cross Historical Avellane cross Aviz cross Brigid's cross Carolingian cross Consecration crosses Coptic cross Cross and Crown Cuthbert's pectoral cross Early Coptic cross Engrailed cross Cross erminée Gammadion Crux gemmata Saint Julian's cross Katanga Cross Lazarus' cross Lorraine cross Cross of Neith Nestorian cross Cross of Peñalba Pierced cross Pierced cross quarterly Knights Templar cross Teutonic Order cross Two-barred cross Victory Cross Voided cross By function Altar cross Blessing cross Conciliation cross Crosses in heraldry Nordic Pisan High cross Market cross Mercat cross Memorial cross Mission cross Monumental cross Necklace Pectoral cross Plague cross Processional cross Rood/Triumphal cross Summit cross Wayside cross Christograms, Chrismons Chi Rho Christogram IX monogram Labarum Signum manus Staurogram/Monogrammatic cross/Tau Rho See also Ankh Armenian eternity sign Balkenkreuz Ichthys Irminsul Kolovrat Mjölnir Rose Cross Rota Solomon's knot Sauwastika Scientology cross Shamrock Shield of the Trinity Sunwheel swastika Sun cross Swastika Triskelion/Triskele Descriptions in antiquity of the execution cross  Christianity portal  Arts portal