mythical character in European folklore who puts people to sleep "The Sandman" redirects here. For other uses, see Sandman (disambiguation). The Sandman is a mythical character in European folklore who puts people to sleep and encourages and inspires beautiful dreams by sprinkling magical sand onto their eyes. Contents 1 Representation in traditional folklore 2 Literature 3 Television 4 Comics 5 Music 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Representation in traditional folklore[edit] The Sandman is a traditional character in many children's stories and books. In Scandinavian folklore, he is said to sprinkle sand or dust on or into the eyes of children at night to bring on sleep and dreams.[1] The grit or "sleep" (rheum) in one's eyes upon waking is the supposed result of the Sandman's work the previous night. Literature[edit] Vilhelm Pedersen representation for the fairy tale "Ole Lukøje" by Hans Christian Andersen Vilhelm Pedersen depiction of " Ole Lukøje " E. T. A. Hoffmann (1776–1822) wrote a short story in 1816 titled Der Sandmann, which showed how sinister such a character could be made. According to the protagonist's nurse, he threw sand in the eyes of children who wouldn't sleep, with the result of those eyes falling out and being collected by the Sandman, who then takes the eyes to his nest on the Moon and uses them to feed his children. The protagonist of the story grows to associate this nightmarish creature with the genuinely sinister figure of his father's associate, Coppelius. In Romanian folklore there is a similar character, Moș Ene (Ene the Elder). Hoffmann's version of the sandman is also similar to the French Canadian character known as the bonhome Sept-heur (seven o’clock guy), who, in some versions, throws sand in children's eyes to blind them so he may capture them. Contrarily to the sandman, his bag is the place where he traps children who do not go to bed. [2] Hans Christian Andersen's 1841 folk tale Ole Lukøje introduced the Sandman, named Ole Lukøje, by relating dreams he gave to a young boy in a week through his magical technique of sprinkling dust in the eyes of the children. "Ole" is a common Danish first name and "Lukøje" means "close eye".[3] Andersen wrote: There is nobody in the world who knows so many stories as Ole-Luk-Oie, or who can relate them so nicely. In the evening, while the children are seated at the table or in their little chairs, he comes up the stairs very softly, for he walks in his socks, then he opens the doors without the slightest noise, and throws a small quantity of very fine dust in their eyes, just enough to prevent them from keeping them open, and so they do not see him. Then he creeps behind them, and blows softly upon their necks, till their heads begin to droop. But Ole-Luk-Oie does not wish to hurt them, for he is very fond of children, and only wants them to be quiet that he may relate to them pretty stories, and they never are quiet until they are in bed and asleep. As soon as they are asleep, Ole-Luk-Oie seats himself upon the bed. He is nicely dressed; his coat is made of silken fabric; it is impossible to say of what color, for it changes from green to red, and from red to blue as he turns from side to side. Under each arm he carries an umbrella; one of them, with pictures on the inside, he spreads over the good children, and then they dream the most beautiful stories the whole night. But the other umbrella has no pictures, and this he holds over the naughty children so that they sleep heavily, and wake in the morning without having dreams at all. In Norway and Sweden, he is called John or Jon Blund and in the Netherlands, Belgium and parts of southern Africa, he is referred to as "Klaas Vaak".[4] Klaas Vaak is a character in a Dutch Musical 'De sprookjesmusical Klaas Vaak", has its own TV-series 'Fairytales of Klaas Vaak' and is one of the entertainers in the amusement park 'Efteling'.[5] Klaas Vaak entertainer in Themepark Efteling Television[edit] The East German Sandmännchen in a hot air balloon The East German stop motion children's television programme Unser Sandmännchen (Our Little Sandman), based on Hans Christian Andersen's Ole Lukøje character and the story by E. T. A. Hoffmann, has been broadcast since 1959, along with a West German version which was discontinued after reunification. Santa Claus-franchised sandman appears as a legendary councilman.[6] In the 1990s, Nilus the Sandman aired on Anglophone Canadian television. In the 1970s, Bonne nuit les petits aired on French television. The show was featuring Nounours, a bear taking care of two toddlers, Nicolas and Pimprenelle. He would arrive on a cloud driven by his friend Sandman (“Le marchand de sable” in French) playing flute as the sun sets, and would only leave once he accompanies the children to bed. At the end of every episode, Nounours would say “Bonne nuit les petits” (which means “Good night kids”) before Sandman creates a light sandfall which puts the two siblings Nicolas and Pimprenelle to sleep. The two partners would then leave on the same cloud after Nounours climbed back the ladder that helped him go down at the beginning of the episode. Sandman plays here a major role, playing flute, driving the cloud, interacting with the other characters from time to time, and most importantly making the children fall asleep. The show was displayed every night at 7:50 pm, and every episode would last 10 minutes, so children could go to sleep peacefully after watching it. Comics[edit] In Marvel Mystery Comics, the Sandman lives in the Land of Dreams, which is located in the Realm of Fairies within the potentially imaginary world of Nowhere. The Sandman ruled over the realm and would place a blanket over it every day. Those who grabbed a dream from the dream tree would have a dream based on whatever they grabbed from the tree and awaken again when the Sandman removed the blanket over his land. Anyone who did not grab a dream would end up in an eternal, dreamless sleep.[7] Fantasy writer Neil Gaiman wrote a 75-part comic book series called The Sandman for Vertigo Comics. The original series ran from 1989 to 1996. It tells the story of Dream of the Endless, who rules over the world of dreams. He is an anthropomorphic personification of dreams known to various characters throughout the series as Morpheus, Oneiros, the Shaper of Form, Lord of the Dreaming, the Dream King, Dream-Sneak, the Cat of Dreams, Murphy, Kai'ckul, and Lord L'Zoril. He possesses three symbols of office: a helm, an amulet known as the Dreamstone, and a sand pouch.[8] A comics adaption of the above-mentioned German TV show Unser Sandmännchen has also been published. Most notably on the back pages of FF Dabei focusing on Pittiplatsch and his friends. Music[edit] Songs based on the figure of the Sandman include the 1950s classic "Mr. Sandman",[9] Roy Orbison's "In Dreams" in which the singer is put to sleep by "a candy-colored clown they call the sandman" to dream of his lost love,[10] and Metallica's "Enter Sandman" whose lyrics "juxtapose childhood bedtime rituals and nightmarish imagery" and originally included a reference to crib death.[11][12] The Sandman also appears in the song Blood Red Sandman by Lordi, the 1971 song "Sandman" by America (band) and the version of the lullaby "Morningtown Ride" recorded by The Seekers[13] and is mentioned briefly in the songs “Headfirst Slide Into Cooperstown On A Bad Bet” by Fall Out Boy and "Farewell and Goodnight" from the Smashing Pumpkins album Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness. See also[edit] Wee Willie Winkie – A Scottish nursery rhyme's personification of sleep Morpheus – Greek god of dreams References[edit] ^ Walsh, William Shepard. "Sandman", Heroes and Heroines of Fiction, Classical Mediæval, Legendary, J.B. Lippincott, 1915 ^ "Der Sandmann". germanstories.vcu.edu. Retrieved June 1, 2019. ^ "Ole Lukoie". The Hans Christian Andersen Center. Retrieved June 1, 2019. ^ "Jon Blund". Ny ABC. Retrieved June 1, 2019. ^ Klaas Vaak, The Dutch Character ^ Connolly, Kate (23 November 2009). "The Sandmannchen, Germany's cutest communist, turns 50". The Guardian. ^ Marvel Mystery Comics #41. Marvel Comics. ^ Neil Gaiman (27 April 2007). "Sandman, Master of Dreams". arschkrebs.de. Retrieved June 1, 2019. ^ Betts, Stephen L. (9 September 2016). "Flashback: Parton, Ronstadt, Harris Share 'Those Memories of You'". Rolling Stone. ^ Lehman, Peter (2003). Roy Orbison: The Invention of An Alternative Rock Masculinity, Temple University Press. ISBN 1-59213-037-2 ^ James Hetfield. When Metallica Ruled the World (TV Documentary). VH1. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Extras – "James On Writing "Enter Sandman" Lyrics, 2004; When Ruled the World ^ Grierson, Tim (2006). "The Greatest Songs Ever! Enter Sandman". Blender. Archived from the original on November 1, 2007. Retrieved September 10, 2007. ^ Reynolds, Malvina. "Morningtown Ride: Steyn's Song of the Week". SteynOnline. 14. Rise of the guardians Bibliography[edit] Andersen, Hans Christian. Fairy Tales of Hans Christian Andersen. Retrieved October 20, 2010. Tatar, Maria (2003). Hard Facts of the Grimms' Fairy Tales. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01487-6. Hoffman, E.T.A. (1817). "Der Sandmann". Die Nachtstücke. Wm. G. Thilgen Jr. (2013) The Sand Man (Lulu Press, Inc.) ISBN 9781304298874 External links[edit] Media related to Sandman Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Sandman myth Seminal works The Sandman (1816) "Ole Lukøje" (1841) Film Lullaby Land (1933) The Daydreamer (1966) The Sandman (1991) Sleepstalker (1995) The Sandman (2000) The Sandman (2011) The Sandman (2017) Songs "The Japanese Sandman" (1920) "Mr. Sandman" (1954) "In Dreams" (1963) "Morningtown Ride" (1966) "Enter Sandman" (1991) "Blood Red Sandman" (2004) Comics Characters Dream (DC Comics) Sandman (Marvel Comics) Sandman (Wesley Dodds) Sandy the Golden Boy Hector Hall Series The Sandman (Vertigo) characters Sandman Mystery Theatre Sandman Midnight Theatre "The Sandman Saga" Literature The Sandman (1816) The Sandman (2008) Television Sandmännchen (1959 German) Nilus the Sandman: The Boy Who Dreamed Christmas (1991 Canadian) Nilus the Sandman (1996 Canadian) Other Sandman (Dungeons & Dragons) The Sandman (audio drama) Coppélia (ballet) Related Logan's Run (1967) film adaptation TV adaptation Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125