This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science Directed by Doug Hajicek Original language English Production Producer Doug Hajicek Running time 60 minutes Distributor Whitewolf Entertainment, Inc. Release Original release January 9, 2003 (2003-01-09) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science is a 2001 documentary television film by producer and wildlife researcher Doug Hajicek. A scientific book was written based on his film. The program originally aired on the Discovery Channel on January 9, 2003. The program features scientists from various disciplines analyzing the most compelling evidence for the existence of Bigfoot, including the Skookum cast and the Patterson–Gimlin film. The documentary has since been released on DVD and VHS. A companion book to the documentary written by anthropologist Jeffrey Meldrum was published in 2006 ( ISBN 0-7653-1216-6). Contents 1 DVD version 2 Potential sequel 3 Companion book 4 References 5 External links DVD version[edit] The DVD version of the program is slightly different from the one that aired on the Discovery Channel and has a large bonus section. It is separated into the following sections: Introduction Exhibit 1: Fossil Evidence Exhibit 2: New Species Discoveries Exhibit 3: Dermal Ridges Exhibit 4: Body Cast Exhibit 5: Images Exhibit 6: Step Frequency Exhibit 7: Biomechanics Exhibit 8: Forensic Measurements Exhibit 9: Visual Size Comparison Exhibit 10: Behavioral Parallels Exhibit 11: Vocalizations Exhibit 12: Visual Misidentifications Exhibit 13: Track Morphology Exhibit 14: Kinesiology Exhibit 15: Soft Tissue Pathology Exhibit 16: Statistics Exhibit 17: DNA Conclusions In the Extra Features section of the DVD are four sections: Footage Analysis, which includes the following: Patterson–Gimlin Film: October 20, 1967 - 16mm film (This version of the film is of much higher quality than others that are usually shown on TV because it is a digital copy of the master. The other two films below are also digitals-from-master. [1]) Memorial Day: May 26, 1996 - Video 8 Freeman: 1994 - Video 8 Freeman film subject baby? - First observed January 4, 2002 by Doug Hajicek during editing of Legend Meets Science. Forensic Animation by Vision Realm Entertainment Inc. Still Gallery Sighting Information, which includes figures from each state. Questions and Answers, which is basically a FAQ Potential sequel[edit] Producer and noted wildlife researcher Doug Hajicek announced plans for a 2 hour film sequel, entitled Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science 2. Originally, the sequel was slated for release in 2019, though no new information has been released since that deadline has passed. It was established that the new film would feature new scientific evidence and fresh forensic work. In addition the new film will feature more scientists with their analysis of debated evidence, with 18 total new evidence categories. Companion book[edit] In 2006, Jeff Meldrum released a companion book of the same name. In the book, Meldrum goes more in depth into the Bigfoot phenomenon, arguing that there is enough scientific evidence to warrant a serious discussion and exploration regarding the legendary cryptid. It is divided into the following chapters:[1] Introduction 1. The Science of Hidden Animals: Cryptozoology 2. Wooden Feet and Fur Suits: Ray Wallace at Bluff Creek 3. Wildman of the Woods: Native American Traditional Knowledge 4. The Giant Ape of the Orient: Gigantopithecus 5. Making a Big Impression: The Skookum Body Cast 6. Caught on Camera: Photographics and Forensic Measurements 7. The Wrangler and the Wildwoman: Bob Gimlin's Encounter with Bigfoot 8. Picture This: Scientific Reaction to the Patterson-Gimlin Film 9. Ape Antics: Behavioral Parallels 10. Sound Off: Vocalizations 11. Grin and Bear It: Misidentification 12. By the Numbers: Statistical Analyses 13. Stepping Through Time: The Evidence of Footprints 14. Line Upon Line: Dermatoglyphics 15. Splitting Hairs and Molecules: DNA and Physical Evidence 16. Where We Stand: The Evidence Weighed and Measured References[edit] ^ Meldrum, Jeff (2006). Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science. New York, NY: Tom Doherty Associates, LLC. pp. 1–297. ISBN 978-0-7653-1217-4. External links[edit] The official homepage of Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science. v t e Cryptozoology Core topics Cryptozoology List of cryptids Cryptozoologists Henry H. Bauer Jon-Erik Beckjord John Bindernagel David Hatcher Childress Loren Coleman William R. Corliss Peter Costello Tim Dinsdale Richard Ellis Richard Freeman Charles Gould Rupert Gould John Willison Green Richard Greenwell Bernard Heuvelmans Ralph Izzard John Keel Aleksandr Kondratov Grover Krantz Willy Ley Roy Mackal Vladimir Markotic Jeffrey Meldrum John R. Napier Michael Newton Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans Boris Porshnev Ivan T. Sanderson Karl Shuker Gardner Soule Roderick Sprague Odette Tchernine Books and television Animal X Animalia Paradoxa Arthur C. Clarke's Mysterious World Beast Hunter Beast Legends Destination Truth Exotic Zoology Extinct or Alive Fact or Faked: Paranormal Files Fortean TV In Search of... Is It Real? Lost Tapes MonsterQuest Monsters and Mysteries in America On the Track of Unknown Animals Sasquatch: Legend Meets Science Strange Abominable Snowmen The Hunt for the Buru The Sasquatch and Other Unknown Hominoids The X Creatures The Secret Saturdays Weird Travels Skeptics Joshua Blu Buhs Robert Todd Carroll Steuart Campbell Peter Dendle Brian Dunning Sharon A. Hill Henry Lee Daniel Loxton Sherrie Lynne Lyons Darren Naish Joe Nickell Donald Prothero Benjamin Radford Brian Regal Michael Shermer George Gaylord Simpson See also Biology Fearsome critters Folklore studies Hypothetical species Pseudoscience Young Earth creationism Zoology Commons Category This article about a scientific documentary film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article related to a made-for-TV documentary film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e