Principally American genre of comedy film Bringing Up Baby (1938) is a screwball comedy from the genre's classic period. Play media A clip from the 1936 screwball comedy My Man Godfrey Screwball comedy is a subgenre of the romantic comedy genre that became popular during the Great Depression, originating in the early 1930s and thriving until the early 1940s. It satirized the traditional love story. Many secondary characteristics of this genre are similar to film noir, but it distinguishes itself for being characterized by a female that dominates the relationship with the male central character, whose masculinity is challenged.[1] The two engage in a humorous battle of the sexes, which was a new theme for Hollywood and audiences at the time.[2] What sets the screwball comedy apart from the generic romantic comedy is that "screwball comedy puts its emphasis on a funny spoofing of love, while the more traditional romantic ultimately accents love."[3] Other elements of the screwball comedy include fast-paced, overlapping repartee, farcical situations, escapist themes, physical battle of the sexes, disguise and masquerade, and plot lines involving courtship and marriage.[2] Screwball comedies often depict social classes in conflict, as in It Happened One Night (1934) and My Man Godfrey (1936).[2] Some comic plays are also described as screwball comedies. Contents 1 History 2 Characteristics 3 Notable examples from the genre's classic period 4 Later examples 5 Screwball comedy elements in other genres 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links History[edit] Screwball comedy has proved to be one of the most popular and enduring film genres.[citation needed] It Happened One Night (1934)[2] is often credited as the first true screwball, though Bombshell starring Jean Harlow preceded it by a year. Although many film scholars agree that its classic period had effectively ended by 1942,[4] elements of the genre have persisted or have been paid homage to in later films. Other film scholars argue that the screwball comedy lives on. During the Great Depression, there was a general demand for films with a strong social class critique and hopeful, escapist-oriented themes. The screwball format arose largely as a result of the major film studios' desire to avoid censorship by the increasingly enforced Hays Code. In order to incorporate prohibited risqué elements into their plots, filmmakers resorted to handling these elements covertly. Verbal sparring between the sexes served as a stand-in for physical, sexual tension.[5] Though some film scholars, such as William K. Everson argue "screwball comedies were not so much rebelling against the Production Code as they were attacking – and ridiculing – the dull, lifeless respectability that the Code insisted on for family viewing."[6] The screwball comedy has close links with the theatrical genre of farce,[3] and some comic plays are also described as screwball comedies. Other genres with which screwball comedy is associated include slapstick, situation comedy, romantic comedy and bedroom farce. Characteristics[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A screenshot from a trailer for It Happened One Night Films definitive of the genre usually feature farcical situations, a combination of slapstick with fast-paced repartee and show the struggle between economic classes. They also generally feature a self-confident and often stubborn central female protagonist and a plot involving courtship and marriage or remarriage. These traits can be seen in both It Happened One Night and My Man Godfrey (1936). The film critic Andrew Sarris has defined the screwball comedy as "a sex comedy without the sex."[7] Like farce, screwball comedies often involve masquerade and disguise in which a character or characters resort to secrecy. Sometimes screwball comedies feature male characters cross-dressing, further contributing to elements of masquerade (Bringing Up Baby (1938), I Was a Male War Bride (1949), and Some Like It Hot (1959)). At first, the couple seem mismatched and even hostile to each other but eventually overcome their differences in an amusing or entertaining way that leads to romance. Often this mismatch comes about when the man is of a lower social class than the woman (Bringing Up Baby, Holiday, both 1938). The final romantic union is often planned by the woman from the outset, and the man is seemingly oblivious to this. In Bringing Up Baby, the woman says to a third party: "He's the man I'm going to marry. He doesn't know it, but I am." In The Lady Eve, Jean (center, played by Barbara Stanwyck) passes herself off as an upper-class woman. These pictures also offered a kind of cultural escape valve: a safe battleground on which to explore serious issues such as class under a comedic and non-threatening framework.[8] Class issues are a strong component of screwball comedies: the upper class are represented as idle, pampered, and having difficulty coping with the real world. By contrast, when lower-class people attempt to pass themselves off as upper-class or otherwise insinuate themselves into high society, they are able to do so with relative ease (The Lady Eve, 1941; My Man Godfrey, 1936). Some critics believe that the portrayal of the upper class in It Happened One Night was brought about by the Great Depression, and the financially struggling moviegoing public's desire to see the rich upper class taught a lesson in humanity. Another common element of the screwball comedy is fast-talking, witty repartee (You Can't Take It with You (1937) and His Girl Friday (1940)). This stylistic device did not originate in the genre: it is also found in many of the old Hollywood cycles, including gangster films and romantic comedies. Screwball comedies also tend to contain ridiculous, farcical situations, such as in Bringing Up Baby, where a couple must take care of a pet leopard during much of the film. Slapstick elements are also frequently present, such as the numerous pratfalls Henry Fonda takes in The Lady Eve (1941). One subgenre of screwball is known as the comedy of remarriage, in which characters divorce and then remarry one another (The Awful Truth (1937), The Philadelphia Story (1940)). Some scholars point to this frequent device as evidence of the shift in the American moral code, as it showed freer attitudes toward divorce (though the divorce always turns out to have been a mistake). Another subgenre of screwball comedy has the woman chasing a man who is oblivious to or not interested in her. Examples include Barbara Stanwyck chasing Henry Fonda (The Lady Eve, 1941); Sonja Henie chasing John Payne (Sun Valley Serenade, 1941, and Iceland, 1942); Marion Davies chasing Antonio Moreno (The Cardboard Lover, 1928); Marion Davies chasing Bing Crosby (Going Hollywood, 1933); and Carole Lombard chasing William Powell (My Man Godfrey, 1936). The philosopher Stanley Cavell has noted that many classic screwball comedies turn on an interlude in the state of Connecticut (Bringing Up Baby, The Lady Eve, The Awful Truth).[9] In Christmas in Connecticut (1945), the action moves to Connecticut and remains there for the duration of the film. Notable examples from the genre's classic period[edit] A promotional photo for the 1940 screwball comedy His Girl Friday The Patsy (1928), directed by King Vidor, starring Marion Davies, Marie Dressler, and Lawrence Gray The Front Page[10] (1931) (remade as His Girl Friday), directed by Lewis Milestone, starring Adolphe Menjou and Pat O'Brien It Happened One Night[11][12] (1934), directed by Frank Capra, starring Clark Gable and Claudette Colbert Twentieth Century[10][12] (1934), directed by Howard Hawks, starring John Barrymore and Carole Lombard My Man Godfrey[11] (1936), directed by Gregory La Cava, starring William Powell and Carole Lombard Cain and Mabel (1936), directed by Lloyd Bacon, starring Marion Davies and Clark Gable Libeled Lady (1936), directed by Jack Conway, starring Jean Harlow, William Powell, Myrna Loy, and Spencer Tracy Theodora Goes Wild[13] (1936), directed by Richard Boleslawski, starring Irene Dunne and Melvyn Douglas The Awful Truth[11][12] (1937), directed by Leo McCarey, starring Irene Dunne and Cary Grant Nothing Sacred[11] (1937), directed by William A. Wellman, starring Carole Lombard and Fredric March Bringing Up Baby[11] (1938), directed by Howard Hawks, starring Katharine Hepburn and Cary Grant His Girl Friday[11][12] (1940), directed by Howard Hawks, starring Cary Grant and Rosalind Russell My Favorite Wife (1940), directed by Garson Kanin, starring Cary Grant and Irene Dunne The Philadelphia Story (1940), directed by George Cukor, starring Katherine Hepburn, Cary Grant and James Stewart Mr. and Mrs. Smith (1941), directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Robert Montgomery and Carole Lombard The Lady Eve[11][12] (1941), directed by Preston Sturges, starring Barbara Stanwyck and Henry Fonda Ball of Fire[14][15] (1941), directed by Howard Hawks, starring Barbara Stanwyck and Gary Cooper The Palm Beach Story[11] (1942), directed by Preston Sturges, starring Claudette Colbert and Joel McCrea The More the Merrier (1943), directed by George Stevens, starring Jean Arthur and Joel McCrea. Other films from this period in other genres incorporate elements of the screwball comedy. For example, Alfred Hitchcock's thriller The 39 Steps (1935) features the gimmick of a young couple who finds themselves handcuffed together and who eventually, almost in spite of themselves, fall in love with one another, and Woody Van Dyke's detective comedy The Thin Man (1934), which portrays a witty, urbane couple who trade barbs as they solve mysteries together. Many of the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals of the 1930s also feature screwball comedy plots, notably The Gay Divorcee (1934), Top Hat (1935), and Carefree (1938), which costars Ralph Bellamy. The Eddie Cantor musicals Whoopee! (1930) and Roman Scandals (1933), and slapstick road movies such as Six of a Kind (1934) include screwball elements. Some of the Joe E. Brown comedies also fall into this category, particularly Broadminded (1931) and Earthworm Tractors (1936). Actors and actresses frequently featured in or associated with screwball comedy include: Jean Arthur Fred Astaire Ralph Bellamy Eric Blore Charles Coburn Claudette Colbert Gary Cooper Marion Davies William Demarest Melvyn Douglas Irene Dunne Clark Gable Cary Grant Jean Harlow Katharine Hepburn Edward Everett Horton Harold Lloyd Carole Lombard Myrna Loy Fred MacMurray Ray Milland William Powell Ginger Rogers Rosalind Russell Barbara Stanwyck James Stewart Some notable directors of screwball comedies include: Frank Capra George Cukor Howard Hawks Garson Kanin Gregory La Cava Mitchell Leisen Ernst Lubitsch Leo McCarey Preston Sturges W. S. Van Dyke Billy Wilder Later examples[edit] A screenshot from a trailer for How to Marry a Millionaire One, Two, Three (1961) Various later films are considered by some critics[weasel words] to have revived elements of the classic era screwball comedies, including: Champagne for Caesar (1950), d. Richard Whorf The Mating Season (1951), d. Mitchell Leisen Monkey Business (1952), d. Howard Hawks How to Marry a Millionaire (1953), d. Jean Negulesco The Seven Year Itch (1955), d. Billy Wilder Bell, Book and Candle (1958), d. Richard Quine Pillow Talk (1959), d. Michael Gordon Some Like It Hot (1959), d. Billy Wilder The Grass Is Greener (1960), d. Stanley Donen Lover Come Back (1961), d. Delbert Mann One, Two, Three (1961), d. Billy Wilder It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963), d. Stanley Kramer Man's Favorite Sport? (1964), d. Howard Hawks Send Me No Flowers (1964), d. Norman Jewison A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (1966) d. Richard Lester Walk, Don't Run (1966), d. Charles Walters What's Up, Doc? (1972), d. Peter Bogdanovich For Pete's Sake (1974), d. Peter Yates Heaven Can Wait (1978), d. Warren Beatty and Buck Henry Something Wild (1986), d. Jonathan Demme Overboard (1987), d. Garry Marshall Raising Arizona (1987), d. Coen Brothers Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown (1988), d. Pedro Almodóvar Oscar (1991) d. John Landis[16] Sólo con Tu Pareja (1991), d. Alfonso Cuarón The Hudsucker Proxy (1994), d. Joel Coen Flirting With Disaster (1996), d. David O. Russell Little Nicky (2000), d. Steven Brill Rat Race (2001), d. Jerry Zucker Intolerable Cruelty (2003), d. Coen Brothers Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy (2004), d. Adam McKay Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day (2008), d. Bharat Nalluri Our Idiot Brother (2011), d. Jesse Peretz While We're Young (2014), d. Noah Baumbach Mistress America (2015), d. Noah Baumbach She's Funny That Way (2015), d. Peter Bogdanovich Hail, Caesar! (2016), d. Coen Brothers Chongqing Hot Pot (2016), d. Yang Qing[17] Elements of classic screwball comedy often found in more recent films which might otherwise simply be classified as romantic comedies include the "battle of the sexes" (Down with Love, How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days), witty repartee (Down with Love), and the contrast between the wealthy and the middle class (You've Got Mail, Two Weeks Notice). Many of Elvis Presley's films from the 1960s had drawn, consciously or unconsciously, the many characteristics of the screwball comedy genre. Some examples are Double Trouble, Tickle Me, Girl Happy and Live A Little, Love A Little. Modern updates on screwball comedy also sometimes are categorized as black comedy (Intolerable Cruelty, which also features a twist on the classic screwball element of divorce and remarriage). The Coen Brothers often include screwball elements in a film which may not otherwise be considered screwball or even a comedy. The Golmaal movies, a series of Hindi-language Indian films, have been described as a screwball comedy franchise.[18][19] Screwball comedy elements in other genres[edit] In his 2008 production of the classic Beaumarchais comedy The Marriage of Figaro, author William James Royce trimmed the five-act play down to three acts and labeled it a "classic screwball comedy". The playwright made Suzanne the central character, endowing her with all the feisty comedic strengths of her classic film counterparts. In his adaptation, entitled One Mad Day! (a play on Beaumarchais' original French title) Royce underscored all of the elements of the classic screwball comedy, suggesting that Beaumarchais may have had a hand in the origins of the genre. The plot of Corrupting Dr. Nice, a science fiction novel by John Kessel involving time travel, is modeled on films such as The Lady Eve and Bringing Up Baby.[20] See also[edit] Hawksian woman References[edit] ^ Dancyger, Ken; Rush, Jeff (2006). Alternative Scriptwriting (Fourth ed.). Focal Press. p. 85. ISBN 978-0240808499. The screwball comedy is funny film noir that has a happy ending... The premise of the film is about the struggle in their relationship. During the course of the struggle, which is highly sexually charged, the maleness of the central character is challenged. The female is the dominant character in the relationship. This role reversion is central to the screwball comedy. ^ a b c d Cele Otnes; Elizabeth Hafkin PleckCele Otnes, Elizabeth Hafkin Pleck (2003) Cinderella dreams: the allure of the lavish wedding University of California Press, p. 168 ISBN 0-520-24008-1 ^ a b Gehring, Wes D. (2008). Romantic vs. Screwball Comedy: Charting the Difference. Lanham: Scarecrow Press Inc. p. 186. ^ Byrge, Duane; Miller, Robert Milton (1991). The Screwball Comedy Films: A History and Filmography, 1934–1942. McFarland. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-89950-539-8. With the explosive exception of His Girl Friday, screwball comedy had calmed considerably by 1940 from its peak of zaniness in 1937-38. ^ "Under the Radar: The Hays Code and the Birth of Screwball". virginia.edu. University of Virginia. Retrieved 21 March 2018. ^ Everson, William K. (1994). Hollywood Bedlam: Classic Screwball Comedies. New York: Carol Publishing Group. ^ Citation Sarris, Andrew. You Ain’t Heard Nothin’ Yet: The American Talking Film, History & Memory, 1927–1949, Oxford University Press, New York, 1998 ^ [1] The Screwball and Its Audience - University of Virginia ^ Cavell, Stanley. Pursuits of Happiness: The Hollywood Comedy of Remarriage. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1981 ^ a b Tim Dirks. "Comedy films: Screwball comedy". filmsite.org. ^ a b c d e f g h "10 great screwball comedy films". British Film Institute. ^ a b c d e Robbie Collin (23 June 2015). "Who killed the screwball comedy?". The Telegraph. ^ https://emanuellevy.com/review/theodora-goes-wild-2/ ^ WILSON, BY JAKE (2011-02-25). "The lost art of screwball comedy". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 2019-01-01. ^ Gemmill, Allie. "These 21 Underrated Rom-Coms Should Be Next In Your Netflix Queue". Bustle. Retrieved 2019-01-01. ^ "Stallone's 'Oscar' Recovers From Bad Start". chicagotribune.com. Retrieved 21 March 2018. ^ Marsh, James (March 23, 2016). "'Chongqing Hot Pot': HKIFF review". Screen Daily. Retrieved March 28, 2016. ^ "Golmaal Again Movie Review Meena Iyer". ^ "blends perfectly with the screwball flavour of Golmaal". ^ Gevers, Nick (16 October 1999). "Corrupting Dr Nice by John Kessel". infinity plus. Retrieved 29 August 2012. Further reading[edit] Screwball Comedy: Defining a Film Genre, Wes D. Gehring, 1983. External links[edit] Screwball Comedy Primer - Green Cine Home of the Screwball - University of Virginia Screwball Comedy - film reference Screwball Comedy - Everything2 Screwball Comedy Film: Definition - wordiQ Great Directors: Mitchell Leisen - Senses of Cinema Head Over Heels - The Guardian (in French) La Screwball Comedy - CINEMACLASSIC (in German) Screwball Comedies: Ein enzyklopädischer Artikel - University of Hamburg v t e Comedy Topics Comedian Comedic device Comedy festival Comedy troupe Comic timing Farce Humorist Humour Impersonator Impressionist Irony Joke Prank call Punch line Satire Visual gag Wit Word play Film Country American British French Italian Genre Fantasy Horror Parody Remarriage Romance Science fiction Screwball Sex Italian Silent Slapstick Stoner Theatre Country Europe Ancient Greek comedy Comédie-Française Comédie-Italienne Corral de comedias Theatre of ancient Rome Asia China Xiangsheng Hong Kong Mo lei tau Japan Kyōgen Manzai Owarai Rakugo Sarugaku Genre Boulevard theatre Comedy-drama Comedy of humours Comedy of manners Comedy of menace Commedia dell'arte Double act Improvisational Macchietta One-person show Pantomime Restoration comedy Sentimental comedy Comédie larmoyante Shadow play Shakespearean comedy Sketch comedy Spex Stand-up comedy Street theatre Theatre of the Absurd Tragicomedy Vaudeville Music and dance Ballad opera Cabaret Café-chantant Café-théâtre Comédie-ballet Comedy club Light music Music hall Musical theatre Opéra bouffe Opéra bouffon Opera buffa Opéra comique Operetta Revue Media Music Album Rock Hip hop Parody Musical comedians Novel Radio Television Mockumentary Roast Sitcom Subgenres Alternative Black Blue Character Christian Clown Cringe Deadpan (dry humor) Documentary Gallows High / low Horror Insult Observational Physical Prop Shock Sick Slapstick Topics Surreal Ventriloquism Zombie Category Portal v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125