Manga marketed to young adult men This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series on Anime and manga Anime History Voice acting Companies Original video animation Original net animation Fansub Fandub Lists Longest series Longest franchises Manga History Publishers International market Mangaka Doujinshi Alternative Gekiga Yonkoma Iconography Scanlation Lists Best-selling series Longest series Demographic groups Children Shōnen Shōjo Seinen Josei Genres Bara Cooking Harem Isekai Magical girl Mecha Ryona Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri People Mitsuru Adachi Fujio Akatsuka George Akiyama Hideaki Anno Hideo Azuma Clamp Osamu Dezaki Tetsuo Hara Mamoru Hosoda Yukinobu Hoshino Ryoichi Ikegami Kunihiko Ikuhara Ken Ishikawa Shotaro Ishinomori Ikki Kajiwara Tomoharu Katsumata Yoshiaki Kawajiri Shōji Kawamori Kitazawa Rakuten Kazuo Koike Satoshi Kon Masami Kurumada Kōichi Mashimo Katsuji Matsumoto Leiji Matsumoto Hayao Miyazaki Shigeru Mizuki Hideko Mizuno Shinji Mizushima Daijiro Morohoshi Tadao Nagahama Go Nagai Shinji Nagashima Daisuke Nishio Eiichiro Oda Kyoko Okazaki Mamoru Oshii Rintaro Takao Saito Hiroshi Sasagawa Junichi Sato Sanpei Shirato Masamune Shirow Gisaburō Sugii Isao Takahata Osamu Tezuka Akira Toriyama Year 24 Group Tatsuo Yoshida Tsutomu Nihei Fandom Conventions Clubs Cosplay Anime music video Otaku Yaoi fandom General Glossary Ecchi Hentai Lolicon Moe Anime-influenced animation 2.5D musical  Anime and manga portal v t e Seinen manga (青年漫画) are Japanese comics marketed toward young adult men.[1] In Japanese, the word seinen literally means "youth", but the term "seinen manga" is also used to describe the target audience of magazines like Weekly Manga Times and Weekly Manga Goraku which cater specifically to men's interests, and are marketed towards a demographic of older teenage boys and adult men between the ages of 18 and 45. Seinen manga are distinguished from shōnen manga which are for younger teen boys, although some seinen manga like xxxHolic share similarities with shōnen manga. Seinen manga can focus on action, politics, science fiction, fantasy, relationships, sports, or comedy. The female equivalent to seinen manga is josei manga. Seinen manga have a wide variety of art styles and variation in subject matter. Examples of seinen series include: Berserk, Excel Saga, Ghost in the Shell, Hellsing, Initial D, Monster, Mushishi, Oh My Goddess!, One-Punch Man, Outlaw Star, and Tokyo Ghoul, as well as the formerly shōnen manga series JoJo's Bizarre Adventure and Trigun. A common way to tell if a manga is seinen is by looking at whether furigana is used over the original kanji text: if there are furigana on all kanji, the title is generally aimed at a younger audience. The title of the magazine it was published in is also an important indicator. Usually Japanese manga magazines with the word "young" in the title (Weekly Young Jump for instance) are seinen. There are also mixed shōnen/seinen magazines such as Gangan Powered and Comp Ace. Other popular seinen manga magazines include Weekly Young Magazine, Weekly Young Sunday, Big Comic Spirits, Business Jump, Ultra Jump, and Afternoon. Contents 1 History 2 Magazines 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History[edit] One of the earliest manga magazines published in Japan was a seinen publication: Weekly Manga Times, first released in 1956. It was aimed squarely at middle-aged men, featuring erotic fiction and manga and tales of yakuza. It was only in 1959 that two of the main shōnen manga titles appeared: Weekly Shōnen Magazine and Weekly Shōnen Sunday. Then in 1967, the first of the magazines aimed at younger men appeared: Weekly Manga Action, which scored big hits with Lupin III and Lone Wolf and Cub, and later Crayon Shin-chan. Big Comic followed in 1968, perhaps best known for its series Golgo 13. The year 1972 saw the addition of Big Comic Original, which featured Tsuribaka Nisshi, a manga about two older men who enjoy fishing; the manga was made into a series of popular movies. In 1979, the publisher Shueisha, known for Weekly Shonen Jump for teen boys, entered the seinen market with Weekly Young Jump. Many Young Jump series have been adapted into anime or live action TV programs, e.g. Elfen Lied, Gantz, Hen, Kirara, Liar Game, Oku-sama wa Joshi Kōsei, and Zetman. Magazines[edit] For a complete list of seinen manga magazines, see List of manga magazines. A list of the top Japanese seinen manga magazines by circulation in the time-span from 1 October 2009 to 30 September 2010.[2] Title Circulation Weekly Young Magazine 807,871 Weekly Young Jump 768,980 Big Comic Original 729,750 Weekly Manga Goraku 500,000 Big Comic 454,000 Comic Kairakuten 350,000 Weekly Morning 340,209 Weekly Manga Sunday (defunct) 300,000 Business Jump (defunct) 285,334 Super Jump (defunct) 277,500 Big Comic Spirits 260,024 Comic Shitsurakuten 250,000 Young Champion 250,000 Comic Ran 207,350 Big Comic Superior 204,125 Manga Action 200,000 Young King 200,000 See also[edit] Children's manga: intended for young children Shōnen manga: intended for boys Shōjo manga: intended for girls Josei manga: intended for young women Gekiga: intended for adults References[edit] ^ "Everything about the Seinen Genre". jappleng.com. ^ Loo, Egan (17 January 2011). "2010 Japanese Manga Magazine Circulation Numbers". Anime News Network. Retrieved 30 July 2014. External links[edit] Look up seinen in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Japanese Magazine Publishers Association (in Japanese) Anime and manga portal