Sex in mainstream film This article is about sex in mainstream film. For pornographic films, see Pornographic film. Play media The Kiss (1896) contained what was regarded as the very first sex scene on film, drawing the general outrage of movie goers, civic leaders, and religious leaders, as utterly shocking, obscene and completely immoral. Sex in film is the presentation of aspects of human sexuality in film. The presence in films of any form of sexuality has been controversial since the development of the medium. Some films containing such sexuality have been criticized by religious groups or have been banned or the subject of censorship by governments, or both. In countries with a film rating system, films containing sex scenes typically receive a restricted classification. Nudity in film may be regarded as sexual or as non-sexual. An erotic film is usually a film that has an erotic quality that may create sexual feelings,[1] as well as a philosophical contemplation concerning the aesthetics of sexual desire, sensuality and romantic love. Sex or erotic scenes are to be found in a wide range of genres and sub-genres, with genres that have a sexual or erotic component typically including the term “erotic” in its description — such as erotic dramas, erotic thrillers, sex comedies, coming-of-age films, romantic dramas, besides others. Love scenes, erotic or not, have been present in films since the silent era of cinematography. A pornographic film, on the other hand, is a sex film which does not usually claim any artistic merit. Sex scenes have been presented in many genres of film, although there are some in which it is rare. Many actors and actresses have performed nude or partial nude scenes, or have dressed and behaved in ways considered sexually provocative by contemporary standards at some point in their careers. Contents 1 Terminology 2 Production 3 Europe 4 United States 4.1 By genre 4.1.1 Erotic thrillers 4.1.2 Horror 5 Mexico 6 India 7 Television 8 Same-sex scenes in mainstream cinema 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Terminology[edit] Sex in film can be distinguished from a sex film, which usually refers to a pornographic film and sometimes to a sex education film. It should also be distinguished from nudity in film, though nudity can be presented in a sexualized context. For example, nudity in the context of naturism would normally be regarded as non-sexual. Some people distinguish between "gratuitous sex" and sex scenes which are presented as integral to a film's plot or as part of the character development. Sex scenes are the main feature of pornographic films. In softcore films, sexuality is less explicit. Erotic films are suggestive of sexuality, but need not contain nudity. Production[edit] See also: Nudity clause In order to minimize risk and conflict, and because an actor can feel vulnerable shooting a sex scene, agreements are signed prior to filming. Therein, specific terms of each sex scene are negotiated, including details of the sex scenes and the surroundings of the studio when the sex scenes will be shot. These "nudity riders" are written contracts commonly used by movie and television shows that intend to film sex or nude scenes.[2] These agreements can include very detailed descriptions such as how much the actors have to be nude, i.e. nude or semi-nude, and information on their attire. An agreement may stipulate that while an intimate scene is being shot, only people associated with the scene or material can remain. Also, whether photographs can be taken, and if these are to be used in the promotion of the film. Use of Body doubles, a person replacing the performer, is also regulated, as is the consequences of a performer agreeing to a nude scene but later deciding against doing it. The agreements apply to auditions too. To tackle the physical and psychological safety of the actors involved in sex scenes, Intimacy Directors International (IDI),[3] a not for profit organization, was established. According to IDI, IDI provides an intimacy coordinator who works with actors and does following: Work professionally with actors to set rules when they engage in any type of sex scenes that includes simulated sex, nudity, and intimate scenes. They are a bridge between actors and producers. Direct scenes where it includes simulated sex, nudity and intimacy scenes. Support actors and advocate for them. Production companies may hire an intimacy coordinator in the following situations: if the scene includes simulated sex or nudity of any kind, and they need a nudity rider, then they should hire an intimacy coordinator. if an actor needs help in dealing with sensitive material. if the director needs help directing a sex scene. if the production company wants to make specific rules for the actors to feel safer. Since the 2010s, film and TV productions increasingly employ intimacy coordinators to ensure the wellbeing of actors who participate in sex scenes, and to help prevent harassment and violations of consent.[4] Europe[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (February 2014) Pedro Almodóvar of Spain is a prolific director who has included eroticism in many of his movies. Tinto Brass of Italy has dedicated his career to bringing explicit sexuality into mainstream cinema. His films are also notable for feminist-friendly eroticism.[citation needed] French filmmaker Catherine Breillat caused controversy with unsimulated sex in her films Romance (1999) and Anatomy of Hell (2004). In Italy, nudity and strong sexual themes go back to the silent era with films such as The Last Days of Pompeii (1926). Lars von Trier of Denmark has included explicit/unsimulated sex scenes in some of his films, such as Breaking the Waves (1996), The Idiots (1998), Manderlay (2005), Antichrist (2009), and Nymphomaniac (2013). He is also a co-founder of film company Puzzy Power, a subsidiary of his Zentropa, with the goal of producing hardcore pornographic films for women. Blue is the Warmest Colour (2013) sparked an international firestorm over its frank depiction of sexuality between two young women, yet managed to win the Palme d'Or, the highest prize awarded at the prestigious Cannes Film Festival in May 2013. Love (2015) contains many explicit unsimulated sex scenes. The Finnish black comedy film Dogs Don't Wear Pants (2019) presents the viewer with a dive into the dark-toned world of BDSM.[5] United States[edit] Lorna (1964) was the first of Russ Meyer's films where the main female part, played in this film by Lorna Maitland, was selected on the basis of her large breast size The inclusion in film of any form of sexuality has been controversial since the development of the medium. Kissing in films, for example, was initially considered by some to be scandalous. The Kiss (1896) contained a kiss, which was regarded as a sex scene and drew general outrage from movie goers, civic leaders, and religious leaders, as utterly shocking, obscene and completely immoral. One contemporary critic wrote, "The spectacle of the prolonged pasturing on each other's lips was beastly enough in life size on the stage but magnified to gargantuan proportions and repeated three times over it is absolutely disgusting."[6] The Catholic Church called for censorship and moral reform - because kissing in public at the time could lead to prosecution.[7] Perhaps in defiance of the righteous indignation and "to spice up a film", the film was followed by many kiss imitators, including The Kiss in the Tunnel (1899) and The Kiss (1900). Other producers would take the criticism on board, or in mock of the standard, and use an implicit kiss, which would be obstructed from view just as the lips would touch, such as shielding a possible kiss by placing say a hat in front of the actors' faces, or fading to grey just as a kiss is to take place, etc. The display of cleavage created controversy. For example, producer Howard Hughes displayed Jane Russell's cleavage in The Outlaw (1943) and in The French Line (1953), which was found objectionable under the Hays Code because of Russell's "breast shots in bathtub, cleavage and breast exposure" while some of her decollete gowns were regarded to be "intentionally designed to give a bosom peep-show effect beyond even extreme decolletage".[8] Both films were condemned by the National Legion of Decency and were released only in cut versions. The selection of actresses for a role on the basis of their breast size is controversial and has been described as contributing to breast fetishism,[9] but has proved to be a draw card. Producers such as Russ Meyer produced films which featured actresses with large breasts. Lorna (1964) was the first of his films where the main female part, played by Lorna Maitland, was selected on the basis of breast size. The producers and exhibitors of the film were prosecuted for obscenity in several US states. Other large breasted actresses used by Meyer include Kitten Natividad, Erica Gavin, Tura Satana, and Uschi Digard among many others. The majority of them were naturally large breasted and he occasionally cast women in their first trimesters of pregnancy to enhance their breast size even further.[10] Author and director William Rotsler said: "with Lorna Meyer established the formula that made him rich and famous, the formula of people filmed at top hate, top lust, top heavy."[11] Blue Movie (1969), directed by Andy Warhol,[12][13][14] was the first adult erotic film depicting explicit sex to receive wide theatrical release in the United States.[12][13][14] Blue Movie is a seminal film in the Golden Age of Porn and, according to Warhol, a major influence in the making of Last Tango in Paris (1972), an internationally controversial erotic drama film.[14] Another explicit adult film of that period was Mona the Virgin Nymph (1970) that contained a number of unsimulated non-penetrative sex scenes. Unlike Blue Movie, however, Mona had a plot.[15] To forestall legal problems, the film was screened without credits. The producer of Mona, Bill Osco, went on to produce other adult films,[16] such as Flesh Gordon (1974), Harlot (1971), and Alice in Wonderland (1976). Boys in the Sand (1971)[17] was an American gay pornographic film,[18] the first gay porn film to include credits, to achieve crossover success, to be reviewed by Variety,[19] and one of the earliest porn films, after Blue Movie[12][13][20][21] to gain mainstream credibility, preceding Deep Throat (1972). By genre[edit] In North American films, erotic films may be primarily character driven or plot driven, with considerable overlap. Most dramas center around character development, such as Steven Shainberg's Secretary (2002). Comedy films, especially romantic comedies and romantic dramas, tend toward character interaction. Mystery films, thrillers, drama and horror films tend toward strong plots and premises.[22] Others combine both strong plots and characters.[22][23] Erotic thrillers[edit] Erotic thrillers are a popular American erotic subgenre, with films such as Dressed to Kill (1980), Angel Heart (1987), Basic Instinct (1992), Single White Female (1992), Color of Night (1994), Wild Things (1998), Eyes Wide Shut (1999), and The Boy Next Door (2015).[22] In some films, the development of a sexual relationship (or even a one-night stand) is often used to create tension in the storyline, especially if the people involved should not be sleeping together, such as in Out of Sight (1998), where a U.S. Marshal has sex with the criminal she is pursuing. Horror[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In horror films, sex is often used to mark characters that are doomed to die. Characters that engage in sex acts are often the first to be claimed by the antagonist(s), or will die shortly after their sex scene or (sometimes) in the middle of it. This convention of it being bad luck to have sex in a horror film is notably illustrated in the Friday the 13th film series, where supernatural villain Jason Voorhees takes a special dislike to teenagers and young adults having sex because, as a young boy, he drowned in a lake while the camp counselors who should have been supervising him were having sex. In some interpretations of this "rule", the sex acts themselves directly cause the character's demise. In Cabin Fever, a man catches the deadly illness because a woman who was infected (but not yet symptomatic) seduces and has impulsive sex with him. They don't use a condom because the careless woman believes she is healthy. Ironically, the woman (and the audience) only realize that she is infected because of red welts that are brought out by their rough lovemaking. Species (1995) and its sequels also feature many sexual deaths as virtually every human who mates with an alien in the franchise subsequently dies - female aliens kill human suitors regardless of whether they have poor genes, resist the alien's advances, or mate successfully. Human women who mate with alien men die shortly after sex as their abdomens burst during the unnaturally rapid pregnancy that always follows. Most times in horror movies the typical survivor is a young girl who is still a virgin. In the film Scream, which satirizes horror movies, this rule is somewhat broken as the character Randy Meeks points out that one of the rules of horrors is to not have sex. In an intersecting scene, the film's main protagonist Sidney Prescott loses her virginity to Billy Loomis. After they finish, Billy is stabbed by Ghostface and Sidney is then chased. Randy himself survives a gunshot wound at the end of the film because, as he explains, he is a virgin. However, he dies in the sequel, Scream 2, after which it is revealed that he lost his virginity sometime prior to his death. Mexico[edit] In Mexico, many comedy films are based on sex, typically portraying men as unstoppable sex-seeking creatures and women as willing targets. Although the number of such comedies waned during the 1990s, domestic servants, bar workers, dancers and neighbors' wives continue to be depicted as potentially willing sexual partners.[citation needed] The films La Tarea (1991), Miracle Alley (1995) and Y Tu Mamá También (2001) are some of the most important examples of this.[according to whom?] India[edit] The entertainment industry is an important part of modern India, and is expressive of Indian society in general. Historically, Indian television has lacked the frank depiction of sex. Kissing scenes, for example, were banned by Indian film censors until the 1990s.[24] Since then the entertainment industry has liberalized but the taboo against them continues well into the 2010s, with many of Bollywood stars refusing to do them, and controversy and debate sparked when actors choose to do them.[25] On the other hand, rape scenes or scenes showing sexual assault were common until approximately the early 2000s.[26] Mainstream films are still largely catered for the masses of India, however, art films and foreign films containing sexuality are watched by Indians. Because of the same process of glamorization of film entertainment that occurs in Hollywood, Indian cinema, mainly the Hindi-speaking Bollywood industry, is also beginning to add sexual overtones.[27] Television[edit] This section needs to be updated. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (October 2015) The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (October 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Many drama series, and daytime soap operas are based around sex. This commonly revolves around the development of personal relationships of the main characters, with a view of creating sexual tension in the series. Partial nudity was considered acceptable on daytime television in the 1970s but disappeared after 2000, partly due to more conservative morals,[28][failed verification] and also to the prevalence of cable and satellite subscriptions. Only PBS occasionally features nudity. In 2008 and 2009, the French TV channel Canal+ featured a series titled X Femmes (English: X Women), which consisted of ten short films shot by female directors with the goal of producing erotica from a female point of view. Same-sex scenes in mainstream cinema[edit] Since approximately 2010, many mainstream films have shown sexual scenes between women. There have been various films which have been made which mainly focus on exploring the relationship between women. Because of the limited films featuring same-sex sex scenes before 2010s, researchers were unable to research people's views on the intimate scenes between women. In 2016, researchers Maria T. Soto-Sanfiel and Adriana Ibiti created a report on pleasurable sensations created by watching sexual scenes between women. People, including heterosexual individuals, reported that the scenes had different effects on their sexual arousal. The reasons were different for everyone who identified themselves as either heterosexual or homosexual, male or female. Lesbian women said that it brought back memories of their own experience and created pleasurable sensations while watching it.[29] Heterosexual women said that they got the same pleasurable sensations as watching heterosexual sex scenes. Heterosexual men related the scenes to their memories of pornography. Gay men preferred seeing heterosexual scenes because they could imagine themselves in place of the women. French film La vie d'Adèle (Blue Is the Warmest Color, in English), directed by Abdellatif Kechiche, was released in October 2013. The film is about a high school student Adele who lusts after art student Lea and falls in love with her. The film explores the lesbian relationship between them and their transformation as characters. To showcase their developing characters, the three-hour long film contained almost ten minutes of sexual scenes between them. These scenes were so long that even heterosexual scenes in movies have not exceeded the length. The scenes were shot in a close-up manner, showing great detail with bold and intimate camera angles.[29] Many critics expressed that if it was not a film, the sex scenes would be close to pornography. The sex scenes were controversial and received mixed reviews. France set the age limit to 12 years, Singapore 21 years, and Brazil opposed to print Blu-rays. The movie earned around $20 million in US and Europe. It was shown at the Cannes Film Festival and awarded the Palme d'Or, along with many other international awards. Carol, directed by Todd Haynes and released in November 2015, also caught much attention. Set during Christmas in 1952, it tells the story of a young woman named Therese Belivet (played by Rooney Mara) falling in love with an older woman named Carol Aird (played by Cate Blanchett). It includes 3 minutes of sex scenes between Carol and Theresa. They were carefully shot with the actors shown half nude, avoiding explicit scenes.[30] Haynes, while talking about the production of the sex scenes, said that actors pretend that they are not nervous, adding: "But they are. So I try to create an environment that's comfortable and predictable. You set your shots, get rid of people that don't need to be there - and then you basically just go."[31] In the past, sex scenes between same-sex couple not only made the actors uncomfortable, but they were also stigmatized, considered shocking or even immoral. However, this has changed greatly and many films about same-sex relationships have been made. There is also an increasing focus on gay male relationships in cinema. An Italian film Call Me by Your Name, directed by Luca Guadagnino, was released in January 2017. Set in the summer of 1983, the film is about a 17-year-old American-Jewish man, named Elio (played by Timothee Chalamet), forming a relationship with a 24-year old graduate student Oliver.[32] Like Carol, its sex scenes were not explicit, with its two main characters shown half naked. The 2019 Paramount Pictures film Rocketman, the biopic of Elton John contains a male-on-male sex scene with Taron Egerton and Richard Madden. It was the first film from Paramount to contain a sex scene between two men, and some controversy ensued in other countries, including a blow-job scene. See also[edit] Film portal Human sexuality portal Erotica and pornography portal Erotic thriller Golden Age of Porn Nudity in film Pre-Code sex films Sex symbol Unsimulated sex Sexposition Kissing in films Media and gender Exploitation of women in mass media References[edit] ^ "Eroticism". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 7 August 2011. ^ Firemark, Gordon (2015-11-02). "Nudity Riders - What they are, why you need them". Entertainment Law Offices of Gordon P. Firemark. Retrieved 2019-11-20. ^ "Our Organization". intimacydirection. Retrieved 2019-11-20. ^ Martinelli, Marissa (29 October 2018). "HBO Will Use "Intimacy Coordinators" for All of Its Sex Scenes". Slate Magazine. Retrieved 29 October 2018. ^ Mark Kermode: Dogs Don’t Wear Pants review – darkly humorous BDSM tale. The Guardian, 22 March 2020. ^ "The Chap-book". Stone and Kimball. February 23, 1896 – via Google Books. ^ "Sex in Cinema: Pre-1920s Greatest and Most Influential Erotic / Sexual Films and Scenes". www.filmsite.org. ^ Doherty, Thomas & Doherty, Thomas Patrick (2007). Hollywood's censor: Joseph I. Breen & the Production Code Administration. Columbia University Press. p. 310. ISBN 978-0-231-14358-5. ^ Latteier 1998, p. 117 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFLatteier1998 (help) ^ Meyer, Russ (2000). A Clean Breast: The Life and Loves of Russ Meyer (3 volume set). (Under the pseudonym "Adolph Albion Schwartz"). El Rio, TX: Hauck Pub Co. ISBN 0-9621797-2-8. ^ McDonough, Jimmy (2005). Big bosoms and square jaws : the biography of Russ Meyer, king of the sex film. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 0-224-07250-1., p.138 ^ a b c Canby, Vincent (July 22, 1969). "Movie Review - Blue Movie (1968) Screen: Andy Warhol's 'Blue Movie'". New York Times. Retrieved December 29, 2015. ^ a b c Canby, Vincent (August 10, 1969). "Warhol's Red Hot and 'Blue' Movie. D1. Print. (behind paywall)". New York Times. Retrieved December 29, 2015. ^ a b c Comenas, Gary (2005). "Blue Movie (1968)". WarholStars.org. Retrieved December 29, 2015. ^ "Pornography". Pornography Girl. Archived from the original on May 6, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2013. The first explicitly pornographic film with a plot that received a general theatrical release in the U.S. is generally considered to be Mona (Mona the Virgin Nymph)... ^ "Flesh Gordon Interview 3". PicPal.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008. Retrieved July 16, 2013. ^ Powell, Mimi; Scott Dagostino; Bhisham Kinha. "The Porn Power List". FAB magazine. Archived from the original on February 22, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2008. ^ "40 Years of Gay History: the Early Seventies". Advocate.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved November 5, 2007. ^ Jeffrey Escoffier, "Beefcake to Hardcore: Gay Pornography and the Sexual Revolution," in Sex Scene. Media and the Sexual Revolution, ed. Eric Schaefer, Duke University Press, 2014, ISBN 9780822356424, pp. 319-347, at p. 319. ^ Comenas, Gary (1969). "July 21, 1969: Andy Warhol's Blue Movie Opens". WarholStars.org. Retrieved January 20, 2016. ^ Haggerty, George E. (2015). A Companion to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Studies. John Wiley & Sons. p. 339. ISBN 9781119000853. Retrieved January 20, 2016. ^ a b c Lundin, Leigh (2010-07-25). "Erotic Mystery Thrillers". Sex-n-violence. Criminal Brief. ^ Ebert, Roger (March 24, 2010). "Chloe". Rogerebert.com. ^ Ray, Arnab (February 25, 2013). "On Kissing, Bollywood and Rebellion". The New York Times. ^ Singh, Prashant (August 25, 2014). "What’s the big deal about a kiss, asks Bollywood". Hindustan Times. ^ Dias, Muditha (May 15, 2013). "Bollywood's culture of rape". ABC ^ "Indians mature enough to handle sex in films: Konkona Sen". The Indian Express. December 3, 2010. ^ Siegel, Tatiana (2006-04-03). "Erotic thrillers lose steam on big screen". The Hollywood Reporter. Hollywood. Archived from the original on 2010-07-22. ^ a b Soto-Sanfiel, María T.; Ibiti, Adriana (2016-03-10). "Lesbian Sex in Mainstream Cinema and Audience Enjoyment". Sexuality & Culture. 20 (3): 555–578. doi:10.1007/s12119-016-9342-5. ISSN 1095-5143. S2CID 147703563. ^ "'Carol': Cannes Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 2019-12-02. ^ "Making of 'Carol': Why It Took 60 Years to Film the Lesbian Love Story". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 2019-12-02. ^ Lane, Anthony (2017-11-24). ""Call Me by Your Name": An Erotic Triumph". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Retrieved 2019-12-02. Further reading[edit] Andrews, David (2006) Soft in the Middle: the contemporary softcore feature in its contexts. Ohio State University Press, ISBN 9780814210222 Brusendorff, Ove & Henningsen, Poul (1960) Erotica for the Millions. Los Angeles: the Book Mart Durgnat, Raymond (1966) Eros in the Cinema. London: Calder & Boyars Jahraus, Oliver & Neuhaus, Stefan (2003) Der erotische Film: Zur medialen Codierung von Ästhetik, Sexualität und Gewalt. Königshausen & Neumann, ISBN 3826025822 Keesey, Douglas; Duncan, Paul (ed.) (2005) Erotic Cinema. Cologne: Taschen ISBN 3-8228-2546-8 Kyrou, Ado (1957) Amour-Érotisme au Cinéma. Le Terrain Vague --do.-- (1963) Le Surréalisme au Cinéma. Le Terrain Vague Lo Duca (1958, 1960, 1962) L'Érotisme au Cinéma. 3 vols. Paris: Pauvert McDonagh, Maitland (1996) The Fifty Most Erotic Films of All Time: from "Pandora's Box" to "Basic Instinct". New York: Carol Publishing Group ISBN 0-8065-1697-6 Tohill, Cathal & Tombs, Pete (1994) Immoral Tales: sex and horror cinema in Europe, 1956-1984. London: Primitive Press ISBN 0-9524141-0-4 Tyler, Parker (1969) Sex Psyche Etcetera in the Film. Horizon Books --do.--(1971) --do.-- (Pelican Book A1302.) Harmondsworth: Penguin Books ISBN 0-14-021302-3 Walker, Alexander (1966) The Celluloid Sacrifice. London: Michael Joseph --do.--(1968) Sex in the Movies: the celluloid sacrifice. (Pelican Book A989.) Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Williams, Linda (2005) The Erotic Thriller in Contemporary Cinema. Edinburgh University Press, ISBN 9780748611485 External links[edit] Sex in Cinema: The Greatest and Most Influential Erotic or Sexual Films and Scenes "Sexuality in the Mass Media: How to View the Media Critically". SexInfo. 2003-04-06. Archived from the original on 2011-07-25. Lundin, Leigh (2010-07-25). "Erotic Mystery Thrillers". Sex-n-violence. Criminal Brief. A movie plot with gaping holes isn't a mystery and not even a good movie. v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125