Sexual activity that involves inserting a person's body part into another person Sexual penetration occurring in the missionary position, depicted by Édouard-Henri Avril Sexual penetration is the insertion of a body part or other object into a body orifice, such as the vagina, anus or mouth, as part of human sexual activity or animal sexual behavior. The term is most commonly used in statute law in the context of proscribing certain sexual activities. Terms such as "sexual intercourse" or "carnal knowledge" are more commonly found in older statutes, while many modern criminal statutes use the term "sexual penetration" because it is a broad term encompassing (unless otherwise qualified) any form of penetrative sexual activity, including digital (i.e., the fingers) or with an object, and may involve only the most minimal penetration. Some jurisdictions refer to some forms of penetration as "acts of indecency", or other terminology. Contents 1 Definitions 2 Unlawful 3 See also 4 References Definitions[edit] When a penis is inserted into a vagina, it is generally called vaginal or sexual intercourse.[1][2] When a penis penetrates another person's anus, it is called anal sex or anal intercourse.[3][4] Penetrative oral sex may involve penetration of the mouth by a penis (fellatio) or the use of the tongue to penetrate a vagina or vulva (cunnilingus). The tongue may also penetrate the anus during anilingus, which is a form of oral and anal sex. If one or more fingers are used to penetrate an orifice, it is called fingering or digital penetration. The insertion of an object, such as a dildo, vibrator or other sex toy, into a person's genital area or anus may also be considered sexual penetration. Unlawful[edit] See also: Human sexual activity § Legal issues Penetrative sex crimes are generally considered more serious than non-penetrative sex crimes,[5] and sexual penetration of a child even more so. A child below the statutory age of consent generally cannot consent to acts involving sexual penetration. In laws, the term sexual penetration is commonly used in relation to sex with children. Unlawful sexual penetration is generally an offense irrespective of how deep the penetration was and irrespective of whether ejaculation of semen took place. Laws may distinguish particular forms of sexual penetration as part of the offense. For example, the law in the U.S. state of Oregon provides: "Unlawful sexual penetration in the first degree" is a felony that occurs where the offender "penetrates the vagina, anus or penis of another with any object other than the penis or mouth of the actor", if the victim is "subjected to forcible compulsion", or is "under 12 years of age", or "is incapable of consent by reason of mental defect, mental incapacitation or physical helplessness" — Unlawful sexual penetration in the first degree, Oregon Statutes § 163.411 In the United Kingdom, sexually penetrating a relative is an offense.[6] Various forms of penetration have at times been considered obscene and been prohibited. Works containing such penetrations may be considered pornography.[citation needed] See also[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sexual penetrative use of objects. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Sex and the law References[edit] ^ Cecie Starr, Beverly McMillan (2008). Human Biology. Cengage Learning. p. 314. ISBN 978-0495561811. Retrieved April 30, 2013. ^ "Sexual intercourse". Collins English Dictionary. Retrieved September 5, 2012. ^ Barry R. Komisaruk; Beverly Whipple; Sara Nasserzadeh; Carlos Beyer-Flores (2009). The Orgasm Answer Guide. JHU Press. pp. 108–109. ISBN 978-0-8018-9396-4. Retrieved November 6, 2011. ^ Janell L. Carroll (2009). Sexuality Now: Embracing Diversity. Cengage Learning. pp. 270–271. ISBN 978-0-495-60274-3. Retrieved December 19, 2010. ^ Guidelines for sentencing, UK Archived 2013-11-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sexual Offences Act 2003 retrieved 24 February 2012 v t e Outline of human sexuality Physiology and biology Erection Insemination Intersex Libido Nocturnal emission Orgasm Female and male ejaculation Pelvic thrust Pre-ejaculate Pregnancy Sexual arousal Sexual stimulation Health and education Birth control Condom Masters and Johnson Reproductive medicine Andrology Gynaecology Urology Safe sex Sex education Sex therapy (PLISSIT model) Sexology Sexual dysfunction Erectile dysfunction Hypersexuality Hyposexuality Sexual medicine Sexual surrogate Sexually transmitted infection Identity and diversity Gender binary Gender identity Men who have sex with men Sexual identity Sexual orientation Women who have sex with women Law Age of consent Criminal transmission of HIV Child sexual abuse Incest Indecent exposure Obscenity Sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Rape Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual misconduct Sexual slavery Sexual violence History Blue Movie Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist sex wars Golden Age of Porn History of erotic depictions Sexual revolution Relationships and society Anarchism and love/sex Extramarital sex Family planning Flirting Free love Marriage Modesty Polyamory Premarital sex Promiscuity Romance Sex-positive movement Sexual abstinence Sexual addiction Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual objectification Sexual slang By country Ancient Rome China India Japan Philippines South Korea United States Sexual activities Conventional sex Anal sex Bareback BDSM Child sex Creampie Edging Erotic sexual denial Fetishism Fingering Fisting Gang bang Group sex Masturbation Mechanics of sex Nipple stimulation Non-penetrative sex Facial Foot fetishism Footjob Forced orgasm Frot Handjob Mammary intercourse Sumata Oral sex 69 Anilingus Cunnilingus Fellatio Irrumatio Paraphilia Pompoir Quickie Sex in space Sex positions Sexual fantasy Sexual fetishism Sexual intercourse Foreplay Sexual penetration Swinging Tribadism Urethral intercourse Urolagnia Virtual sex Cybersex Erotic talk Wet T-shirt contest Sex industry Red-light district Adult video games Erotica Pornography Film actor Prostitution Survival sex Sex museum Sex shop Sex tourism Child Female Sex worker Sex toy doll Strip club Webcam model Religion and sexuality Buddhism Christian demonology Daoism Islam Mormonism Sex magic  Human sexuality portal v t e Human sexuality and sexology Sexual relationship phenomena Asexuality Gray asexuality Bisexuality Casual relationship Casual sex Celibacy Celibacy syndrome Herbivore men Committed relationship Conventional sex Free love Foreplay Heterosexuality Homosexuality Hypersexuality Marriage One-night stand Polyamory Promiscuity Female Romantic love Romantic orientation Flirting Sex life Sexual abstinence Sexual orientation Sexual partner Single person Swinging Sexual dynamics Hypergamy Physical attractiveness Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual frustration Sociosexuality See also Sexual addiction Sex Addicts Anonymous Sexual jealousy Sex-positive movement Sexual surrogate