This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Shapeshifter DVD cover Directed by Gregory Lemkin Produced by David Michael Latt David Rimawi Sherri Strain Written by Gregory Lemkin and A. Everett Howe Starring Jennifer Lee Wiggins Ocean Marciano Chris Facey Vaz Andreas Marat Glazer Thomas Downey Joel Ezra Hebner Music by Scott Bruzenak Ariel Westberg Cinematography Andrew Shulkind Edited by Jaron Whitfill Distributed by The Asylum Release date 2005 (2005) Running time 81 minutes Country United States Language English Shapeshifter is a 2005 horror film with supernatural elements created by the independent film group The Asylum. It was directed by Gregory Lemkin who also co-wrote the film. Contents 1 Plot 2 Release 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] Inmates and guards alike become trapped in a maximum security prison when they fall prey to a demonic beast that feeds on human flesh. As the creature's power multiplies with every kill, their only chance for survival is to uncover the ancient mystery that holds the power of the shapeshifter. Release[edit] Shapeshifter was released on DVD by The Asylum Home Entertainment on November 29, 2005.[1] Reception[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2018) Jon Condit from Dread Central panned the film, awarding it a score of one out of five. In his review, Condit criticized the film's lack of originality, weak characters, and slow pacing; calling it "a thoroughly dull demonic monster in a prison flick almost completely devoid of energy or imagination."[2] References[edit] ^ "Shapeshifter (2005) - Gregory Lemkin". Allmovie.com. AllMovie. Retrieved 18 April 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Condit, Jon. "Shapeshifter (2005) - Dread Central". Dread Central.com. Jon Condit. Retrieved 18 April 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at AllMovie API at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes This article about a 2000s horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e