Not to be confused with Shawnee State Forest. Shawnee National Forest IUCN category VI (protected area with sustainable use of natural resources) Garden of the Gods Wilderness in Shawnee National Forest Location Illinois, USA Nearest city Harrisburg, Illinois Coordinates 37°30′N 88°40′W﻿ / ﻿37.500°N 88.667°W﻿ / 37.500; -88.667Coordinates: 37°30′N 88°40′W﻿ / ﻿37.500°N 88.667°W﻿ / 37.500; -88.667 Area 265,616 acres (1,074.91 km2) Established August 1933 Governing body U.S. Forest Service Website Shawnee National Forest The Shawnee National Forest is a United States National Forest located in the Ozark and Shawnee Hills of Southern Illinois, United States. Administered by the U.S.D.A. Forest Service, it consists of approximately 280,000 acres (1,100 km²) of federally managed lands. In descending order of land area it is located in parts of Pope, Jackson, Union, Hardin, Alexander, Saline, Gallatin, Johnson, and Massac counties.[1] Forest headquarters are located in Harrisburg, Illinois. There are local ranger district offices in Jonesboro and Vienna.[2] The Shawnee National Forest is also the single largest publicly owned body of land in the state of Illinois. It is considered part of Southern Illinois, and is south of the St. Louis, Missouri, and Metro East areas, in area code 618. Portions of it are in the far south area of Illinois known as Little Egypt. Cities in or near the area are Carbondale, Illinois, Marion, Illinois, and Cairo, Illinois. Designated as the Illini and Shawnee Purchase Units, President Franklin D. Roosevelt declared these purchase units to be the Shawnee National Forest in September 1939. Most of the land added to the Forest in its first decade of existence was exhausted farmland. Throughout the 1930s and 1940s, the Civilian Conservation Corps planted pine trees to prevent erosion and help rebuild the soil. However, the Forest is also home to many hardwood trees and other plant and animal species characteristic of the region. In the 1980s and 1990s, there was an active history of conservation and protest efforts by local, regional, and national environmental groups and individuals ranging from radical movements such as Earth First! to mainstream organizations such as the Sierra Club and the Green Party. The wise use movement once played an active role in lobbying for its vision of the Shawnee National Forest. Today a more cooperative atmosphere has developed, although some controversy remains with a few.[who?] In 2006, the Forest Service completed the development of a new Forest Management Plan for the Shawnee National Forest. This plan, adopted every 10–15 years, outlines the policies and practices of the U.S. Forest Service in overseeing the management of the Shawnee National Forest. The 2006 Forest Plan was completed in collaboration with many environmental and public groups and is designed to maintain and enhance the forest's unique biodiversity. Contents 1 Geology 1.1 Rock climbing 2 Wilderness areas 3 Recreation areas 4 Coinage 5 Eclipse viewing 6 References 7 External links Geology[edit] During the Illinoian Stage (between 352,000 and 132,000 years ago), the Laurentide Ice Sheet covered up to 85 percent of Illinois. The southern margin of this ice sheet was located within what is now the area of the Shawnee National Forest. There are many points of interest marking the southern edge of the glacier. Some are located within the Forest boundary, others are on public land in proximity. Little Grand Canyon is located within the Shawnee National Forest. This is accessible off Illinois Route 127 south of Murphysboro, Illinois. A small creek with a tiny watershed has carved an impressive rock canyon, more than 200 feet deep, leading down to the Big Muddy River. The southern edge of the ice sheet was just to the north of Little Grand Canyon. Blocks of ice slid off the face of the glacier, carried by enormous volumes of meltwater, to carve this tiny canyon. In the deep shade of the canyon are relict species of Arctic plants left over from its ancient origin. Cedar Lake is an artificial lake formed by damming Cedar Creek. The lake is accessible off Illinois Route 127, south of Murphysboro, and off U.S. 51, south of Carbondale. In this area, the Illinoian Glacier climbed the Shawnee Hills at its southern margin. The glacier blocked the waterways flowing north down the hills. This drainage formed a creek running northwest along the face of the glacier. This became Cedar Creek, the watershed of which is extremely asymmetrical. While the watershed extends only a few thousand feet to the south, up the face of the terminal moraine, the creek is also fed by waterways extending miles to the south. Within the area of the Shawnee National Forest, but not at this time US property, is Hicks Dome, an igneous feature in Hardin County, Illinois. This was formerly speculated to be the result of a hot spot, but some argue it was caused by a meteorite impact.[3] Rock formations near hiking trail Scenic View Shawnee National Forest featured on America the Beautiful quarter Rock climbing[edit] In northwestern Pope County, Jackson Falls is a noted location for rock climbing and speed climbing.[4][5] Wilderness areas[edit] There are seven officially designated wilderness areas lying within Shawnee National Forest that are part of the National Wilderness Preservation System. Bald Knob Wilderness Bay Creek Wilderness Burden Falls Wilderness Clear Springs Wilderness Garden of the Gods Wilderness Lusk Creek Wilderness Panther Den Wilderness There are three natural vegetation research areas: Cave Hill, Stoneface, and Whoopie Cat Mountain Research Natural Areas in the Shawnee National Forest. Recreation areas[edit] Pounds Hollow Coinage[edit] Shawnee National Forest appeared on the thirty-first quarter in the America the Beautiful Quarters series in 2016.[6] Eclipse viewing[edit] The Shawnee National Forest was among the best sites from which to view the solar eclipse of August 21, 2017, with two minutes 44 seconds of totality.[7] References[edit] ^ Table 6 - NFS Acreage by State, Congressional District, and County, 30 September 2008 ^ USFS Ranger Districts by State ^ "NEW DIMENSIONS OF THE WEAUBLEAU STRUCTURE: A POSSIBLE METEORITE IMPACT SITE IN SOUTHWESTERN MISSOURI". gsa.confex.com. Retrieved 1 January 2019. ^ "Jackson Falls Trail" (PDF). Shawnee National Forest. United States Department of Agriculture. August 2016. Retrieved March 9, 2021. ^ "Activities: Jackson Falls". Illinois Office of Tourism. Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. Retrieved March 9, 2021. ^ "United States Mint Announces 2016 America the Beautiful Quarters® Program Coin Designs". July 22, 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2017. ^ "The Path Through the United States". eclipse.org. Retrieved 14 January 2017. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shawnee National Forest. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikivoyage has a travel guide for API. Shawnee National Forest - The official Forest Service site for the Shawnee National Forest v t e Protected areas of Illinois Federal National Historic Sites Chicago Portage Lincoln Home National monument Pullman National Forest Shawnee National Wildlife Refuges Chautauqua Crab Orchard Cypress Creek Driftless Area Emiquon Hackmatack Mark Twain Meredosia Middle Mississippi River Port Louisa Two Rivers Upper Mississippi River National Grassland Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie National Trails/National Heritage Area Lewis and Clark Mormon Pioneer Trail of Tears Abraham Lincoln National Heritage Area National Natural Landmarks List of National Natural Landmarks in Illinois National Wild and Scenic Rivers Middle Fork Vermilion River Wetlands of international importance Cache River-Cypress Creek The Emiquon Complex Dixon Waterfowl Refuge Chiwaukee Prairie Illinois Beach Lake Plain (shared with Wisconsin) Upper Mississippi (shared) State State Parks Apple River Argyle Lake Beall Woods Beaver Dam Buffalo Rock Castle Rock Cave-in-Rock Chain O'Lakes Channahon Delabar Dixon Springs Donnelley/Depue Ferne Clyffe Fort Massac Fox Ridge Gebhard Woods Giant City Hennepin Canal Parkway Horseshoe Lake Illini Illinois Beach James "Pate" Philip Jubilee College Kankakee River Lake Murphysboro Lincoln Trail Lowden Matthiessen Mississippi Palisades Moraine Hills Morrison-Rockwood Nauvoo Pere Marquette Red Hills Rock Cut Rock Island Trail Shabbona Lake Siloam Springs South Shore Starved Rock Walnut Point Weinberg-King White Pines Forest Wildlife Prairie William G. Stratton Wolf Creek State Historic Sites List of Illinois State Historic Sites (including, Cahokia World Heritage Site) State Forests Big River Hidden Springs Lowden-Miller Sand Ridge Trail of Tears State Recreation Areas Clinton Lake Eagle Creek Eldon Hazlet Frank Holten Golconda Marina Johnson-Sauk Trail Kickapoo Lake Le-Aqua-Na Moraine View North Point Marina Prophetstown Pyramid Ramsey Lake Randolph County Sangchris Lake Stephen A. Forbes Washington County Wayne Fitzgerrell Weldon Springs William W. Powers State Fish & Wildlife Areas Anderson Lake Baldwin Lake Banner Marsh Carlyle Lake Coffeen Lake Crawford County Des Plaines Double T Edward R. Madigan Green River Hamilton County Heidecke Lake Horseshoe Lake (Alexander County) Iroquois County Kaskaskia River Kinkaid Lake Kishwaukee River LaSalle Lake Mackinaw River Marshall Mautino Mazonia/Braidwood Mermet Lake Middle Fork Mississippi River Newton Lake Jim Edgar Panther Creek Peabody River Pekin Lake Powerton Lake Ray Norbut Rend Lake Rice Lake Sahara Woods Saline County Sam Dale Lake Sam Parr Sanganois Shelbyville Silver Springs Snakeden Hollow Spring Lake Ten Mile Creek Turkey Bluffs Union County Woodford State Natural Areas Bartlett Woods Cache River Franklin Creek Fults Hill Prairie Goose Lake Prairie Harry "Babe" Woodyard Illinois Caverns Kidd Lake Mitchell's Grove Nature Preserve Piney Creek Ravine Prairie Ridge Revis Hill Prairie Sand Prairie-Scrub Oak Sielbeck Forest Spitler Woods Volo Bog State Trails Mormon Trail Trail of Tears Tunnel Hill Local County Districts Local forest and conservation districts Category Chicago Illinois Department of Natural Resources Commons v t e National Forests of the United States Allegheny Angeles Angelina Apache–Sitgreaves Apalachicola Arapaho Ashley Beaverhead–Deerlodge Bienville Bighorn Bitterroot Black Hills Boise Bridger–Teton Caribou–Targhee Carson Chattahoochee–Oconee Chequamegon–Nicolet Cherokee Chippewa Choctawhatchee Chugach Cibola Clearwater Cleveland Coeur d'Alene Coconino Colville Conecuh Coronado Croatan Custer Daniel Boone Davy Crockett De Soto Delta Deschutes Dixie Eldorado Finger Lakes Fishlake Flathead Francis Marion Fremont–Winema Gallatin George Washington and Jefferson Gifford Pinchot Gila Grand Mesa Green Mountain Gunnison Helena Hiawatha Holly Springs Homochitto Hoosier Humboldt–Toiyabe Huron–Manistee Idaho Panhandle Inyo Kaibab Kaniksu Kisatchie Klamath Kootenai Lake Tahoe Basin Lassen Lewis and Clark Lincoln Lolo Los Padres Malheur Manti–La Sal Mark Twain Medicine Bow–Routt Mendocino Modoc Monongahela Mount Baker–Snoqualmie Mount Hood Nantahala Nebraska Nez Perce Ocala Osceola Ochoco Okanogan Olympic Ottawa Ouachita Ozark–St. Francis Payette Pike Pisgah Plumas Prescott Rio Grande Rogue River–Siskiyou Roosevelt San Bernardino San Isabel San Juan Sabine Salmon–Challis Sam Houston Samuel R. McKelvie Santa Fe Sawtooth Sequoia Shasta–Trinity Shawnee Shoshone Sierra Siuslaw Six Rivers St. Joe Stanislaus Sumter Superior Tahoe Tombigbee Tongass Tonto Talladega Tuskegee Uinta Umatilla Umpqua Uncompahgre Uwharrie Wallowa–Whitman Wasatch–Cache Wayne Wenatchee White Mountain White River Willamette William B. Bankhead Full Detailed List former list Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125