Mortal Kombat character, bodyguard, briefly Shokan queen This article is about the Mortal Kombat character. For the Hindu aspect of God, see Shiva. Sheeva Mortal Kombat character Sheeva in Mortal Kombat 11 (2020) First appearance Mortal Kombat 3 (1995) Created by Ed Boon John Tobias Designed by John Tobias (MK3) Atomhawk Design (MK9) Portrayed by Marjean Holden (Annihilation) Voiced by Dawnn Lewis (MK:DotR) Lori McClain (MK:A) Lani Minella (MK9) Vanessa Marshall (MK11) Motion capture Lani Minella (MK9) Nik Stewart (MK11) (Model) In-universe information Species Shokan (Draco lineage) Gender Female Weapon Shokan Daggers (MK:A) Shield (MK11) Origin Outworld Fighting styles Kuatan (MK:A) Warning: Page using Template:Infobox character with unknown parameter "Face Model" (this message is shown only in preview). Sheeva is a fictional character in the Mortal Kombat fighting game franchise by NetherRealm Studios/Midway Games. Making her first appearance in Mortal Kombat 3 (1995), she is of the multilimbed Shokan species from the otherworldly realm of Outworld, like Goro and Kintaro. She has served as the personal protector of Outworld emperor Shao Kahn's queen, Sindel, while harboring a bitter hatred for Motaro, who is of the Shokan's sworn enemies, the Centaurians. In the 2011 reboot, her role in the storyline is that of Kahn's bodyguard and jailer, holding Sonya Blade and Kitana captive on separate occasions. Created as a stop motion-animated figurine like Goro and Kintaro, Sheeva was added into the MK (Mortal Kombat) series due to fan requests for a playable version of Goro. However, out of all the characters from the first generation of games, she has featured the least in the overall series continuity to date, only appearing as a playable in two additional titles after MK3 and its upgrades (Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 and Mortal Kombat Trilogy) in addition to small roles in alternative Mortal Kombat-related media, while appearing on no official merchandise. Reception to the character has been mixed in terms of her presence in the series and her finishing moves. Contents 1 Appearances 1.1 Mortal Kombat games 1.1.1 Character design and gameplay 1.2 Other media 2 Reception 3 References Appearances[edit] Mortal Kombat games[edit] Sheeva belongs to the ancient race of the Shokan, a subterranean people living in Outworld. Like all of her race, she possesses a tall, muscular build, red eyes, four arms with three fingers on each totaling 12 fingers, and two toes on each foot. However special to her only is the horns on her head. In Mortal Kombat 3 (1995), when the Outworld emperor Shao Kahn resurrected the Edenian queen Sindel as the first step in his invasion of Earthrealm, he appointed Sheeva to be her personal protector. She became distrustful, however, when the Kahn appointed the centaur Motaro to lead his Extermination Squads into battle. Sheeva saw this as an insult, as the Shokan and Centaurs have long been mortal enemies. She served the emperor in Earthrealm, but when she returned to Outworld, she was shocked to learn that Shao Kahn had betrayed the Shokans and had launched an offensive against them. She joined her fellow Shokans in fighting the Kahn’s warriors. The Shokans were far outnumbered, but when Shao Kahn is defeated by Earth’s warriors and recalled his troops, Sheeva takes this opportunity to get revenge on Motaro. Days later, she learned that Motaro had nursed his Earthrealm ally, Kano, back to health. Although Motaro had rescued Kano, it was merely to imprison him so he could later face the wrath of Shao Kahn for his failure to defeat the Earthrealm warrior Sonya Blade. Some time later, Sheeva attempted to kill Motaro and Shao Kahn, freeing Kano to help her with the latter after he offered his assistance. They proceeded to the palace, but Kano betrayed Sheeva, informing Shao Kahn of the attempt on his life, which leads to him killing Sheeva. In Mortal Kombat: Armageddon's' (2006) training mode, an illusion of Sheeva is seen in the Netherealm within a legion of demons all attempting to overthrow fallen Elder God Shinnok's rule as part of a test for Edenian demigod Taven. Sheeva returns in the rebooted continuity of Mortal Kombat (2011). In the Story Mode, she serves as Shao Kahn's bodyguard and jailer. She fights several kombatants in the game and loses to them all. Sheeva returns as ally in Mortal Kombat 11, initially as a non-playable character before later becoming a DLC character. She is first seen when a past iteration of Edenian princess Kitana tried to convince her to aid Kotal Kahn against the revived Shao Kahn. Sheeva, however, is hesitant to get involved unless victory is assured; stating she will join only if Baraka and his Tarkatans can be persuaded to join as well. After Kitana achieves this, Sheeva accompanies her in storming the Koliseum to prevent Kotal's execution. Later, Sheeva becomes one of Kitana's primary lieutenants after the now-crippled Kotal appoints the latter the new Kahn.[1] Sheeva joins the alliance in the final battle against the keeper of time Kronika's army in the Netherrealm while Kitana and her allies proceed to Kronika's keep.[2] In the DLC expansion, Aftermath, Sheeva plays a more significant role, aiding a time-traveling Shang Tsung in retrieving Kronika's Crown of Souls so Fire God Liu Kang can restore history after exploiting her blood oath to Sindel. Sheeva assists in reviving her so she can join them as well,[3] but upon learning of Sindel's treachery, Sheeva attempted to stop her, only to be defeated.[4] Character design and gameplay[edit] Sheeva, whose name was derived from Shiva, the Hindu deity of destruction, was introduced into the series due to fan requests for a playable version of Goro.[5] She was not included among the selectable fighters in the SNES and Sega Genesis version of Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 due to memory constraints, though she appeared as a glitch character in the SNES version of Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3. Until the release of MK: Armageddon, Sheeva had not appeared as a playable character since MK Trilogy, nor did she have had any substantial cameos. Her fate after MK Trilogy was revealed in the text from Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance's Konquest mode. In Armageddon's arcade mode, Sheeva sometimes appeared as a sub-boss before the final fight with Blaze. She is the only Shokan character that can perform aerial combos. While she has Goro's offensive moves, she is female so that she would be smaller in size and therefore the same height as the other fighters. Other media[edit] Sheeva has a minor role in the 1997 film Mortal Kombat: Annihilation, and is played by Marjean Holden. In the shooting script and novelization, Sheeva is killed following an extensive fight scene with Raiden, but the scene was never filmed, with Raiden instead fighting two Raptors and Sheeva being crushed by a falling cage.[6] Her only action sequence is a brief quarrel with Motaro, though the film acknowledges her then-current role in the games as Sindel's personal protector. Sheeva has a small role in the animated series Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm, in which she harbored a long-standing animosity toward Raiden. She was voiced by Dawnn Lewis. In the 2015 Mortal Kombat X: Blood Ties prequel comic miniseries produced by DC Comics, Sheeva is crowned by Kintaro as the current leader of the Shokan in a peaceful treaty with Kotal Kahn, following the death of previous rule King Gorbak. Sheeva mourns Kintaro's death after a possessed Sonya kills him in battle. Reception[edit] Reception of the character has been mixed. In 2011, Wirtualna Polska featured her among the top ten villainesses in gaming, as "an attraction for connoisseurs of unusual beauty and even more unusual quantities of the various parts of the body."[7] In 2012, UGO.com ranked her as the 28th top Mortal Kombat character.[8] Game Informer in 2010 listed her as one of the characters they did not want for MK2011, stating that "despite a somewhat cool ground-pound move, she was an addition to the series that never really served a purpose or did anything particularly noteworthy."[9] Sheeva was featured in several lists of the best finishing moves in the Mortal Kombat series by various publications. In 1996, her "Skin Rip" move received the most votes for favorite Mortal Kombat 3 finishing move from GamePro readers.[10] In 2010, IGN ranked her "Manly Forearms" from MK3 as the third-best Fatality.[11] In 2012, GameFront ranked her "Stripped Down" Fatality from Mortal Kombat 2011 as the third best in the series,[12] while her other Fatality was also ranked as the ninth best in this game by Paste.[13] References[edit] ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 7: Coming of Age (Kitana). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 12: End of an Era (Fire God Liu Kang). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11:Aftermath. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 14: Guardian for Life (Sheeva). ^ NetherRealm Studios (2019). Mortal Kombat 11:Aftermath. Warner Bros. Level/area: Chapter 16: Visions of Empire (Sindel & Shao Kahn). ^ Sheeva's Bio Card. Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Premium Edition Bonus Disc, Midway Games, 2006. ^ Interview with: Marjean Holden - Total Mortal Kombat, 2/4/01 ^ Sheeva – Mortal Kombat - 10 najseksowniejszych negatywnych bohaterek - Imperium gier - WP.PL Archived 2012-03-21 at the Wayback Machine (in Polish) ^ UGO Team (2012-02-28). "Sheeva - Top 50 Mortal Kombat Characters". UGO.com. Archived from the original on 2013-03-16. Retrieved 2012-10-09. ^ Ulrich, Tyler (2010-06-21). "Who We Want (And Don't Want) In The New Mortal Kombat - Features". www.GameInformer.com. Retrieved 2012-08-13. ^ "Reader Report". GamePro. IDG (91): 13. April 1996. ^ "IGN's Unofficial Top 10 List of the Best Mortal Kombat Fatalities - PS3 Feature at IGN". Uk.ps3.ign.com. 2010-11-30. Retrieved 2012-10-09. ^ Andy Gold (2011-04-20). "Mortal Kombat's 10 Best Fatalities". GameFront. Retrieved 2012-10-09. ^ Nathan Spicer (2011-04-23). "The 17 Best Fatalities from Mortal Kombat 1 & 9 :: Blogs :: List of the Day :: Paste". Pastemagazine.com. Retrieved 2012-10-09. v t e Mortal Kombat Video games Fighting games Mortal Kombat (1992) Mortal Kombat II Mortal Kombat 3 Ultimate Trilogy Mortal Kombat 4 Gold Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Mortal Kombat: Deception Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe Mortal Kombat (2011) Mortal Kombat X Mortal Kombat 11 Adventure games Mortal Kombat Mythologies: Sub-Zero Mortal Kombat: Special Forces Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks Compilations Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection Other media Films Mortal Kombat (1995) Mortal Kombat: Annihilation Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge Mortal Kombat (2021) Television Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm Mortal Kombat: Conquest Mortal Kombat: Legacy episodes Card games Mortal Kombat Kard Game Epic Battles Music Mortal Kombat: The Album Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Score Mortal Kombat: More Kombat Mortal Kombat: Annihilation – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Songs Inspired by the Warriors Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Other Comics Malibu Comics Mortal Kombat: Live Tour Characters Baraka Cassie Cage Cyrax Ermac Goro Jade Jax Johnny Cage Kabal Kano Kenshi Kitana Kung Lao Liu Kang Mileena Nightwolf Noob Saibot Quan Chi Raiden Rain Reptile Scorpion Sektor Shang Tsung Shao Kahn Sheeva Shinnok Sindel Skarlet Smoke Sonya Blade Stryker Sub-Zero Related Controversies surrounding Mortal Kombat Fatality Midway Games NetherRealm Studios Mortal Kombat: Rebirth Injustice: Gods Among Us Injustice 2 Category