For other uses, see Shinjuku (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Special ward in Kantō, Japan Shinjuku 新宿区 Special ward Shinjuku City[1] Skyscrapers of Shinjuku with Mount Fuji in the background Flag Seal Location of Shinjuku in Tokyo Shinjuku   Coordinates: 35°42′5″N 139°42′35″E﻿ / ﻿35.70139°N 139.70972°E﻿ / 35.70139; 139.70972Coordinates: 35°42′5″N 139°42′35″E﻿ / ﻿35.70139°N 139.70972°E﻿ / 35.70139; 139.70972 Country Japan Region Kantō Prefecture Tokyo Government  • Mayor Kenichi Yoshizumi  • Tourism Ambassador Godzilla[2] Area  • Total 18.23 km2 (7.04 sq mi) Population  (2018)  • Total 346,235  • Density 18.232/km2 (47.22/sq mi) Time zone UTC+9 (Japan Standard Time) - Tree Zelkova serrata - Flower Azalea Phone number 03-3209-1111 City Hall Address Kabukichō 1-4-1, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8484 Website www.city.shinjuku.lg.jp Shinjuku (Japanese: 新宿区, Hepburn: Shinjuku-ku) is a special ward in Tokyo, Japan. It is a major commercial and administrative centre, housing the northern half of the busiest railway station in the world (Shinjuku Station) and the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building, the administration centre for the government of Tokyo. As of 2018, the ward has an estimated population of 346,235, and a population density of 18,232 people per km2. The total area is 18.23 km2.[3] Since the end of the Second World War, Shinjuku has been a major secondary center of Tokyo (fukutoshin), rivaling to the original city center in Marunouchi and Ginza. It literally means "New Inn Ward". Shinjuku is also commonly used to refer to the entire area surrounding Shinjuku Station. The southern half of this area and of the station in fact belong to Yoyogi and Sendagaya districts of the neighboring Shibuya ward. Contents 1 Geography 2 Districts and neighborhoods 3 History 4 Economy 5 Government and politics 5.1 Elections 6 Transportation 6.1 Rail 6.2 Roads 7 Education 7.1 Colleges and universities 7.2 Schools 7.2.1 High schools 8 Public institutions 8.1 Libraries 8.2 Hospitals 8.3 Cultural centers 8.3.1 Museums 8.3.2 Halls 9 Sister cities 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Geography[edit] Shinjuku office buildings Man with guitar immediately south of the Shinjuku JR Station, a popular busking location Shinjuku is surrounded by Chiyoda to the east; Bunkyo and Toshima to the north; Nakano to the west, and Shibuya and Minato to the south.[4] Shinjuku Gyo-en National Garden and NTT DoCoMo Yoyogi Building Shinjuku shopping street Shinjuku shopping area The current city of Shinjuku grew out of several separate towns and villages, which have retained some distinctions despite growing together as part of the Tokyo metropolis. East Shinjuku (or administratively called Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku): The area east of Shinjuku Station and surrounding Shinjuku-sanchome Station, historically known as Naito-Shinjuku, houses the city hall and the flagship Isetan department store, as well as several smaller areas of interest: Kabukichō: Tokyo's best-known red-light district, renowned for its variety of bars, restaurants, and sex-related establishments. Golden Gai: An area of tiny shanty-style bars and clubs. Musicians, artists, journalists, actors and directors gather here, and the ramshackle walls of the bars are literally plastered with film posters. Shinjuku Gyo-en: A large park, 58.3 hectares, 3.5 km in circumference, blending Japanese traditional, English Landscape and French Formal style gardens. Shinjuku Ni-chōme: Tokyo's best-known gay district. Nishi-Shinjuku: The area west of Shinjuku Station, historically known as Yodobashi, is home to Tokyo's largest concentration of skyscrapers. Several of the tallest buildings in Tokyo are located in this area, including the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building, KDDI Building and Park Tower. Ochiai: The northwestern corner of Shinjuku, extending to the area around Ochiai-minami-nagasaki Station and the south side of Mejiro Station, is largely residential with a small business district around Nakai Station. Ōkubo: The area surrounding Okubo Station, Shin-Okubo Station and Higashi-Shinjuku Station is best known as Tokyo's historic ethnic Korean neighborhood after World War II. Totsuka: The northern portion of Shinjuku surrounding Takadanobaba Station and Waseda University, today commonly referred to as Nishi-Waseda. The Takadanobaba area is a major residential and nightlife area for students, as well as a commuter hub. Toyama: A largely residential and school area, in the east of Ōkubo and south of Waseda University, extending to the area around Nishi-Waseda Station, Gakushuin Women's College and Toyama Park. Ushigome: A largely residential area in the eastern portion of the city. Ichigaya: A commercial area in eastern Shinjuku, site of the Ministry of Defense. Kagurazaka: A hill descending to the Iidabashi Station area, once one of Tokyo's last remaining hanamachi or geisha districts, and currently known for hosting a sizable French community.[5] Yotsuya: An upscale residential and commercial district in the southeast corner of Shinjuku. The Arakichō area is well known for its many small restaurants, bars, and izakaya. "Shinjuku" is often popularly understood to mean the entire area surrounding Shinjuku Station, but the Shinjuku Southern Terrace complex and the areas to the west of the station and south of Kōshū Kaidō are part of the Yoyogi and Sendagaya districts of the special ward of Shibuya. Naturally, most of Shinjuku is occupied by the Yodobashi Plateau, the most elevated portion of which extends through most of the Shinjuku Station area. The Kanda River runs through the Ochiai and Totsuka areas near sea level, but the Toshima Plateau also builds elevation in the northern extremities of Totsuka and Ochiai. The highest point in Shinjuku is Hakone-san in Toyama Park, 44.6 m above sea level.[6] Districts and neighborhoods[edit] Ushigome Area Ageba-chō Akagimotomachi Akagimotomachi Babashitamachi Bentenchō Enokimachi Fukuromachi Haraikata-chō Haramachi Higashienokichō Higashigoken-chō Ichigayachōenjimachi Ichigayadai-chō Ichigayafunagawaramachi Ichigayahachiman-chō Ichigayahonmura-chō Ichigayakaga-chō Ichigayakōrachō Ichigayanakano-chō Ichigayasadohara-chō Ichigayasanai-chō Ichigayata-chō Ichigayatakajōmachi Ichigayayakuouji-chō Ichigayayamabushichō Ichigayayanagi-chō Iwato-chō Kaguragashi Kagurazaka Kaitaichō Kikuichō Kitamachi Kitayamabushichō Kōdachō Minamienokichō Minamimachi Minamiyamabushi-chō Nakamachi Nakazatochō Nandochō Nijūkimachi Nishigoken-chō Nishiwaseda* Saikuchō Shimomiyabi-chō Shinogawamachi Shiroganechō Suidōmachi Sumiyoshi-chō Tansumachi Tenjinmachi Tomihisa-chō Toyama* Tsukiji-chō Tsukudo-chō Tsukudohachimanchō Wakamatsumachi Wakamiyachō Waseda-chō Wasedaminamimachi Wasedatsurumaki-chō Wasedamachi Yamabuki-chō Yaraimachi Yochō-machi* Yokoteramachi Yodobashi Area Kamiochiai Kitashinjuku Nakai Nakaochiai Ōkubo Shimoochiai Takadanobaba Totsuka-chō Nishiochiai Nishishinjuku Hyakuninmachi Kabukichō* Shinjuku* Toyama* Nishiwaseda* Yochō-chō* Yotsuya Area Aisumichō Arakimachi Daikyōmachi Funamachi Kabukichō* Kasumigaokachō Katamachi Minamimotomachi Naitōchō Samonmachi Shinanomachi Shinjuku* Sugamachi Wakaba Yotsuya Yotsuyahonshiochō Yotsuyasakamachi Yotsuyasaneichō History[edit] Shinjuku at night In 1634, during the Edo period, as the outer moat of the Edo Castle was built, a number of temples and shrines moved to the Yotsuya area on the western edge of Shinjuku. In 1698, Naitō-Shinjuku had developed as a new (shin) station (shuku or juku) on the Kōshū Kaidō, one of the major highways of that era. Naitō was the family name of a daimyō whose mansion stood in the area; his land is now a public park, the Shinjuku Gyoen. In 1898, the Yodobashi Water Purification Plant, the city's first modern water treatment facility, was built in the area that is now between the park and the train station. [7] In 1920, the town of Naitō-Shinjuku, which comprised large parts of present-day Shinjuku (the neighbourhood, not the municipality), parts of Nishi-Shinjuku and Kabukichō was integrated into Tokyo City. Shinjuku began to develop into its current form after the Great Kantō Earthquake in 1923, since the seismically stable area largely escaped the devastation. Consequently, West Shinjuku is one of the few areas in Tokyo with many skyscrapers. The Tokyo air raids from May to August 1945 destroyed almost 90% of the buildings in the area in and around Shinjuku Station.[8] The pre-war form of Shinjuku, and the rest of Tokyo, for that matter, was retained after the war because the roads and rails, damaged as they were, remained, and these formed the heart of the Shinjuku in the post-war construction. Only in Kabuki-cho was a grand reconstruction plan put into action.[9] The present ward was established on March 15, 1947 with the merger of the former wards of Yotsuya, Ushigome, and Yodobashi. It served as part of the athletics 50 km walk and marathon course during the 1964 Summer Olympics.[10] In the 1970s, the Yodobashi Water Purification Plant closed and was replaced by skyscrapers.[11] In 1991, the Tokyo Metropolitan Government moved from the Marunouchi district of Chiyoda to the current building in Shinjuku. (The Tokyo International Forum stands on the former site vacated by the government.) Economy[edit] The area surrounding Shinjuku Station is a major economic hub of Tokyo. Many companies have their headquarters or Tokyo offices in this area, including regional telephone operator NTT East, global camera and medical device manufacturer Olympus Corporation, electronics giant Seiko Epson,[12] video game developer Square Enix,[13] fast food chains McDonald's Japan and Yoshinoya,[14] travel agency H.I.S.,[15] Subaru Corporation (Subaru),[16] railway operator Odakyu Electric Railway, construction giants Taisei Corporation[17] and Kumagai Gumi,[18] medical equipment manufacturer Nihon Kohden,[19] Enoki Films,[20] navigation software company Jorudan,[21] instant noodle giant Nissin Foods,[22] automotive components manufacturer Keihin Corporation,[23] and regional airline Airtransse.[24] The station area also hosts numerous major retailers such as Isetan, Takashimaya, Marui, Bic Camera, Yodobashi Camera and Yamada Denki. Northeastern Shinjuku has an active publishing industry and is home to the publishers Shinchosha[25] and Futabasha.[26] The main store of the Books Kinokuniya bookstore chain is also located in Shinjuku. Government and politics[edit] Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building Shinjuku City Office Shinjuku Central Park Like the other special wards of Tokyo, Shinjuku has a status equivalent to that of a city. The current mayor is Kenichi Yoshizumi. The ward council (区議会, kugikai) consists of 38 elected members; the Liberal Democratic Party and New Komeitō Party together currently hold a majority. The Democratic Party of Japan, Japanese Communist Party and the Social Democratic Party are also represented together with four independents. Shinjuku's city office (区役所, kuyakusho) is located on the southeastern edge of Kabukichō. Shinjuku is also the location of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government. The governor's office, the metropolitan assembly chamber, and all administrative head offices are located in the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building. Technically, Shinjuku is therefore the prefectural capital of Tokyo; but according to a statement by the governor's office, Tokyo (the – as administrative unit: former – Tokyo City, the area of today's 23 special wards collectively) can usually be considered the capital of Tokyo (prefecture/"Metropolis") for geographical purposes. The Geographical Survey Institute (Kokudo Chiriin) names Tōkyō (the city) as capital of Tōkyō-to (the prefecture/"Metropolis").[27] Resident Nationalities[28] Nationality Population (Percentage) (2018)  Japan 301,163 (87.8%)  China 13,060 (3.8%)  South Korea 10,006 (2.9%)    Nepal 3,716 (1%)  Vietnam 3,368 (0.98%)  Myanmar 2,211 (0.64%) Others 12,711 (3.88%) Elections[edit] 2004 Shinjuku local election 2006 Shinjuku mayoral election 2007 Shinjuku local election Transportation[edit] Further information: Transport in Greater Tokyo Shinjuku is a major urban transit hub. Shinjuku Station sees an estimated 3.64 million passengers pass through each day, making it the busiest station in the world. It houses interchanges to three subway lines and three privately owned commuter lines, as well as several JR lines. Rail[edit] A list of railway lines passing through and stations located within Shinjuku includes: JR East Yamanote Line: Takadanobaba, Shin-Ōkubo, Shinjuku Chūō Line (Rapid), Chūō-Sōbu Line: Yotsuya, Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Ōkubo Saikyō Line, Shōnan-Shinjuku Line: Shinjuku Tokyo Metro Marunouchi Line: Yotsuya, Yotsuya-sanchōme, Shinjuku-gyoenmae, Shinjuku-sanchōme, Shinjuku, Nishi-Shinjuku Yūrakuchō Line: Ichigaya, Iidabashi Tōzai Line: Kagurazaka, Waseda, Takadanobaba, Ochiai Fukutoshin Line: Nishi-Waseda, Higashi-Shinjuku, Shinjuku-sanchōme Namboku Line: Iidabashi, Ichigaya, Yotsuya Tokyo Metropolitan Bureau of Transportation Toei Shinjuku Line: Akebonobashi, Shinjuku-sanchōme, Shinjuku Toei Ōedo Line: Ochiai-Minaminagasaki, Nakai, Nishi-Shinjuku-gochōme, Tochō-mae, Kokuritsu-Kyōgijō, Ushigome-Kagurazaka, Ushigome-Yanagichō, Wakamatsu-Kawada, Higashi-Shinjuku, Shinjuku-Nishiguchi Toden Arakawa Line: Omokagebashi, Waseda Odakyu Electric Railway Odawara Line: Shinjuku Keio Corporation Keio Line, Keio New Line: Shinjuku Seibu Railway Seibu Shinjuku Line: Seibu-Shinjuku, Takadanobaba, Shimo-Ochiai, Nakai Roads[edit] Traffic on Ōme-kaidō heading towards Kabukichō at night Shuto Expressway: No.4 Shinjuku Route (Miyakezaka JCT - Takaido) No.5 Ikebukuro Route (Takebashi JCT - Bijogi JCT) National highways: National Route 20 (Shinjuku-dōri, Kōshū-kaidō) Other major routes: Tokyo Metropolitan Route 8 (Mejiro-dōri, Shin-Mejiro-dōri) Tokyo Metropolitan Route 302 (Yasukuni-dōri, Ōme-kaidō) Tokyo Metropolitan Route 305 (Meiji-dōri) Education[edit] Colleges and universities[edit] Chuo University graduate school Gakushuin Women's College Keio University Medical College Kogakuin University Lakeland College Japan Mejiro University Sophia University Mejiro Seibo Campus Tokyo Fuji University Tokyo Medical University Tokyo University of Science Tokyo Women's Medical University Waseda University Schools[edit] Public elementary and junior high schools in Shinjuku are operated by the Shinjuku City (the Shinjuku Ward) Board of Education. Public high schools are operated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education. High schools[edit] Koishikawa Technical High School, public school Shinjuku High School, public school Shinjuku Yamabuki High School, public school Toyama High School, public school Gakushuin Girls Junior and Senior High School, private girls' school, affiliated with Gakushuin University and Gakushuin Women's College Hozen Junior and Senior High School, private boys' school Kaijō Junior and Senior High School, private boys' school Seijo Senior High School and Seijo Gakuen Junior High School, private girls' school Seijō Junior and Senior High School, private boys' school Waseda Junior and Senior High School, private boys' school, affiliated with Waseda University Meijiro Kenshin Junior and Senior High School Public institutions[edit] Libraries[edit] Shinjuku operates several public libraries, including the Central Library (with the Children's Library), the Yotsuya Library, the Tsurumaki Library, Tsunohazu Library, the Nishi-Ochiai Library, the Toyama Library, the Kita-Shinjuku Library, the Okubo Library, and the Nakamachi Library. In addition there is a branch library, Branch Library of Central Library in the City Office, located in the city office.[29] Hospitals[edit] There are several major hospitals located within the city limits. Keio University Hospital International Medical Center of Japan Social Insurance Chūō General Hospital Tokyo Medical University Hospital Tokyo Women's Medical University Hospital Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical Treatment Corporation Ohkubo Hospital Cultural centers[edit] Museums[edit] National Printing Bureau Banknote and Postage Stamp Museum National Museum of Nature and Science, Shinjuku Branch Shinjuku Historical Museum Tokyo Fire Department Museum Tokyo Toy Museum Halls[edit] Tokyo Opera City Shinjuku Bunka Center Meiji Yasuda Life Hall Sister cities[edit] Shinjuku has sister city agreements with several localities:[30] Lefkada, Greece Mitte, Berlin, Germany Dongcheng District, Beijing, China Ina, Nagano, Japan See also[edit] Tokyo portal Tourism in Japan References[edit] ^ Shinjuku City Archived 2008-02-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ Izadi, Elahi (9 April 2015). "Terrifying monster named Tokyo's new tourism ambassador". The Washington Post. Retrieved 15 September 2018. ^ Shinjuku City ^ Tokyo Special Wards Map ^ japanvisitor.com ^ http://www.city.shinjuku.lg.jp/content/000021207.pdf ^ "Water Supply in Tokyo". Bureau of Waterworks, Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Bureau of Waterworks, Tokyo Metropolitan Government. Retrieved 15 February 2021. ^ History of Shinjuku Archived 2006-03-26 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ichikawa, 2003 ^ 1964 Summer Olympics official report. Volume 2. Part 1. p. 74. ^ "Shinjuku Then and Now". Real Estate Japan. GPlus Media Inc. Retrieved 15 February 2021. ^ "Head Office & Japanese Facilities." Seiko Epson. Retrieved on January 13, 2009. ^ "We tour Square Enix's awesome HQ since you probably never will". vulturebeat.com. Retrieved 20 December 2016. ^ 会社概要. Yoshinoya. Retrieved February 25, 2010. ^ "Company Info." H.I.S. Retrieved on March 11, 2010. ^ "[1]." Fuji Heavy Industries and Subaru. ^ "Corporate Data." Taisei Corporation. Retrieved on February 20, 2012. "Head Office 1-25-1, Nishi-Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 163-0606" ^ "Corporate Profile." Kumagai Gumi. Retrieved on August 30, 2017. "Headquarters 2-1, Tsukudo-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8557" ^ "Key Facts." Nihon Kohden. Retrieved on August 9, 2015. ^ "Home." Enoki Films. Retrieved on March 23, 2014. "Enoki Bldg., No. 2, 1-30-10 Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0022 Japan" ^ "Headquarter." Jorduan. Retrieved on January 7, 2011. "ZIP 160-0022 2-1-9 Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan" (map) ^ "Company Profile." Nissin Foods. Retrieved on August 15, 2009. ^ "Company Overview." Keihin Corporation. Retrieved on May 23, 2018. ^ 会社概要. Airtransse. Retrieved May 20, 2009. ^ 会社情報. Shinchosha. Retrieved June 17, 2011. 〒162-8711 東京都新宿区矢来町71 ^ 会社概要. Futabasha. Retrieved January 7, 2011. 所在地 〒162-8540　東京都新宿区東五軒町3-28 (GIF map of location) (PDF of location) ^ Tokyo Metropolitan Government, governor's office: About Tokyo's prefectural capital Archived 2014-04-19 at the Wayback Machine (in Japanese) ^ "Resident nationalities of Shinjuku)" (PDF). Retrieved April 13, 2018. "Shinjuku Demographics". (in Japanese) ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2008-05-14. Retrieved 2008-08-27.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Friendship cities Archived 2010-04-07 at the Wayback Machine Shinjuku Ward Office, History of Shinjuku Hiroo Ichikawa "Reconstructing Tokyo: The Attempt to Transform a Metropolis" in C. Hein, J.M. Diefendorf, and I. Yorifusa (Eds.) (2003). Building Urban Japan after 1945. New York: Palgrave. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Shinjuku travel guide from Wikivoyage Shinjuku City Official website (in Japanese) Shinjuku Demographics (in Japanese) The Shinjuku Historical Museum: a nicely arranged museum with interesting exhibits of Tokyo's past v t e Tokyo Metropolis Architecture Education Festivals History Neighborhoods Politics Sports Tourism Transportation Special Wards of Tokyo Adachi Arakawa Bunkyō Chiyoda Chūō Edogawa Itabashi Katsushika Kita Kōtō Meguro Minato Nakano Nerima Ōta Setagaya Shibuya Shinagawa Shinjuku Suginami Sumida Taitō Toshima Western (Tama area) Core city Hachiōji Cities Akiruno Akishima Chōfu Fuchū Fussa Hamura Higashikurume Higashimurayama Higashiyamato Hino Inagi Kiyose Kodaira Koganei Kokubunji Komae Kunitachi Machida Mitaka Musashimurayama Musashino Nishitōkyō Ōme Tachikawa Tama Nishitama District Hinode Mizuho Okutama Hinohara Subprefectures Ōshima Subprefecture Ōshima To-shima Niijima Kōzushima Miyake Subprefecture Miyake Mikurajima Hachijō Subprefecture Hachijō Aogashima Ogasawara Subprefecture Ogasawara List of mergers in Tokyo Metropolis Portal Category v t e Neighborhoods of Tokyo Akasaka Akihabara Aobadai Aomi Aoyama Ariake Asagaya Asakusa Asakusabashi Azabu Awajichō Daikanyama Den-en-chōfu Ebisu Ebisuminami Futako-tamagawa Ginza Gotanda Hamamatsuchō Harajuku Hibiya Higashi Higashikanda Hongō Ichigaya Iidabashi Ikebukuro Iwamotochō Jiyūgaoka Jinbōchō Jūjō Kabukichō Kagurazaka Kajichō Kamata Kamiikebukuro Kanda Kasumigaseki Kichijōji Komaba Koishikawa Kugayama Kudankita Kyōbashi Kōenji Kōjimachi Marunouchi Mejiro Mita Meguro-mita Muromachi Nagatachō Nakameguro Nishigotanda Nishiogikubo Nihonbashi Nishiōizumi Nishiōizumimachi Nishishinjuku Nishikichō Ochanomizu Odaiba Ogawamachi Ogikubo Ōizumigakuenchō Ōmori Omotesandō Ōsaki Ōtemachi Roppongi Ryōgoku San'ya Sendagaya Shiba Shibaura Shibuya Shimokitazawa Shinbashi Shinjuku Shinjuku Ni-chōme Shinonome Shiodome Shirokane Shirokanedai Shōtō Sudachō Sugamo Surugadai Takadanobaba Takanawa Tamachi Tateishi Tatsumi Toyosu Tsukiji Tsukishima Uchikanda Uchisaiwaichō Ueno Wakasu Yaesu Yanaka Yayoi Yōga Yotsuya Yoyogi Yūrakuchō Zōshigaya v t e Metropolitan cities of Japan Tokyo Metropolis Special wards of Tokyo※ Adachi Arakawa Bunkyō Chiyoda Chūō Edogawa Itabashi Katsushika Kita Kōtō Meguro Minato Nakano Nerima Ōta Setagaya Shibuya Shinagawa Shinjuku Suginami Sumida Toshima Taitō Designated cities Chiba※ Fukuoka※ Hamamatsu Hiroshima※ Kawasaki Kitakyushu Kobe※ Kumamoto※ Kyoto※ Nagoya※ Niigata※ Okayama※ Osaka※ Sagamihara Saitama※ Sakai Sapporo※ Sendai※ Shizuoka※ Yokohama※ Core cities Akashi Akita※ Amagasaki Aomori※ Asahikawa Fukui※ Fukushima※ Fukuyama Funabashi Gifu※ Hachinohe Hachiōji Hakodate Higashiōsaka Himeji Hirakata Ichinomiya Iwaki Kagoshima※ Kanazawa※ Kashiwa Kawagoe Kawaguchi Kōchi※ Kōfu※ Kōriyama Koshigaya Kurashiki Kure Kurume Maebashi※ Matsue※ Matsumoto Matsuyama※ Miyazaki※ Mito※ Morioka※ Naha※ Nagano※ Nagasaki※ Nara※ Neyagawa Nishinomiya Ōita※ Okazaki Ōtsu※ Sasebo Shimonoseki Suita Takamatsu※ Takasaki Takatsuki Tottori※ Toyama※ Toyohashi Toyonaka Toyota Utsunomiya※ Wakayama※ Yao Yamagata※ Yokosuka Special cities Atsugi Chigasaki☆ Fuji☆ Hiratsuka Ibaraki Isesaki Jōetsu Kakogawa Kasugai Kasukabe Kishiwada☆ Kumagaya Nagaoka Numazu Odawara☆ Ōta Saga※ Sōka Takarazuka Tokorozawa☆ Tsukuba☆ Yamato Yokkaichi☆ Prefectural capitals without designation Tsu Tokushima Yamaguchi ※ also a prefectural capital; † eligible for core city status but not yet nominated; ☆ to become core cities v t e Cities in Japan with a population of 200,000+ 2,000,000 and more Tokyo (capital) Yokohama Osaka Nagoya 1,000,000–1,999,999 Sapporo Fukuoka Kobe Kyoto Kawasaki Saitama Hiroshima Sendai 500,000–999,999 Kitakyushu Chiba Setagaya Sakai Niigata Hamamatsu Shizuoka Sagamihara Nerima Okayama Ōta, Tokyo Kumamoto Edogawa Adachi Kagoshima Funabashi Hachiōji Kawaguchi Himeji Suginami Itabashi Matsuyama Higashiōsaka Utsunomiya 200,000–499,999 Matsudo Nishinomiya Kurashiki Ichikawa, Chiba Oita Fukuyama Amagasaki Kanazawa Nagasaki Kōtō Katsushika Yokosuka Toyama City Toyota Takamatsu Machida Gifu Hirakata Fujisawa Kashiwa Toyonaka Nagano City Toyohashi Ichinomiya Wakayama City Okazaki Miyazaki City Nara Suita Takatsuki Shinagawa Asahikawa Iwaki Kochi Takasaki Kōriyama Tokorozawa Kawagoe Kita Akita City Ōtsu Koshigaya Maebashi Naha Nakano, Tokyo Shinjuku Yokkaichi Aomori Kurume Kasugai Morioka Akashi Fukushima City Tsu Shimonoseki Nagaoka Ichihara Hakodate Yao Ibaraki City Fukui City Meguro Kakogawa Tokushima Mito Hiratsuka Toshima Yamagata City Sasebo Fuchū, Tokyo Kure, Hiroshima]] Hachinohe Saga City Neyagawa Sōka Sumida Fuji Kasukabe Chigasaki Matsumoto Atsugi Yamato Ageo Takarazuka Chōfu Ōta, Gunma Tsukuba Numazu Joetsu Shibuya Minato Kumagaya Isesaki Kishiwada Tottori City v t e Shinjuku, Tokyo Districts Yotsuya Area Aisumichō Arakimachi Daikyōmachi Funamachi Kabukichō* Kasumigaokachō Katamachi Minamimotomachi Naitōchō Samonmachi Shinanomachi Shinjuku* Ni-chōme Sugamachi Wakaba Yotsuya Yotsuyahonshiochō Yotsuyasakamachi Yotsuyasaneichō Ushigome Area Ageba-chō Akagimotomachi Akagimotomachi Babashitamachi Bentenchō Enokimachi Fukuromachi Haraikata-chō Haramachi Higashienokichō Higashigoken-chō Ichigayachōenjimachi Ichigayadai-chō Ichigayafunagawaramachi Ichigayahachiman-chō Ichigayahonmura-chō Ichigayakaga-chō Ichigayakōrachō Ichigayanakano-chō Ichigayasadohara-chō Ichigayasanai-chō Ichigayata-chō Ichigayatakajōmachi Ichigayayakuouji-chō Ichigayayamabushichō Ichigayayanagi-chō Iwato-chō Kaguragashi Kagurazaka Kaitaichō Kikui-chō Kitamachi Kitayamabushichō Kōdachō Minamienokichō Minamimachi Minamiyamabushi-chō Nakamachi Nakazatochō Nandochō Nijūkimachi Nishigoken-chō Nishiwaseda* Saikuchō Shimomiyabi-chō Shinogawamachi Shiroganechō Suidōmachi Sumiyoshimachi Tansumachi Tenjinmachi Tomihisamachi Toyama* Tsukiji-chō Tsukudo-chō Tsukudohachimanchō Wakamatsumachi Wakamiyachō Waseda-chō Wasedaminamimachi Wasedatsurumaki-chō Yamabuki-chō Yaraimachi Yochō-chō* Yokoteramachi Yodobashi Area Kamiochiai Kitashinjuku Nakai Nakaochiai Ōkubo Shimoochiai Takadanobaba Totsuka-chō Nishiochiai Nishishinjuku Hyakuninmachi Kabukichō* Shinjuku* Toyama* Nishiwaseda* Yochō-chō* Education Chuo University Graduate School Gakushuin Women's College Keio University Medical College Kogakuin University Lakeland College Japan Mejiro University Seibo College Tokyo Fuji University Tokyo Medical University Tokyo University of Science Tokyo Women's Medical University Waseda University Major stations Iidabashi (JR, Metro, Toei) Seibu-Shinjuku (Seibu) Shinjuku (JR, Metro, Toei, Keio, Odakyu, bus terminal) Shinjuku-sanchome (Metro, Toei) Takadanobaba (JR, Metro, Seibu) Yotsuya (JR, Metro) Landmarks Shinjuku Gyo-en Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building * - partially v t e Venues of the 1964 Summer Olympics (Tokyo) Asaka Nezu Park Asaka Shooting Range Chofu City Enoshima Fuchu City Hachioji City Hachioji Velodrome Karasuyama-machi Karuizawa Kemigawa Komazawa Gymnasium Komazawa Hockey Field Komazawa Olympic Park Stadium Komazawa Volleyball Courts Korakuen Ice Palace Lake Sagami Mitsuzawa Football Field Nagai Stadium National Gymnasium Tokyo National Stadium Nippon Budokan Nishikyogoku Athletic Stadium Ōmiya Football Field Prince Chichiba Memorial Football Field Sasazuka-machi Shibuya Public Hall Shinjuku Toda Rowing Course Tokorozawa Shooting Range Tokyo Metropolitan Gymnasium Tokyo Metropolitan Indoor Swimming Pool Waseda Memorial Hall Yokohama Cultural Gymnasium v t e Olympic venues in athletics 19th century 1896: Marathon (city), Panathenaic Stadium 20th century 1900: Croix-Catelan Stadium 1904: Francis Field 1908: White City Stadium 1912: Stockholm Olympic Stadium 1920: Olympisch Stadion 1924: Stade de Colombes 1928: Olympic Stadium 1932: Olympic Stadium, Riverside Drive at Griffith Park 1936: Avus Motor Road, Olympic Stadium 1948: Empire Stadium 1952: Olympic Stadium 1956: Melbourne Cricket Ground 1960: Arch of Constantine, Raccordo Anulare, Stadio Olimpico, Via Appia Antica, Via Cristoforo Colombo 1964: Fuchu City, Karasuyama-machi, National Stadium, Sasazuka-machi, Shinjuku 1968: Estadio Olímpico Universitario, Zócalo 1972: Olympiastadion 1976: Montreal Botanical Garden, Olympic Stadium, Streets of Montreal 1980: Grand Arena, Streets of Moscow 1984: Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Santa Monica College, Streets of Los Angeles, Streets of Santa Monica 1988: Seoul Olympic Stadium, Streets of Seoul 1992: Estadi Olímpic de Monjuïc, Marathon course, Mataró, Walking course 1996: Marathon course, Olympic Stadium, Walking course 21st century 2000: Marathon course, North Sydney, Olympic Stadium 2004: Marathon (city), Olympic Stadium, Panathenaic Stadium, Stadium at Olympia 2008: Beijing National Stadium, Olympic Green Promenade Walking course, Streets of Beijing Marathon course 2012: Marathon Course, Olympic Stadium 2016: Estádio Olímpico João Havelange, Pontal, Sambódromo 2020: Japan National Stadium 2024: Stade de France, Champs-Élysées 2028: Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Banc of California Stadium, Grand Park Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125