A medieval rabbi, halakhist, and Talmudist Shlomo ben Avraham ibn Aderet Personal Born 1235 Barcelona, Catalonia, Aragon Died 1310 (aged 74–75) Barcelona, Catalonia, Aragon Religion Judaism Shlomo ben Avraham ibn Aderet (Hebrew: שלמה בן אברהם אבן אדרת‎ or Solomon son of Abraham son of Aderet)[1] (1235 – 1310) was a medieval rabbi, halakhist, and Talmudist. He is widely known as the Rashba (Hebrew: רשב״א‎), the Hebrew acronym of his title and name: Rabbi Shlomo ben Avraham. The Rashba was born in Barcelona, Crown of Aragon, in 1235. He became a successful banker and leader of Spanish Jewry of his time. As a rabbinical authority his fame was such that he was designated as El Rab d'España ("The Rabbi of Spain"). He served as rabbi of the Main Synagogue of Barcelona for 50 years. He died in 1310. רמב״ן רבינו יונה רשב״א רבינו בחיי ריטב"א   Teachers   Students Contents 1 Biography 1.1 Defense of Judaism 1.2 Aderet and Abba Mari 1.3 Maimonidean controversy 2 Works 2.1 Talmud commentaries 2.2 Responsa 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Biography[edit] His teachers were Nahmanides and Yonah Gerondi. He was a master in the study of the Talmud, and was not opposed to the Kabbala. Aderet was very active as a rabbi and as an author. Under his auspices and through his recommendation, part of the commentary on the Mishnah by Maimonides was translated from the Arabic into Hebrew. His Talmudic lectures were attended by throngs of disciples, many of whom came from distant places. Questions in great number, dealing with ritual, with the most varied topics of the Halakah, and with religious philosophy, were addressed to him from Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, Germany, and even from Asia Minor. His responsa show evidence of wide reading, keen intelligence, and systematic thought. They also afford a clear insight into the communal life of the time, portraying Aderet's contemporaries, and are of value for the study not only of rabbinical procedure but also of the intellectual development of the age in which he lived. Only half of these responsa have been published, as they number three thousand. Among his numerous students were Yom Tov Asevilli and Bahya ben Asher. A manuscript purporting to be a certificate of indebtedness, dated 1262, in favor of a certain Solomon Adret, Jew of Barcelona, and a passport for the same Adret, dated 1269, are still extant.[2] Defense of Judaism[edit] Aderet had to contend with the external enemies of Judaism, as well as with religious dissensions and excesses within its own ranks. He wrote a refutation of the charges of Raymond Martini, a Dominican friar of Barcelona, who, in his work, "Pugio Fidei," had collected passages from the Talmud and the Midrash and interpreted them in a manner hostile to Judaism. These charges also induced Aderet to write a commentary on the Haggadot, of which only a fragment is now extant. He refuted also the attacks of a Muslim who asserted that the priests had falsified the Bible. M. Schreiner[3] has shown that this Muslim was Aḥmad ibn Ḥazm, and the book referred to was "Al-Milal wal-Niḥal" (Religions and Sects). Aderet opposed also the increasing extravagances of the Kabbalists, who made great headway in Spain and were represented by Nissim ben Abraham of Avila, a pretended worker of miracles, and by Abraham Abulafia, the kabbalistic visionary. He combated these with vigor, but displayed no less animosity toward the philosophic-rationalistic conception of Judaism then prevailing, particularly in France, which was represented by Levi ben Abraham ben Ḥayyim, who treated most important religious questions with the utmost freedom, and who was joined by the Spaniard Isaac Albalag and others. Aderet and Abba Mari[edit] Opposed to these was another tendency, the chief object of which was the preservation of the pure faith of Judaism. At the head of this movement stood Abba Mari ben Moses ha-Yarḥi. He appealed to Aderet for assistance. An extensive correspondence ensued between the authorities of southern France and northern Spain, Aderet taking a most important part. Afterward this correspondence was collected and published by Abba Mari, in a separate work, entitled "Minḥat Ḳenaot".[4] Aderet, whose disposition was peaceable, at first endeavored to conciliate the opposing spirits. Ultimately he was called upon to decide the affair, and on July 26, 1305, together with his colleagues of the rabbinate of Barcelona, he pronounced the ban of excommunication (ḥerem) over all who studied physics or metaphysics before the completion of their thirtieth year. A protest against this ban may be found in a poem in which Philosophy "calls out in a loud voice against . . . Solomon ben Adret and against all the rabbis of France . . . who have placed under the ban all people who approach her".[5] Those who desired to study medicine as a profession were exempted from the ban. A special ban was pronounced against the rationalistic Bible exegetes and the philosophic Haggadah commentators, their writings and their adherents. The enforcing of these bans caused Aderet much trouble and embittered the closing years of his life. He left three sons, Isaac, Judah, and Astruc Solomon, all of whom were learned in the Talmud. Maimonidean controversy[edit] The Rashba defended Maimonides during contemporary debates over his works, and he authorized the translation of Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah from Arabic to Hebrew. Nevertheless, the Rashba was opposed to the philosophic-rationalistic approach to Judaism often associated with Rambam, and he was part of the beth din (rabbinical court) in Barcelona that forbade men younger than 25 from studying secular philosophy or natural science, although an exception was made for those who studied medicine. On July 26, 1305, the Rashba wrote: "In that city [Barcelona] are those who write iniquity about the Torah and if there would be a heretic writing books, they should be burnt as if they were the book of sorcerers."[6] Works[edit] Of the works of Solomon ben Aderet there have appeared in print: A manual on kashrut (dietary laws) and other religious laws that are observed at home, Torat haBayit haArokh (The Long Law of the House), published at Venice in 1607, at Berlin in 1762, at Vienna in 1811, etc. The shorter manual, Torat haBayit haKatzar (The Short Law of the House), published at Cremona in 1565, and at Berlin in 1871. A number of his commentaries and novellae on Talmudic treatises have been printed. Mishmeret HaBayit, a defense against Aharon HaLevi's critique of Torat HaBayit. Sha'ar HaMayim, a work focusing on the laws of a mikveh (ritual bath). Piskei Ḥallah (Decisions on Ḥallah), published at Constantinople in 1518, and at Jerusalem in 1876. Avodat haKodesh (The Holy Service), on the laws of Sabbath and festivals, published at Venice in 1602. His polemical work against Islam was edited by Perles, as an appendix to the latter's monograph on Aderet.[7] Talmud commentaries[edit] His commentaries upon seven Talmudic treatises published at Constantinople in 1720, and at Berlin in 1756. Similar disquisitions upon five treatises were published at Venice in 1523 and at Amsterdam in 1715. He wrote besides a number of disquisitions upon single treatises. His Talmud commentaries are now known as Hiddushei HaRashba. Not all commentaries traditionally attributed to Rashba were actually composed by him. Elchonon Wasserman stated that the commentary on Sukkah attributed to Rashba was actually written by Yom Tov Asevilli, the commentary on Ketubot was actually written by Nachmanides, and the commentary on Menachot was written by an unknown author other than Rashba. Yisrael Meir Kagan suggested that the commentary on Menachot was by Isaiah di Trani, while Israel Joshua Trunk argued that the author was Solomon ben Abraham of Montpellier.[8]:41 Responsa[edit] Aderet was considered an outstanding rabbinic authority, and more than 3,000 of his responsa are known to be extant. Questions were addressed to him from Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, Germany, and even from Asia Minor. His responsa, which cover the entire gamut of Jewish life, are concise and widely quoted by halakhic authorities. Aderet's responsa also illustrate his opposition to messianism and prophetic pretensions as a general phenomenon, with examples against Nissim ben Abraham and Abraham Abulafia. His responsa were printed in Bologna (1539), Venice (1545), Hanau (1610), and other places. The second part of his responsa appeared under the title "Toledot Adam" (The Generations of Man) at Leghorn in 1657, the third part at the same place in 1778, the fourth part at Salonica in 1803, and the fifth part at Leghorn in 1825.[7] According to Elchonon Wasserman, some responsa attributed to Rashba were actually written by other authors, notably Meir of Rothenburg.[8]:41 See also[edit] History of the Jews in Spain Notes[edit] ^ The name Shlomo ben Avraham ibn Aderet may be written in many different ways. His first name is written as either Shlomo or Solomon. Aderet sometimes is spelled Adret or Adereth. "Ben", a Hebrew word, and "ibn", an Arabic word, both mean "son". Occasionally, the "ben Avraham" is removed, leaving his name as Shlomo ibn Aderet. ^ Jacobs, "Sources," pp. 16, 43, No. 130 ^ "Z. D. M. G." xlviii, 39 ^ Published in Presburg, 1838. See full analysis in Renan's "Les Rabbins Français," pp. 647–694. ^ See H. Hirschfeld, "Jew. Quart. Rev." xii. 140 ^ H. Z. Dimitrovsky, ed. Teshubot HaRishba, Vol. 2 (Jerusalem: Mossad Harav Kook, 1990) I, Pt. I, p. 361. ^ a b Kayserling, Meyer. "ADRET, SOLOMON BEN ABRAHAM (or RaSHBa)". Jewish Encyclopedia. Retrieved 23 July 2017. ^ a b The role of manuscripts in halakhic decision-making: Hazon Ish, his precursors and contemporaries References[edit]  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Singer, Isidore; et al., eds. (1901–1906). "ADRET, SOLOMON BEN ABRAHAM (or RaSHBa)". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Singer, Isidore; et al., eds. (1901–1906). "ADRET". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. External links[edit] Hebrew Wikisource has original text related to this article: Rashba Video Lecture on Rabbi Shlomo ben Aderet by Dr. Henry Abramson  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Singer, Isidore; et al., eds. (1901–1906). "ADRET, SOLOMON BEN ABRAHAM (or RaSHBa)". The Jewish Encyclopedia. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. v t e Rishonim North Africa Isaac Alfasi (Rif) Chananel ben Chushiel Dunash ben Labrat Zechariah Aghmati Nissim ben Jacob Samuel ben Jacob ibn Jam Shemariah ben Elhanan Sar Shalom ben Moses Spain (except Catalonia) Maimonides Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Ezra Yom Tov Asevilli (Ritva) Joseph ibn Migash (Ri Migash) Meir Abulafia (Ramah) Bahya ibn Paquda Bahya ben Asher David Abudirham Joseph Albo Isaac ben Moses Arama (Akeidat Yitzchak) Rabbenu Yerucham Shem Tov ben Abraham ibn Gaon (Migdal Oz) Meir ben Solomon Abi-Sahula Isaac ibn Ghiyyat Maimon ben Joseph Isaac Aboab I Abraham ibn Daud Moses ibn Ezra Jonah ibn Janah Abraham Saba Catalonia Nachmanides Menachem Meiri Nissim of Gerona (Ran) Shlomo ibn Aderet (Rashba) Yonah Gerondi (Rabbeinu Yonah) Zerachiah ha-Levi of Girona (Baal HaMaor) Hasdai Crescas Aharon HaLevi (Ra'ah) Isaac ben Sheshet (Rivash) Simeon ben Zemah Duran (Tashbatz) Vidal of Tolosa (Maggid Mishneh) Joseph ibn Habib (Nimmukei Yosef) Azriel of Gerona Moshe Chalava Judah ben Yakar Judah ben Barzillai Provence Hachmei Provence Abraham ben David (Raavad) Gersonides (Ralbag) David Kimhi (Radak) Abba Mari Isaac ben Abba Mari (HaIttur) Abraham ben Nathan (HaManhig) David ben Levi of Narbonne (HaMichtam) Moses ben Joseph (Rambi) Abraham ben Isaac of Narbonne (Raavad II, HaEshkol) Moshe ha-Darshan Meshullam ben Jacob Asher ben Meshullam Abraham of Montpellier Joseph Caspi Isaac the Blind Samuel ibn Tibbon Isaac of Narbonne Aaron ben Jacob ha-Kohen France (except Provence) Rashi List of Tosafists Rabbeinu Tam Rashbam Eliezer ben Samuel (Yereim) Isaac ben Samuel (Ri HaZaken) Moses ben Jacob of Coucy (Semag) Judah ben Nathan (Rivan) Bechor Shor Abraham ben Joseph of Orleans Yechiel of Paris Rivam Peretz ben Elijah Eliezer of Toul Chaim Paltiel Jacob of Orléans Samson of Chinon Jacob of Chinon Eliezer of Touques Isaac ben Abraham of Dampierre Elhanan ben Isaac of Dampierre Baruch ben Isaac Samson ben Abraham of Sens Isaac ben Eliezer Halevi Meir ben Samuel Moses of Évreux Samuel of Évreux Samuel ben Solomon of Falaise Judah ben Isaac Messer Leon Joseph ben Samuel Bonfils Menahem ben Helbo Simeon Kara Shemaiah of Soissons Elijah ben Menahem HaZaken Germany Gershom ben Judah (Rabbeinu Gershom) Asher ben Jehiel (Rosh) Jacob ben Asher (Baal HaTurim) Mordechai ben Hillel (Mordechai) Meir of Rothenburg (Maharam MeRotenberg) Yaakov ben Moshe Levi Moelin (Maharil) Eliezer ben Nathan (Ra'aven) Eliezer ben Joel HaLevi (Raavyah) Judah ben Samuel of Regensburg (Yehudah haHasid) Isaac ben Mordecai of Regensburg Ephraim ben Isaac of Regensburg Judah ben Kalonymus Eleazar of Worms (Rokeach) Meir HaKohen (Hagahot Maimuniot) Yehuda HaKohen ben Meir Meir ben Baruch Halevi Israel Bruna Israel of Bamberg Ephraim of Bonn Judah ben Asher Joel ben Isaac ha-Levi Jacob ben Judah Landau Samuel ben Natronai Alexander Suslin Jacob Weil Isaac ben Asher ha-Levi Simha of Speyer Isaac Asir HaTikvah England Aaron of Canterbury Aaron of York Elias of London Eliyahu Menachem of London Hagin Deulacres Jacob ben Judah of London Josce of London Moses ben Isaac ben ha-Nessiah Moses of London Yom Tov of Joigny Berechiah de Nicole Austria Israel Isserlein (Terumat HaDeshen) Isaac of Vienna (Or Zarua) Avigdor Cohen of Vienna Isaac Tyrnau Italy Nathan ben Jehiel (the Aruch) Isaiah di Trani (Rid) Isaiah di Trani the Younger (Riaz) Obadiah Bartenura Menahem Recanati Zedekiah Anaw (Shibbolei HaLeket) Benjamin Anaw Judah Anav Moses ben Meir of Ferrara Eliezer ben Samuel of Verona Hillel ben Samuel Joseph Colon Trabotto Isaac ben Melchizedek Judah Messer Leon Elsewhere Isaac Abarbanel Elijah Mizrachi Tobiah ben Eliezer (Lekach Tov) Zerahiah the Greek Isaac ben Dorbolo Isaac ben Samuel of Acre Moses Taku Isaac ben Jacob ha-Lavan Nathan ben Abraham I Hillel ben Eliakim Judah Leon ben Moses Mosconi Nethanel ben Isaiah‎ Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125