Ralph Williams, almost always referred to as Skip Williams, is an American game designer. He is married to Penny Williams, who is also involved with the games industry. He was the co-creator of Dungeons & Dragons 3rd Edition and the longtime author of the "Sage Advice" column for Dragon Magazine. Career[edit] Born in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, Williams was informally acquainted with many of the people who developed and influenced the original Dungeons & Dragons game, going to school with Gary Gygax's son Ernie and participating in a gaming group that Gary used to playtest some of the AD&D rules.[1] Williams started out working as a part-time clerk in TSR's Dungeon Hobby Shop in 1976.[2][3] Williams first worked for TSR in an administrative capacity, working as a cashier, in shipping, and doing various office tasks.[citation needed] Williams directed the Gen Con game fair from 1980-1983.[2] Williams was laid off after a time but continued to work for TSR in a freelance role, performing odd jobs; it was in this circumstance in 1987 that he came to write "Sage Advice" in the pages of Dragon - Williams recalls that Dragon editor Roger E. Moore simply couldn't find anyone else willing to regularly write the column.[1] Williams held the position until 2004.[citation needed] In 1989, Williams joined the RPGA staff for a few years before becoming a roleplaying game designer for TSR.[2] From 1990 to 1992 he was also Associate Editor of Polyhedron magazine.[citation needed] When TSR was purchased by Wizards of the Coast, he moved from Wisconsin to Washington.[citation needed] Williams was promoted to Senior Designer,[citation needed] and worked on the 3rd Edition design team with Monte Cook and Jonathan Tweet.[4] Cook, Tweet, and Williams all contributed to the 3rd edition Players Handbook, Dungeon Master's Guide, and Monster Manual, and then each designer wrote one of the books based on those contributions.[5] Williams also worked on the new edition of the Forgotten Realms campaign setting.[2] Although he was released from Wizards of the Coast in 2002 and has since moved back to Wisconsin, he continued to produce D&D and d20 material on a freelance basis up until 2005. His publications from this time include "Cry Havoc!" published by Monte Cook's Malhavoc Press and Races of the Wild from Wizards of the Coast. He has appeared as the author of the "Ask The Kobold" column for Kobold Quarterly. In 2015, he agreed to write scenarios for the Kickstarter "Dungeon of the Day",[6] a Megaton Games production. Williams and his wife Penny live in rural Wisconsin in a century-old farmhouse surrounded by several acres of abandoned farmland.[3] References[edit] ^ a b "A Talk With Skip Williams". Archived from the original on 2011-07-14. Retrieved 2009-01-16. ^ a b c d Ryan, Michael G. (October 2000). "ProFiles: Skip Williams". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#276): 12, 14, 16. ^ a b Williams, Skip (2007). "Dawn Patrol". In Lowder, James (ed.). Hobby Games: The 100 Best. Green Ronin Publishing. pp. 73–76. ISBN 978-1-932442-96-0. ^ Shannon Appelcline (2011). Designers & Dragons. Mongoose Publishing. p. 287. ISBN 978-1-907702-58-7. ^ "Profiles: Monte Cook". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#275): 10, 12, 14. September 2000. ^ https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1059822030/dungeon-of-the-day External links[edit] "Pen & Paper listing for Skip Williams". Archived from the original on 2008-05-09. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond v t e d20 System Role-playing game system originally published by Wizards of the Coast Main authors Monte Cook Jonathan Tweet Skip Williams Games Dungeons & Dragons d20 Modern d20 Future d20 Apocalypse d20 Past Star Wars Roleplaying Game The Wheel of Time Roleplaying Game Licensing System Reference Document Open Game License Game System License Derived games 13th Age Castles & Crusades Conan: The Roleplaying Game Dungeon Crawl Classics EverQuest RPG Judge Dredd RPG Mutants & Masterminds Pathfinder Spycraft Starfinder Stargate SG-1 True20 Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125