For other uses, see API (disambiguation). High-rise building Completed in 2009, the Burj Khalifa, in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, is currently[update] the tallest skyscraper in the world, with a height of 829.8 metres (2,722 ft). The setbacks at various heights are a typical skyscraper feature. A skyscraper is a large continuously habitable building having multiple floors. Modern sources currently define skyscrapers as being at least 100 metres[1] or 150 metres[2] in height, though there is no universally accepted definition. Historically, the term first referred to buildings with between 10 and 20 stories when these types of buildings began to be constructed in the 1880s.[3] Skyscrapers may host offices, hotels, residential spaces, and retail spaces. One common feature of skyscrapers is having a steel framework that supports curtain walls. These curtain walls either bear on the framework below or are suspended from the framework above, rather than resting on load-bearing walls of conventional construction. Some early skyscrapers have a steel frame that enables the construction of load-bearing walls taller than of those made of reinforced concrete. Modern skyscrapers' walls are not load-bearing, and most skyscrapers are characterised by large surface areas of windows made possible by steel frames and curtain walls. However, skyscrapers can have curtain walls that mimic conventional walls with a small surface area of windows. Modern skyscrapers often have a tubular structure, and are designed to act like a hollow cylinder to resist wind, seismic, and other lateral loads. To appear slenderer, allow less wind exposure and transmit more daylight to the ground, many skyscrapers have a design with setbacks, which in some cases is also structurally required. As of January 2020[update], only nine cities have more than 100 skyscrapers that are 150 m (492 ft) or taller: Hong Kong (355), Shenzhen (289), New York City (284), Dubai (201), Shanghai (163), Tokyo (158), Chongqing (127), Chicago (127), and Guangzhou (118).[4] Contents 1 Definition 1.1 Early skyscrapers 1.2 Modern skyscrapers 2 Design and construction 2.1 Basic design considerations 2.2 Loading and vibration 2.3 Steel frame 2.4 Tube structural systems 2.4.1 Trussed tube and X-bracing 2.4.2 Bundled tube 2.5 The elevator conundrum 3 Economic rationale 4 Environmental impact 5 History of the tallest skyscrapers 5.1 Gallery 6 Future developments 6.1 Wooden skyscrapers 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Definition[edit] The Home Insurance Building in Chicago, completed in 1885, was the first steel-frame skyscraper; it was demolished in 1931. The term skyscraper was first applied to buildings of steel-framed construction of at least 10 storeys in the late 19th century[citation needed], a result of public amazement at the tall buildings being built in major American cities like Chicago, New York City,[5] Philadelphia, Detroit, and St. Louis. The first steel-frame skyscraper was the Home Insurance Building (originally 10 storeys with a height of 42 m or 138 ft) in Chicago, Illinois in 1885.[6] Some point to Philadelphia's 10-storey Jayne Building (1849–50) as a proto-skyscraper,[7] or to New York's seven-floor Equitable Life Building, built in 1870, for its innovative use of a kind of skeletal frame,[8] but such designation depends largely on what factors are chosen. Even the scholars making the argument find it to be purely academic.[9] The structural definition of the word skyscraper was refined later by architectural historians, based on engineering developments of the 1880s that had enabled construction of tall multi-storey buildings. This definition was based on the steel skeleton—as opposed to constructions of load-bearing masonry, which passed their practical limit in 1891 with Chicago's Monadnock Building. What is the chief characteristic of the tall office building? It is lofty. It must be tall. The force and power of altitude must be in it, the glory and pride of exaltation must be in it. It must be every inch a proud and soaring thing, rising in sheer exaltation that from bottom to top it is a unit without a single dissenting line. — Louis Sullivan's The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered (1896) Some structural engineers define a highrise as any vertical construction for which wind is a more significant load factor than earthquake or weight. Note that this criterion fits not only high-rises but some other tall structures, such as towers. Different organizations from the United States and Europe define skyscrapers as buildings at least 150 metres in height or taller,[10][11][5][12] with "supertall" skyscrapers for buildings higher than 300 m (984 ft) and "megatall" skyscrapers for those taller than 600 m (1,969 ft).[13] The tallest structure in ancient times was the 146 m (479 ft) Great Pyramid of Giza in ancient Egypt, built in the 26th century BC. It was not surpassed in height for thousands of years, the 160 m (520 ft) Lincoln Cathedral having exceeded it in 1311–1549, before its central spire collapsed.[14] The latter in turn was not surpassed until the 555-foot (169 m) Washington Monument in 1884. However, being uninhabited, none of these structures actually comply with the modern definition of a skyscraper. High-rise apartments flourished in classical antiquity. Ancient Roman insulae in imperial cities reached 10 and more storeys.[15] Beginning with Augustus (r. 30 BC-14 AD), several emperors attempted to establish limits of 20–25 m for multi-storey buildings, but met with only limited success.[16][17] Lower floors were typically occupied by shops or wealthy families, the upper rented to the lower classes.[15] Surviving Oxyrhynchus Papyri indicate that seven-storey buildings existed in provincial towns such as in 3rd century AD Hermopolis in Roman Egypt.[18] The skylines of many important medieval cities had large numbers of high-rise urban towers, built by the wealthy for defense and status. The residential Towers of 12th century Bologna numbered between 80 and 100 at a time, the tallest of which is the 97.2 m (319 ft) high Asinelli Tower. A Florentine law of 1251 decreed that all urban buildings be immediately reduced to less than 26 m.[19] Even medium-sized towns of the era are known to have proliferations of towers, such as the 72 up to 51 m height in San Gimignano.[19] The medieval Egyptian city of Fustat housed many high-rise residential buildings, which Al-Muqaddasi in the 10th century described as resembling minarets. Nasir Khusraw in the early 11th century described some of them rising up to 14 storeys, with roof gardens on the top floor complete with ox-drawn water wheels for irrigating them.[20] Cairo in the 16th century had high-rise apartment buildings where the two lower floors were for commercial and storage purposes and the multiple storeys above them were rented out to tenants.[21] An early example of a city consisting entirely of high-rise housing is the 16th-century city of Shibam in Yemen. Shibam was made up of over 500 tower houses,[22] each one rising 5 to 11 storeys high,[23] with each floor being an apartment occupied by a single family. The city was built in this way in order to protect it from Bedouin attacks.[22] Shibam still has the tallest mudbrick buildings in the world, with many of them over 30 m (98 ft) high.[24] An early modern example of high-rise housing was in 17th-century Edinburgh, Scotland, where a defensive city wall defined the boundaries of the city. Due to the restricted land area available for development, the houses increased in height instead. Buildings of 11 storeys were common, and there are records of buildings as high as 14 storeys. Many of the stone-built structures can still be seen today in the old town of Edinburgh. The oldest iron framed building in the world, although only partially iron framed, is The Flaxmill (also locally known as the "Maltings"), in Shrewsbury, England. Built in 1797, it is seen as the "grandfather of skyscrapers", since its fireproof combination of cast iron columns and cast iron beams developed into the modern steel frame that made modern skyscrapers possible. In 2013 funding was confirmed to convert the derelict building into offices.[25] Oriel Chambers in Liverpool is the world's first glass curtain walled building. The stone mullions are decorative. The Wainwright Building, a 10-storey red brick office building in St. Louis, Missouri, built in 1891 Early skyscrapers[edit] Main article: Early skyscrapers In 1857, Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator, allowing convenient and safe passenger movement to upper floors, at the E.V. Haughwout Building in New York City. Otis later introduced the first commercial passenger elevators to the Equitable Life Building in 1870, considered by a portion of New Yorkers to be the first skyscraper. Another crucial development was the use of a steel frame instead of stone or brick, otherwise the walls on the lower floors on a tall building would be too thick to be practical. An early development in this area was Oriel Chambers in Liverpool, England. It was only five floors high.[26][27][28] Further developments led to what many individuals and organizations consider the world's first skyscraper, the ten-story Home Insurance Building in Chicago, built in 1884–1885.[29] While its original height of 42.1 m (138 ft) is not considered very impressive today, it was at that time. The building of tall buildings in the 1880s gave the skyscraper its first architectural movement, broadly termed the Chicago School, which developed what has been called the Commercial Style.[30] The architect, Major William Le Baron Jenney, created a load-bearing structural frame. In this building, a steel frame supported the entire weight of the walls, instead of load-bearing walls carrying the weight of the building. This development led to the "Chicago skeleton" form of construction. In addition to the steel frame, the Home Insurance Building also utilized fireproofing, elevators, and electrical wiring, key elements in most skyscrapers today.[31] Burnham and Root's 45 m (148 ft) Rand McNally Building in Chicago, 1889, was the first all-steel framed skyscraper,[32] while Louis Sullivan's 41 m (135 ft) Wainwright Building in St. Louis, Missouri, 1891, was the first steel-framed building with soaring vertical bands to emphasize the height of the building and is therefore considered to be the first early skyscraper. In 1889, the Mole Antonelliana in Italy was 167 m (549 ft) tall. Most early skyscrapers emerged in the land-strapped areas of Chicago and New York City toward the end of the 19th century. A land boom in Melbourne, Australia between 1888 and 1891 spurred the creation of a significant number of early skyscrapers, though none of these were steel reinforced and few remain today. Height limits and fire restrictions were later introduced. London builders soon found building heights limited due to a complaint from Queen Victoria, rules that continued to exist with few exceptions. Concerns about aesthetics and fire safety had likewise hampered the development of skyscrapers across continental Europe for the first half of the 20th century. Some notable exceptions are the 43 m (141 ft) tall 1898 Witte Huis (White House) in Rotterdam; the 51.5 m (169 ft) tall PAST Building (1906-1908) in Warsaw, the Royal Liver Building in Liverpool, completed in 1911 and 90 m (300 ft) high;[33] the 57 m (187 ft) tall 1924 Marx House in Düsseldorf, Germany; the 61 m (200 ft) Kungstornen (Kings' Towers) in Stockholm, Sweden, which were built 1924–25,[34] the 89 m (292 ft) Edificio Telefónica in Madrid, Spain, built in 1929; the 87.5 m (287 ft) Boerentoren in Antwerp, Belgium, built in 1932; the 66 m (217 ft) Prudential Building in Warsaw, Poland, built in 1934; and the 108 m (354 ft) Torre Piacentini in Genoa, Italy, built in 1940. After an early competition between Chicago and New York City for the world's tallest building, New York took the lead by 1895 with the completion of the 103 m (338 ft) tall American Surety Building, leaving New York with the title of the world's tallest building for many years. Modern skyscrapers[edit] The Flatiron Building was completed in 1902 in New York City. Completed in 1931, the Empire State Building in New York City was the tallest building in the world for nearly 40 years. Opened in 1973, the World Trade Center in New York City dethroned the Empire State Building as tallest in the world from 1970 to 1973. Completed in 1973, the Sears Tower in Chicago dethroned the World Trade Center, and was the tallest in the world from 1974 to 1998 Modern skyscrapers are built with steel or reinforced concrete frameworks and curtain walls of glass or polished stone. They use mechanical equipment such as water pumps and elevators. Since the 1960s, according to the CTBUH, the skyscraper has been reoriented away from a symbol for North American corporate power to instead communicate a city or nation's place in the world.[35] Skyscraper construction entered a three-decades-long era of stagnation in 1930 due to the Great Depression and then World War II. Shortly after the war ended, the Soviet Union began construction on a series of skyscrapers in Moscow. Seven, dubbed the "Seven Sisters", were built between 1947 and 1953; and one, the Main building of Moscow State University, was the tallest building in Europe for nearly four decades (1953–1990). Other skyscrapers in the style of Socialist Classicism were erected in East Germany (Frankfurter Tor), Poland (PKiN), Ukraine (Hotel Ukrayina), Latvia (Academy of Sciences) and other Eastern Bloc countries. Western European countries also began to permit taller skyscrapers during the years immediately following World War II. Early examples include Edificio España (Spain) Torre Breda (Italy). From the 1930s onward, skyscrapers began to appear in various cities in East and Southeast Asia as well as in Latin America. Finally, they also began to be constructed in cities of Africa, the Middle East, South Asia and Oceania from the late 1950s on. Skyscraper projects after World War II typically rejected the classical designs of the early skyscrapers, instead embracing the uniform international style; many older skyscrapers were redesigned to suit contemporary tastes or even demolished—such as New York's Singer Building, once the world's tallest skyscraper. German architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe became one of the world's most renowned architects in the second half of the 20th century. He conceived of the glass façade skyscraper[36] and, along with Norwegian Fred Severud,[37] he designed the Seagram Building in 1958, a skyscraper that is often regarded as the pinnacle of the modernist high-rise architecture.[38] Skyscraper construction surged throughout the 1960s. The impetus behind the upswing was a series of transformative innovations[39] which made it possible for people to live and work in "cities in the sky".[40] In the early 1960s structural engineer Fazlur Rahman Khan, considered the "father of tubular designs" for high-rises,[41] discovered that the dominating rigid steel frame structure was not the only system apt for tall buildings, marking a new era of skyscraper construction in terms of multiple structural systems.[42] His central innovation in skyscraper design and construction was the concept of the "tube" structural system, including the "framed tube", "trussed tube", and "bundled tube".[43] His "tube concept", using all the exterior wall perimeter structure of a building to simulate a thin-walled tube, revolutionized tall building design.[44] These systems allow greater economic efficiency,[45] and also allow skyscrapers to take on various shapes, no longer needing to be rectangular and box-shaped.[46] The first building to employ the tube structure was the Chestnut De-Witt apartment building,[39] this building is considered to be a major development in modern architecture.[39] These new designs opened an economic door for contractors, engineers, architects, and investors, providing vast amounts of real estate space on minimal plots of land.[40] Over the next fifteen years, many towers were built by Fazlur Rahman Khan and the "Second Chicago School",[47] including the hundred-storey John Hancock Center and the massive 442 m (1,450 ft) Willis Tower.[48] Other pioneers of this field include Hal Iyengar, William LeMessurier, and Minoru Yamasaki, the architect of the World Trade Center. Many buildings designed in the 70s lacked a particular style and recalled ornamentation from earlier buildings designed before the 50s. These design plans ignored the environment and loaded structures with decorative elements and extravagant finishes.[49] This approach to design was opposed by Fazlur Khan and he considered the designs to be whimsical rather than rational. Moreover, he considered the work to be a waste of precious natural resources.[50] Khan's work promoted structures integrated with architecture and the least use of material resulting in the least carbon emission impact on the environment.[51] The next era of skyscrapers will focus on the environment including performance of structures, types of material, construction practices, absolute minimal use of materials/natural resources, embodied energy within the structures, and more importantly, a holistically integrated building systems approach.[49] Modern building practices regarding supertall structures have led to the study of "vanity height".[52][53] Vanity height, according to the CTBUH, is the distance between the highest floor and its architectural top (excluding antennae, flagpole or other functional extensions). Vanity height first appeared in New York City skyscrapers as early as the 1920s and 1930s but supertall buildings have relied on such uninhabitable extensions for on average 30% of their height, raising potential definitional and sustainability issues.[54][55][56] The current era of skyscrapers focuses on sustainability, its built and natural environments, including the performance of structures, types of materials, construction practices, absolute minimal use of materials and natural resources, energy within the structure, and a holistically integrated building systems approach. LEED is a current green building standard.[57] Architecturally, with the movements of Postmodernism, New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture, that established since the 1980s, a more classical approach came back to global skyscraper design, that remains popular today.[58] Examples are the Wells Fargo Center, NBC Tower, Parkview Square, 30 Park Place, the Messeturm, the iconic Petronas Towers and Jin Mao Tower. Other contemporary styles and movements in skyscraper design include organic, sustainable, neo-futurist, structuralist, high-tech, deconstructivist, blob, digital, streamline, novelty, critical regionalist, vernacular, Neo Art Deco and neo-historist, also known as revivalist. 3 September is the global commemorative day for skyscrapers, called "Skyscraper Day".[59] New York City developers competed among themselves, with successively taller buildings claiming the title of "world's tallest" in the 1920s and early 1930s, culminating with the completion of the 318.9 m (1,046 ft) Chrysler Building in 1930 and the 443.2 m (1,454 ft) Empire State Building in 1931, the world's tallest building for forty years. The first completed 417 m (1,368 ft) tall World Trade Center tower became the world's tallest building in 1972. However, it was overtaken by the Sears Tower (now Willis Tower) in Chicago within two years. The 442 m (1,450 ft) tall Sears Tower stood as the world's tallest building for 24 years, from 1974 until 1998, until it was edged out by 452 m (1,483 ft) Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, which held the title for six years. Design and construction[edit] Main article: Skyscraper design and construction Modern skyscrapers in downtown Los Angeles The design and construction of skyscrapers involves creating safe, habitable spaces in very tall buildings. The buildings must support their weight, resist wind and earthquakes, and protect occupants from fire. Yet they must also be conveniently accessible, even on the upper floors, and provide utilities and a comfortable climate for the occupants. The problems posed in skyscraper design are considered among the most complex encountered given the balances required between economics, engineering, and construction management. One common feature of skyscrapers is a steel framework from which curtain walls are suspended, rather than load-bearing walls of conventional construction. Most skyscrapers have a steel frame that enables them to be built taller than typical load-bearing walls of reinforced concrete. Skyscrapers usually have a particularly small surface area of what are conventionally thought of as walls. Because the walls are not load-bearing most skyscrapers are characterized by surface areas of windows made possible by the concept of steel frame and curtain wall. However, skyscrapers can also have curtain walls that mimic conventional walls and have a small surface area of windows. The concept of a skyscraper is a product of the industrialized age, made possible by cheap fossil fuel derived energy and industrially refined raw materials such as steel and concrete. The construction of skyscrapers was enabled by steel frame construction that surpassed brick and mortar construction starting at the end of the 19th century and finally surpassing it in the 20th century together with reinforced concrete construction as the price of steel decreased and labour costs increased. The steel frames become inefficient and uneconomic for supertall buildings as usable floor space is reduced for progressively larger supporting columns.[60] Since about 1960, tubular designs have been used for high rises. This reduces the usage of material (more efficient in economic terms – Willis Tower uses a third less steel than the Empire State Building) yet allows greater height. It allows fewer interior columns, and so creates more usable floor space. It further enables buildings to take on various shapes. Elevators are characteristic to skyscrapers. In 1852 Elisha Otis introduced the safety elevator, allowing convenient and safe passenger movement to upper floors. Another crucial development was the use of a steel frame instead of stone or brick, otherwise the walls on the lower floors on a tall building would be too thick to be practical. Today major manufacturers of elevators include Otis, ThyssenKrupp, Schindler, and KONE. Advances in construction techniques have allowed skyscrapers to narrow in width, while increasing in height. Some of these new techniques include mass dampers to reduce vibrations and swaying, and gaps to allow air to pass through, reducing wind shear.[61] Basic design considerations[edit] Good structural design is important in most building design, but particularly for skyscrapers since even a small chance of catastrophic failure is unacceptable given the high price. This presents a paradox to civil engineers: the only way to assure a lack of failure is to test for all modes of failure, in both the laboratory and the real world. But the only way to know of all modes of failure is to learn from previous failures. Thus, no engineer can be absolutely sure that a given structure will resist all loadings that could cause failure, but can only have large enough margins of safety such that a failure is acceptably unlikely. When buildings do fail, engineers question whether the failure was due to some lack of foresight or due to some unknowable factor. Loading and vibration[edit] The load a skyscraper experiences is largely from the force of the building material itself. In most building designs, the weight of the structure is much larger than the weight of the material that it will support beyond its own weight. In technical terms, the dead load, the load of the structure, is larger than the live load, the weight of things in the structure (people, furniture, vehicles, etc.). As such, the amount of structural material required within the lower levels of a skyscraper will be much larger than the material required within higher levels. This is not always visually apparent. The Empire State Building's setbacks are actually a result of the building code at the time (1916 Zoning Resolution), and were not structurally required. On the other hand, John Hancock Center's shape is uniquely the result of how it supports loads. Vertical supports can come in several types, among which the most common for skyscrapers can be categorized as steel frames, concrete cores, tube within tube design, and shear walls. The wind loading on a skyscraper is also considerable. In fact, the lateral wind load imposed on supertall structures is generally the governing factor in the structural design. Wind pressure increases with height, so for very tall buildings, the loads associated with wind are larger than dead or live loads. Other vertical and horizontal loading factors come from varied, unpredictable sources, such as earthquakes. Steel frame[edit] By 1895, steel had replaced cast iron as skyscrapers' structural material. Its malleability allowed it to be formed into a variety of shapes, and it could be riveted, ensuring strong connections.[62] The simplicity of a steel frame eliminated the inefficient part of a shear wall, the central portion, and consolidated support members in a much stronger fashion by allowing both horizontal and vertical supports throughout. Among steel's drawbacks is that as more material must be supported as height increases, the distance between supporting members must decrease, which in turn increases the amount of material that must be supported. This becomes inefficient and uneconomic for buildings above 40 storeys tall as usable floor spaces are reduced for supporting column and due to more usage of steel.[60] Tube structural systems[edit] See also: Tube (structure) The Willis Tower in Chicago showing the bundled tube frame design A new structural system of framed tubes was developed by Fazlur Rahman Khan in 1963. The framed tube structure is defined as "a three dimensional space structure composed of three, four, or possibly more frames, braced frames, or shear walls, joined at or near their edges to form a vertical tube-like structural system capable of resisting lateral forces in any direction by cantilevering from the foundation".[63][64] Closely spaced interconnected exterior columns form the tube. Horizontal loads (primarily wind) are supported by the structure as a whole. Framed tubes allow fewer interior columns, and so create more usable floor space, and about half the exterior surface is available for windows. Where larger openings like garage doors are required, the tube frame must be interrupted, with transfer girders used to maintain structural integrity. Tube structures cut down costs, at the same time allowing buildings to reach greater heights. Concrete tube-frame construction[43] was first used in the DeWitt-Chestnut Apartment Building, completed in Chicago in 1963,[65] and soon after in the John Hancock Center and World Trade Center. The tubular systems are fundamental to tall building design. Most buildings over 40-storeys constructed since the 1960s now use a tube design derived from Khan's structural engineering principles,[60][66] examples including the construction of the World Trade Center, Aon Center, Petronas Towers, Jin Mao Building, and most other supertall skyscrapers since the 1960s.[43] The strong influence of tube structure design is also evident in the construction of the current tallest skyscraper, the Burj Khalifa.[46] Trussed tube and X-bracing[edit] Changes of structure with height; the tubular systems are fundamental for supertall buildings. Khan pioneered several other variations of the tube structure design.[citation needed] One of these was the concept of X-bracing, or the trussed tube, first employed for the John Hancock Center. This concept reduced the lateral load on the building by transferring the load into the exterior columns. This allows for a reduced need for interior columns thus creating more floor space. This concept can be seen in the John Hancock Center, designed in 1965 and completed in 1969. One of the most famous buildings of the structural expressionist style, the skyscraper's distinctive X-bracing exterior is actually a hint that the structure's skin is indeed part of its 'tubular system'. This idea is one of the architectural techniques the building used to climb to record heights (the tubular system is essentially the spine that helps the building stand upright during wind and earthquake loads). This X-bracing allows for both higher performance from tall structures and the ability to open up the inside floorplan (and usable floor space) if the architect desires. The John Hancock Center was far more efficient than earlier steel-frame structures. Where the Empire State Building (1931), required about 206 kilograms of steel per square metre and 28 Liberty Street (1961) required 275, the John Hancock Center required only 145.[45] The trussed tube concept was applied to many later skyscrapers, including the Onterie Center, Citigroup Center and Bank of China Tower.[67] Bundled tube[edit] An important variation on the tube frame is the bundled tube, which uses several interconnected tube frames. The Willis Tower in Chicago used this design, employing nine tubes of varying height to achieve its distinct appearance. The bundled tube structure meant that "buildings no longer need be boxlike in appearance: they could become sculpture."[46] The elevator conundrum[edit] The invention of the elevator was a precondition for the invention of skyscrapers, given that most people would not (or could not) climb more than a few flights of stairs at a time. The elevators in a skyscraper are not simply a necessary utility, like running water and electricity, but are in fact closely related to the design of the whole structure: a taller building requires more elevators to service the additional floors, but the elevator shafts consume valuable floor space. If the service core, which contains the elevator shafts, becomes too big, it can reduce the profitability of the building. Architects must therefore balance the value gained by adding height against the value lost to the expanding service core.[68] Many tall buildings use elevators in a non-standard configuration to reduce their footprint. Buildings such as the former World Trade Center Towers and Chicago's John Hancock Center use sky lobbies, where express elevators take passengers to upper floors which serve as the base for local elevators. This allows architects and engineers to place elevator shafts on top of each other, saving space. Sky lobbies and express elevators take up a significant amount of space, however, and add to the amount of time spent commuting between floors. Other buildings, such as the Petronas Towers, use double-deck elevators, allowing more people to fit in a single elevator, and reaching two floors at every stop. It is possible to use even more than two levels on an elevator, although this has never been done. The main problem with double-deck elevators is that they cause everyone in the elevator to stop when only person on one level needs to get off at a given floor. Buildings with sky lobbies include the World Trade Center, Petronas Twin Towers, Willis Tower and Taipei 101. The 44th-floor sky lobby of the John Hancock Center also featured the first high-rise indoor swimming pool, which remains the highest in America.[69] Economic rationale[edit] Skyscrapers are usually situated in city centers where the price of land is high. Constructing a skyscraper becomes justified if the price of land is so high that it makes economic sense to build upward as to minimize the cost of the land per the total floor area of a building. Thus the construction of skyscrapers is dictated by economics and results in skyscrapers in a certain part of a large city unless a building code restricts the height of buildings. Skyscrapers are rarely seen in small cities and they are characteristic of large cities, because of the critical importance of high land prices for the construction of skyscrapers. Usually only office, commercial and hotel users can afford the rents in the city center and thus most tenants of skyscrapers are of these classes. Today, skyscrapers are an increasingly common sight where land is expensive, as in the centers of big cities, because they provide such a high ratio of rentable floor space per unit area of land. One problem with skyscrapers is car parking. In the largest cities most people commute via public transport, but in smaller cities many parking spaces are needed. Multi-storey car parks are impractical to build very tall, so much land area is needed. Another disadvantage of very high skyscrapers is the loss of usable floorspace, as many elevator shafts are needed to enable performant vertical travelling. This led to the introduction of express lifts and sky lobbies where transfer to slower distribution lifts can be done. Environmental impact[edit] Further information: Bird-skyscraper collisions This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) 30 St Mary Axe in London is an example of a modern environmentally friendly skyscraper. Constructing a single skyscraper requires large quantities of materials like steel, concrete, and glass, and these materials represent significant embodied energy. Skyscrapers are thus material and energy intensive buildings, but skyscrapers can have long lifespans, for example the Empire State Building in New York City, United States completed in 1931 and remains in active use. Skyscrapers have considerable mass, requiring a stronger foundation than a shorter, lighter building. In construction, building materials must be lifted to the top of a skyscraper during construction, requiring more energy than would be necessary at lower heights. Furthermore, a skyscraper consumes much electricity because potable and non-potable water have to be pumped to the highest occupied floors, skyscrapers are usually designed to be mechanically ventilated, elevators are generally used instead of stairs, and electric lights are needed in rooms far from the windows and windowless spaces such as elevators, bathrooms and stairwells. Skyscrapers can be artificially lit and the energy requirements can be covered by renewable energy or other electricity generation with low greenhouse gas emissions. Heating and cooling of skyscrapers can be efficient, because of centralized HVAC systems, heat radiation blocking windows and small surface area of the building. There is Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification for skyscrapers. For example, the Empire State Building received a gold Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design rating in September 2011 and the Empire State Building is the tallest LEED certified building in the United States,[70] proving that skyscrapers can be environmentally friendly. The 30 St Mary Axe in London, the United Kingdom is another example of an environmentally friendly skyscraper. In the lower levels of a skyscraper a larger percentage of the building floor area must be devoted to the building structure and services than is required for lower buildings: More structure – because it must be stronger to support more floors above The elevator conundrum creates the need for more lift shafts—everyone comes in at the bottom and they all have to pass through the lower part of the building to get to the upper levels. Building services – power and water enter the building from below and have to pass through the lower levels to get to the upper levels. In low-rise structures, the support rooms (chillers, transformers, boilers, pumps and air handling units) can be put in basements or roof space—areas which have low rental value. There is, however, a limit to how far this plant can be located from the area it serves. The farther away it is the larger the risers for ducts and pipes from this plant to the floors they serve and the more floor area these risers take. In practice this means that in highrise buildings this plant is located on 'plant levels' at intervals up the building. Operational Energy The building sector accounts for approximately 50% of greenhouse gas emissions, with operational energy accounting for 80-90% of building related energy use.[71] Operational energy use is affected by the magnitude of conduction between the interior and exterior, convection from infiltrating air, and radiation through glazing. The extent to which these factors affect the operational energy vary depending on the microclimate of the skyscraper, with increased wind speeds as the height of the skyscraper increases, and a decrease in the dry bulb temperature as the altitude increases.[71] For example, when moving from 1.5 meters to 284 meters, the dry bulb temperature decreased by 1.85oC while the wind speeds increased from 2.46 meters per seconds to 7.75 meters per second, which led to a 2.4% decrease in summer cooling in reference to the Freedom Tower in New York City. However, for the same building it was found that the annual energy use intensity was 9.26% higher because of the lack of shading at high altitudes which increased the cooling loads for the remainder of the year while a combination of temperature, wind, shading, and the effects of reflections led to a combined 13.13% increase in annual energy use intensity.[72] In a study performed by Leung and Ray in 2013, it was found that the average energy use intensity of a structure with between 0 and 9 floors was approximately 80 kBtu/ft/yr, while the energy use intensity of a structure with more than 50 floors was about 117 kBtu/ft/yr. Refer to Figure 1 to see the breakdown of how intermediate heights affect the energy use intensity. The slight decrease in energy use intensity over 30-39 floors can be attributed to the fact that the increase in pressure within the heating, cooling, and water distribution systems levels out at a point between 40 and 49 floors and the energy savings due to the microclimate of higher floors are able to be seen.[73] There is a gap in data in which another study looking at the same information but for taller buildings is needed. Elevators A portion of the operational energy increase in tall buildings is related to the usage of elevators because the distance traveled and the speed at which they travel increases as the height of the building increases. Between 5 and 25% of the total energy consumed in a tall building is from the use of elevators. As the height of the building increases it is also more inefficient because of the presence of higher drag and friction losses.[74] Embodied Energy The embodied energy associated with the construction of skyscrapers varies based on the materials used. Embodied energy is quantified per unit of material. Skyscrapers inherently have higher embodied energy than low-rise buildings due to the increase in material used as more floors are built. Figures 2 and 3 compare the total embodied energy of different floor types and the unit embodied energy per floor type for buildings with between 20 and 70 stories. For all floor types except for steel-concrete floors, it was found that after 60 stories, there was a decrease in unit embodied energy but when considering all floors, there was exponential growth due to a double dependence on height. The first of which is the relationship between an increase in height leading to an increase in the quantity of materials used, and the second being the increase in height leading to an increase in size of elements to increase the structural capacity of the building. A careful choice in building materials can likely reduce the embodied energy without reducing the number of floors constructed within the bounds presented.[75] Embodied Carbon Similar to embodied energy, the embodied carbon of a building is dependent on the materials chosen for its construction. Figures 4 and 5 show the total embodied carbon for different structure types for increasing numbers of stories and the embodied carbon per square meter of gross floor area for the same structure types as the number of stories increases. Both methods of measuring the embodied carbon show that there is a point where the embodied carbon is lowest before increasing again as the height increases. For the total embodied carbon it is dependent on the structure type, but is either around 40 stories, or approximately 60 stories. For the square meter of gross floor area, the lowest embodied carbon was found at either 40 stories, or approximately 70 stories.[76] Air Pollution In urban areas, the configuration of buildings can lead to exacerbated wind patterns and an uneven dispersion of pollutants. When the height of buildings surrounding a source of air pollution is increased, the size and occurrence of both “dead-zones” and “hotspots” were increased in areas where there were almost no pollutants and high concentrations of pollutants, respectively. Figure 6 depicts the progression of a Building F’s height increasing from 0.0315 units in Case 1, to 0.2 units in Case 2, to 0.6 units in Case 3. This progression shows how as the height of Building F increases, the dispersion of pollutants decreases, but the concentration within the building cluster increases. The variation of velocity fields can be affected by the construction of new buildings as well, rather than solely the increase in height as shown in the figure.[77] As urban centers continue to expand upward and outward, the present velocity fields will continue to trap polluted air close to the tall buildings within the city. Specifically within major cities, a majority of air pollution is derived from transportation, whether it be cars, trains, planes, or boats. As urban sprawl continues and pollutants continue to be emitted, the air pollutants will continue to be trapped within these urban centers.[78] Different pollutants can be detrimental to human health in different ways. For example, particulate matter from vehicular exhaust and power generation can cause asthma, bronchitis, and cancer, while nitrogen dioxide from motor engine combustion processes can cause neurological disfunction and asphyxiation.[79] LEED/Green Building Rating Like with all other buildings, if special measures are taken to incorporate sustainable design methods early on in the design process, it is possible to obtain a green building rating, such as a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification. An integrated design approach is crucial in making sure that design decisions that positively impact the whole building are made at the beginning of the process. Because of the massive scale of skyscrapers, the decisions made by the design team must take all factors into account, including the buildings impact on the surrounding community, the effect of the building on the direction in which air and water move, and the impact of the construction process, must be taken into account. There are several design methods that could be employed in the construction of a skyscraper that would take advantage of the height of the building.[80] The microclimates that exist as the height of the building increases can be taken advantage of to increase the natural ventilation, decrease the cooling load, and increase daylighting. Natural ventilation can be increased by utilizing the stack effect, in which warm air moves upward and increases the movement of the air within the building. If utilizing the stack effect, buildings must take extra care to design for fire separation techniques, as the stack effect can also exacerbate the severity of a fire.[81] Skyscrapers are considered to be internally dominated buildings because of their size as well as the fact that a majority are used as some sort of office building with high cooling loads. Due to the microclimate created at the upper floors with the increased wind speed and the decreased dry bulb temperatures, the cooling load will naturally be reduced because of infiltration through the thermal envelope. By taking advantage of the naturally cooler temperatures at higher altitudes, skyscrapers can reduce their cooling loads passively. On the other side of this argument, is the lack of shading at higher altitudes by other buildings, so the solar heat gain will be larger for higher floors than for floors at the lower end of the building. Special measures should be taken to shade upper floors from sunlight during the overheated period to ensure thermal comfort without increasing the cooling load.[73] History of the tallest skyscrapers[edit] Main articles: History of the tallest buildings in the world, List of tallest buildings, and List of tallest buildings and structures At the beginning of the 20th century, New York City was a center for the Beaux-Arts architectural movement, attracting the talents of such great architects as Stanford White and Carrere and Hastings. As better construction and engineering technology became available as the century progressed, New York City and Chicago became the focal point of the competition for the tallest building in the world. Each city's striking skyline has been composed of numerous and varied skyscrapers, many of which are icons of 20th-century architecture: The E. V. Haughwout Building in Manhattan, is considered by a portion of New Yorkers to be the world's first skyscraper due to the fact it was the first building to install successfully a passenger elevator, on 23 March 1857. The Equitable Life Building in Manhattan, is considered by another portion of New Yorkers to be the world's first skyscraper due to the fact it was the first office building to feature passenger elevators. The Home Insurance Building in Chicago, which was built in 1884, is considered by many people to be the world's first skyscraper due to its steel skeleton.[82] Subsequent buildings such as the Singer Building and the Metropolitan Life Tower were higher still. The Flatiron Building, designed by Daniel Hudson Burnham and standing 285 ft (87 m) high, was one of the tallest buildings in New York City upon its completion in 1902, made possible by its steel skeleton. While it was never the world's tallest building, it was one of the first buildings designed with a steel framework, and to achieve this height with other construction methods of that time would have been very difficult. The Tower Building, designed by Bradford Gilbert and built in 1889, is considered by some to be New York City's first skyscraper, and may have been the first building in New York City to use a skeletal steel frame.[83] The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower, completed in 1909 across Madison Square Park from the Flatiron Building, was designed by the architectural firm of Napoleon LeBrun & Sons and stood 700 feet (210 m) tall. Until 1913 it was the tallest building in the world.[84] The Woolworth Building, a neo-Gothic "Cathedral of Commerce" overlooking New York City Hall, was designed by Cass Gilbert. At 792 feet (241 m), it became the world's tallest building upon its completion in 1913, an honor it retained until 1930. 40 Wall Street, a 71-story, 927-foot-tall (283 m) neo-Gothic building designed by H. Craig Severance, was the world's tallest building for a month in May 1930.[85][86] In late May 1930 the Chrysler Building took the lead as the tallest building in the world, scraping the sky at 1,046 feet (319 m).[87] Designed by William Van Alen, an Art Deco style masterpiece with an exterior crafted of brick,[88] the Chrysler Building continues to be a favorite of New Yorkers to this day.[89] The Empire State Building, the first building to have more than 100 floors (it has 102), was completed the following year. It was designed by Shreve, Lamb and Harmon in the contemporary Art Deco style. The tower takes its name from the nickname of New York State. Upon its completion in 1931 at 1,250 feet (381 m), it took the top spot as tallest building, and towered above all other buildings until 1970. The antenna mast added in 1951 brought pinnacle height to 1,472 feet (449 m), lowered in 1984 to 1,454 feet (443 m).[90] The World Trade Center officially surpassed the Empire State Building in 1970, was completed in 1973, and consisted of two tall towers and several smaller buildings. For a short time, the first of the two towers was the world's tallest building. Upon completion, the towers stood for 28 years, until the September 11 attacks destroyed the buildings in 2001. Various governmental entities, financial firms, and law firms called the towers home. The Willis Tower (formerly Sears Tower) was completed in 1974, one year after the World Trade Center, and surpassed it as the world's tallest building. It was the first building to employ the "bundled tube" structural system, designed by Fazlur Khan. The building was not surpassed in height until the Petronas Towers were constructed in 1998, but remained the tallest in some categories until Burj Khalifa surpassed it in all categories in 2010. It is currently the second tallest building in the United States, after One World Trade Center, which was built to replace the destroyed towers. Momentum in setting records passed from the United States to other nations with the opening of the Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 1998. The record for the world's tallest building has remained in Asia since the opening of Taipei 101 in Taipei, Taiwan, in 2004. A number of architectural records, including those of the world's tallest building and tallest free-standing structure, moved to the Middle East with the opening of the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. This geographical transition is accompanied by a change in approach to skyscraper design. For much of the 20th century large buildings took the form of simple geometrical shapes. This reflected the "international style" or modernist philosophy shaped by Bauhaus architects early in the century. The last of these, the Willis Tower and World Trade Center towers in New York, erected in the 1970s, reflect the philosophy. Tastes shifted in the decade which followed, and new skyscrapers began to exhibit postmodernist influences. This approach to design avails itself of historical elements, often adapted and re-interpreted, in creating technologically modern structures. The Petronas Twin Towers recall Asian pagoda architecture and Islamic geometric principles. Taipei 101 likewise reflects the pagoda tradition as it incorporates ancient motifs such as the ruyi symbol. The Burj Khalifa draws inspiration from traditional Islamic art. Architects in recent years have sought to create structures that would not appear equally at home if set in any part of the world, but that reflect the culture thriving in the spot where they stand.[citation needed] The following list measures height of the roof.[91][failed verification] The more common gauge is the "highest architectural detail"; such ranking would have included Petronas Towers, built in 1996. Built Building City Country Official Height Floors Pinnacle Current status 1870 Equitable Life Building New York City  United States 43 m 142 ft 8 Destroyed by fire in 1912 1889 Auditorium Building Chicago 82 m 269 ft 17 106 m 349 ft Standing 1890 New York World Building New York City 94 m 309 ft 20 106 m 349 ft Demolished in 1955 1894 Philadelphia City Hall Philadelphia 155.8 m 511 ft 9 167 m 548 ft Standing 1908 Singer Building New York City 187 m 612 ft 47 Demolished in 1968 1909 Met Life Tower 213 m 700 ft 50 Standing 1913 Woolworth Building 241 m 792 ft 57 Standing 1930 40 Wall Street 282 m 925 ft 70 283 m 927 ft Standing 1930 Chrysler Building 319 m 1046 ft 77 319 m 1,046 ft Standing 1931 Empire State Building 381 m 1,250 ft 102 443 m 1,454 ft Standing 1972 World Trade Center (North Tower) 417 m 1,368 ft 110 526.8 m 1,730 ft Destroyed in 2001 in the September 11 attacks 1974 Willis Tower (formerly Sears Tower) Chicago 442 m 1,450 ft 110 527.3 m 1,729 ft Standing 1996 Petronas Towers Kuala Lumpur  Malaysia 452 m 1,482 ft 88 452 m 1,483 ft Standing 2004 Taipei 101 Taipei  Taiwan 508 m 1,667 ft 101 508.2 m 1,667 ft Standing 2010 Burj Khalifa Dubai  United Arab Emirates 828 m 2,717 ft 163 829.8 m 2,722 ft Standing Gallery[edit] The Willis Tower in Chicago was the world's tallest building from 1974 to 1998; many still refer to it as the "Sears Tower", its name from inception to 2009. The Petronas Twin Towers in Kuala Lumpur were the tallest from 1998 to 2004. Taipei 101, the world's tallest skyscraper from 2004 to 2010, was the first to exceed the 500-metre mark. Future developments[edit] See also: List of visionary tall buildings and structures and List of future tallest buildings Proposals for such structures have been put forward, including the Burj Mubarak Al Kabir in Kuwait and Azerbaijan Tower in Baku. Kilometer-plus structures present architectural challenges that may eventually place them in a new architectural category.[92] The first building under construction and planned to be over one kilometre tall is the Jeddah Tower. Wooden skyscrapers[edit] Main article: List of tallest wooden buildings Several wooden skyscraper designs have been designed and built. A 14-storey housing project in Bergen, Norway known as 'Treet' or 'The Tree' became the world's tallest wooden apartment block when it was completed in late 2015.[93] The Tree's record was eclipsed by Brock Commons, an 18-storey wooden dormitory at the University of British Columbia in Canada, when it was completed in September 2016.[94] A 40-storey residential building 'Trätoppen' has been proposed by architect Anders Berensson to be built in Stockholm, Sweden.[95] Trätoppen would be the tallest building in Stockholm, though there are no immediate plans to begin construction.[96] The tallest currently-planned wooden skyscraper is the 70-storey W350 Project in Tokyo, to be built by the Japanese wood products company Sumitomo Forestry Co. to celebrate its 350th anniversary in 2041.[97] An 80-storey wooden skyscraper, the River Beech Tower, has been proposed by a team including architects Perkins + Will and the University of Cambridge. The River Beech Tower, on the banks of the Chicago River in Chicago, Illinois, would be 348 feet shorter than the W350 Project despite having 10 more storeys.[98][97] Wooden skyscrapers are estimated to be around a quarter of the weight of an equivalent reinforced-concrete structure as well as reducing the building carbon footprint by 60–75%. Buildings have been designed using cross-laminated timber (CLT) which gives a higher rigidity and strength to wooden structures.[99] CLT panels are prefabricated and can therefore save on building time.[100] See also[edit] Architecture portal CTBUH Skyscraper Award Emporis Skyscraper Award Groundscraper List of cities with the most skyscrapers List of tallest buildings List of tallest buildings and structures Plyscraper Seascraper Skyscraper design and construction Skyscraper Index Skyscraper Museum in NYC Skyscrapers in film Skyline Vertical farming, "farmscrapers" World's littlest skyscraper drag-coefficient material-fatigue down-force Notes[edit] References[edit] ^ "Skyscraper, Emporis Standards". Emporis.com. Retrieved 7 November 2020. ^ "What is a Skyscraper?". Theb1m.com. Retrieved 7 November 2020. ^ The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica. "Skyscraper". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 25 October 2016. Skyscraper, very tall, multistoried building. The name first came into use during the 1880s, shortly after the first skyscrapers were built, in the United States. The development of skyscrapers came as a result of the coincidence of several technological and social developments. The term skyscraper originally applied to buildings of 10 to 20 stories, but by the late 20th century the term was used to describe high-rise buildings of unusual height, generally greater than 40 or 50 stories. ^ "Number of 150m+ Completed Buildings - The Skyscraper Center". Skyscrapercenter.com. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 19 December 2019. ^ a b Ambrose, Gavin; Harris, Paul; Stone, Sally (2008). The Visual Dictionary of Architecture. Switzerland: AVA Publishing SA. p. 233. ISBN 978-2-940373-54-3. Skyscraper: A tall, multi-storey building. Skyscrapers are different from towers or masts because they are habitable. The term was first applied during the late-nineteenth century, as the public marvelled at the elevated, steel-frame buildings being erected in Chicago and New York, USA. Modern skyscrapers tend to be constructed from reinforced concrete. As a general rule, a building must be at least 150 metres high to qualify as a skyscraper. ^ "Magical Hystory Tour: Skyscrapers". 15 August 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. No one is certain which was the first true skyscraper, but Chicago's ten-story Home Insurance Building (1885) is a top contender. ^ Charles E. Peterson (October 1950). "Ante-Bellum Skyscraper". Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians. 9:3: 25–28. In the annals of the American skyscraper there was, perhaps, nothing more daring than John McArthur, Jr.'s design for the Jayne Granite building, erected on lower Chestnut Street near the Philadelphia riverfront, just a century ago (FIG. 2). More than a generation older than the celebrated works of Louis Sullivan in Chicago and St. Louis. [..] Sullivan was for several months a cub draftsman in Furness and Hewitt's office just across the street. Although he does not seem to have mentioned in his writings Dr. Jayne's "proud and soaring" patent medicine headquarters, we may well wonder if some of the famous skyscraper designs of Chicago and St. Louis do not owe a real debt to Philadelphia. ^ "Magical Hystory Tour: Skyscrapers". 15 August 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. The thirteen-story Tower Building (1889) just down the avenue at 50 Broadway, was the first New York skyscraper to use skeletal steel construction. ^ Ivars Peterson (5 April 1986). "The first skyscraper – new theory that Home Insurance Building was not the first". CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2010. "In my view, we can no longer argue that the Home Insurance Building was the first skyscraper," says Carl W. Condit, now retired from Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., and author of several books on Chicago architecture. "The claim rests on an unacceptably narrow idea of what constitutes a high-rise commercial building," he says."If there is a building in which all these technical factors—structural system, elevator, utilities—converge at the requisite level of maturity," argues Condit, "it's the Equitable Life Assurance Building in New York." Completed in 1870, the building rose 7½ storeys, twice the height of its neighbors. ^ "Which World City Has The Most Skyscrapers?". The Urban Developer. 11 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2018. "The majority of international organisations, such as the CTBUH and Emporis, define a skyscraper as a building that reaches or exceeds the height of 150 metres." ^ "Huge New Rogers Skyscraper Proposed". skyscrapernews.com. 3 December 2007. Retrieved 3 December 2007. ...their eleventh proper skyscraper, that is by definition buildings above 150 metres ^ Data Standards: skyscraper (ESN 24419), Emporis Standards, accessed on line July 2020. "A skyscraper is defined on Emporis as a multi-story building whose architectural height is at least 100 meters. This definition falls midway between many common definitions worldwide, and is intended as a metric compromise which can be applied across the board worldwide" ^ "CTBUH Height Criteria: Tall, Supertall, and Megatall Buildings". CTBUH. 20 March 2009. Retrieved 10 July 2020. ^ A.F.K. "The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Cathedral Church of Lincoln, by A.F. Kendric, B.A". Gwydir.demon.co.uk. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2011. ^ a b Gregory S. Aldrete: "Daily Life in the Roman City: Rome, Pompeii and Ostia", 2004, ISBN 978-0-313-33174-9, p.79f. ^ Strabo, 5.3.7 ^ Alexander G. McKay: Römische Häuser, Villen und Paläste, Feldmeilen 1984, ISBN 3-7611-0585-1 p. 231 ^ Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 2719, in: Katja Lembke, Cäcilia Fluck, Günter Vittmann: Ägyptens späte Blüte. Die Römer am Nil, Mainz 2004, ISBN 3-8053-3276-9, p.29 ^ a b Werner Müller: "dtv-Atlas Baukunst I. Allgemeiner Teil: Baugeschichte von Mesopotamien bis Byzanz", 14th ed., 2005, ISBN 978-3-423-03020-5, p.345 ^ Behrens-Abouseif, Doris (1992). Islamic Architecture in Cairo. Brill Publishers. p. 6. ISBN 978-90-04-09626-4. ^ Mortada, Hisham (2003). Traditional Islamic principles of built environment. Routledge. p. viii. ISBN 978-0-7007-1700-2. ^ a b UNESCO World Heritage Centre. "Old Walled City of Shibam". ^ Helfritz, Hans (April 1937). "Land without shade". Journal of the Royal Central Asian Society. 24 (2): 201–16. doi:10.1080/03068373708730789. ^ Shipman, J. G. T. (June 1984). "The Hadhramaut". Asian Affairs. 15 (2): 154–62. doi:10.1080/03068378408730145. ^ "Shrewsbury Flax Mill: Funding for offices and restoration". BBC News. 30 July 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2013. ^ "Oriel Chambers". Liverpool Architectural Society. Archived from the original on 22 September 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2009. ^ Manchester School of Architecture video YouTube ^ Building Design Architect's website, 8 January 2010 ^ Smith, Chrysti M. (2006). Verbivore's Feast: Second Course: More Word & Phrase Origins. Farcountry Press. p. 289. ISBN 978-1-56037-402-2. The word skyscraper, in its architectural context, was first applied to the Home Insurance Building, completed in Chicago in 1885. ^ Marshall, Colin (2 April 2015). "The world's first skyscraper: a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 9". The Guardian. ^ Dupré, Judith (2013). Skyscrapers: A History of the World's Most Extraordinary Buildings-Revised and Updated. New York: Hachette/Black Dog & Leventhal. p. 14. ISBN 978-1-57912-942-2. ^ "The Plan Comes Together". Encyclopedia of Chicago. Retrieved 27 July 2013. ^ "Royal Liver Building". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 23 June 2011. ^ Hultin, Olof; Bengt O H Johansson; Johan Mårtelius; Rasmus Wærn (1998). The Complete Guide to Architecture in Stockholm. Stockholm: Arkitektur Förlag. p. 62. ISBN 978-91-86050-43-6. ^ "The 50 Most Influential Tall Buildings of the Last 50 Years". CTBUH. Retrieved 2019-10-10. ^ A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture. Oxford University Press. 2006. p. 880. ISBN 978-0-19-860678-9. ^ Nordenson, Guy (2008). Seven Structural Engineers: The Felix Candela Lectures. New York City: Museum of Modern Art. p. 21. ISBN 978-0870707032. ^ "Mies van der Rohe Dies at 83; Leader of Modern Architecture". The New York Times. 17 August 1969. Retrieved 21 July 2007. Mies van der Rohe, one of the great figures of 20th-century architecture. ^ a b c Lynn Beadle (2001). Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. CRC Press. p. 482. ISBN 978-0-203-46754-1. ^ a b "Designing cities in the sky". lehigh.edu. 14 March 2007. ^ Weingardt, Richard (2005). Engineering Legends. ASCE Publications. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-7844-0801-8. ^ Mir M. Ali, Kyoung Sun Moon. "Structural developments in tall buildings: current trends and future prospects". Architectural Science Review (September 2007). Retrieved 10 December 2008. ^ a b c Ali, Mir M. (2001). "Evolution of Concrete Skyscrapers: from Ingalls to Jin mao". Electronic Journal of Structural Engineering. 1 (1): 2–14. Retrieved 30 November 2008. ^ Weingardt, Richard (2005). Engineering Legends. ASCE Publications. p. 76. ISBN 978-0-7844-0801-8. ^ a b Alfred Swenson & Pao-Chi Chang (2008). "Building construction: High-rise construction since 1945". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 9 December 2008. ^ a b c Stephen Bayley (5 January 2010). "Burj Dubai: The new pinnacle of vanity". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 26 February 2010. ^ Billington, David P. (1985). The Tower and the Bridge: The New Art of Structural Engineering. Princeton University Press. pp. 234–5. ISBN 978-0-691-02393-9. ^ "List of Tallest skyscrapers in Chicago". Emporis.com. 15 June 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2011. ^ a b Strauss, Alfred; Frangopol, Dan; Bergmeister, Konrad (2012-09-18). Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Systems: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering (IALCCE'12), Vienna, Austria, October 3-6, 2012. ISBN 9780203103364. ^ Strauss, Alfred; Frangopol, Dan; Bergmeister, Konrad (2012-09-18). Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Systems: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering (IALCCE'12), Vienna, Austria, October 3-6, 2012. ISBN 9780203103364. ^ "IALCCE 2012: Keynote Speakers Details". ialcce2012.boku.ac.at. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2012. ^ "Tall Buildings in Numbers Vanity Height". Ctbuh.org. Archived from the original on 17 November 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013. ^ "CTBUH releases list of supertall towers with highest percentages of 'vanity height'". World Architecture News. Retrieved 21 September 2013. ^ "Most of the World's Tallest Buildings Game the System With 'Vanity Height' – Jenny Xie". The Atlantic Cities. 9 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013. ^ Lecher, Colin. "The World's Tallest Skyscrapers Have A Dirty Little Secret". Popsci.com. Retrieved 21 September 2013. ^ "World's tallest skyscapers? [sic] Only if 'useless' needles count". NY Daily News. 7 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013. ^ Alfred Strauss; Dan Frangopol; Konrad Bergmeister (2012). Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Systems: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering (IALCCE'12), Vienna, Austria, October 3-6, 2012. CRC Press. ISBN 978-0-203-10336-4. ^ Adam, Robert. "How to Build Skyscrapers". City Journal. Retrieved 20 September 2014. ^ Whitman, Elizabeth. "Skyscraper Day 2015: 10 Facts, Photos Celebrating Ridiculously Tall Buildings Around The World". International Business Times. Retrieved 3 September 2015. ^ a b c "Lehigh University: Fazlur Rahman Khan Distinguished Lecture Series". Lehigh.edu. Retrieved 14 June 2013. ^ "Why Can't We Build Skinny Skyscrapers Everywhere?". CityLab. Retrieved 2015-12-31. ^ Leslie, Thomas (June 2010). "Built Like Bridges: Iron, Steel, and Rivets in the Nineteenth-century Skyscraper". Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians. 69 (2): 234–261. doi:10.1525/jsah.2010.69.2.234. JSTOR 10.1525/jsah.2010.69.2.234. Abstract only. ^ Ali, Mir M. (January 2001). "Evolution of Concrete Skyscrapers". Electronic Journal of Structural Engineering. 1 (1): 2–14. Archived from the original on 5 June 2007. Retrieved 14 May 2007. ^ Khan, Fazlur Rahman; Rankine, J. (1980). "Structural Systems". Tall Building Systems and Concepts. Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, American Society of Civil Engineers. SC: 42. ^ Alfred Swenson & Pao-Chi Chang (2008). "building construction". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 9 December 2008. ^ "Top 10 world's tallest steel buildings". Constructionweekonline.com. Retrieved 14 June 2013. ^ Dr. D. M Chan. "Introduction to Tall building Structures" (PDF). Teaching.ust.hk. p. 34. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2010. ^ "How Skyscrapers Work: Making it Functional". HowStuffWorks. Retrieved 30 October 2008. ^ Emporis GmbH. "John Hancock Center". ^ Dailey, Jessica (14 September 2011). "Empire State Building Achieves LEED Gold Certification". Inhabitat.com. Retrieved 30 July 2013. ^ a b Saroglou, Tanya; Meir, Isaac A.; Theodosiou, Theodoros; Givoni, Baruch (August 2017). "Towards energy efficient skyscrapers". Energy and Buildings. 149: 437–449. doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.05.057. ISSN 0378-7788. ^ Ellis, Peter (August 15, 2005). "Simulating Tall Buildings Using EnergyPlus" (PDF). National Renewable Energy Laboratory. ^ a b Leung, Luke (December 2013). "Low-energy Tall Buildings? Room for Improvement as Demonstrated by New York City Energy Benchmarking Data". International Journal of High-Rise Buildings. 2. ^ Sachs, Harvey (April 2005). "Opportunities for Elevator Energy Efficiency Improvements" (PDF). American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. ^ Foraboschi, Paolo; Mercanzin, Mattia; Trabucco, Dario (January 2014). "Sustainable structural design of tall buildings based on embodied energy". Energy and Buildings. 68: 254–269. doi:10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.09.003. ISSN 0378-7788. ^ Gan, Vincent J.L.; Chan, C.M.; Tse, K.T.; Lo, Irene M.C.; Cheng, Jack C.P. (September 2017). "A comparative analysis of embodied carbon in high-rise buildings regarding different design parameters". Journal of Cleaner Production. 161: 663–675. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.05.156. ISSN 0959-6526. ^ Aristodemou, Elsa; Boganegra, Luz Maria; Mottet, Laetitia; Pavlidis, Dimitrios; Constantinou, Achilleas; Pain, Christopher; Robins, Alan; ApSimon, Helen (February 2018). "How tall buildings affect turbulent air flows and dispersion of pollution within a neighbourhood". Environmental Pollution. 233: 782–796. doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2017.10.041. ISSN 0269-7491. ^ Borck, Rainald (2016-05-01). "Will skyscrapers save the planet? Building height limits and urban greenhouse gas emissions". Regional Science and Urban Economics. 58: 13–25. doi:10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2016.01.004. ISSN 0166-0462. ^ Kim, Ki-Hyun; Kumar, Pawan; Szulejko, Jan E.; Adelodun, Adedeji A.; Junaid, Muhammad Faisal; Uchimiya, Minori; Chambers, Scott (May 2017). "Toward a better understanding of the impact of mass transit air pollutants on human health". Chemosphere. 174: 268–279. doi:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.01.113. ISSN 0045-6535. ^ Ali, Mir (2008). "Overview of Sustainable Design Factors in High-Rise Buildings" (PDF). Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. ^ Ayşin Sev; Görkem Aslan (2014-07-04). "Natural Ventilation for the Sustainable Tall Office Buildings of the Future". doi:10.5281/zenodo.1094381. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ "Home Insurance Building". HISTORY.com. ^ Edward Robb Ellis (2005). The Epic of New York City. Carroll & Graf publishers. pp. 405–415. ISBN 978-0-7867-1436-0. ^ Gray, Christopher (1996-05-26). "Streetscapes/Metropolitan Life at 1 Madison Avenue;For a Brief Moment, the Tallest Building in the World". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2020-07-05. ^ Hoster, Jay (2014). Early Wall Street 1830–1940. Charleston: Arcadia Publishing. p. 127. ISBN 978-1-4671-2263-4. Retrieved 7 June 2018. ^ "Bank of Manhattan Built in Record Time; Structure 927 Feet High, Second Tallest in World, Is Erected in Year of Work". The New York Times. 6 May 1930. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 27 April 2020. ^ "Chrysler Building. Quote: An exhibition in the building's lobby reports the height as 1046". Skyscraperpage.com. Retrieved 5 June 2011. ^ Emporis GmbH. "– Chrysler Building statistics". Emporis.com. Retrieved 5 June 2011. ^ "America's Favorite Architecture: Chrysler Building ranked 9th". Favoritearchitecture.org. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2011. ^ Pollak, Michael (23 April 2006). "75 YEARS: F. Y. I." The New York Times. Retrieved 31 October 2009. ^ "The World's Tallest Buildings | Statistics". Emporis. Retrieved 12 March 2014. ^ Owainati, Sadek (3 November 2008). "Reaching for the stars". ArabianBusiness.com. Retrieved 15 November 2008. ^ Editorial, Reuters. "Wooden 'plyscrapers' challenge concrete and steel". U.S. Retrieved 2018-03-22. ^ "The University of British Columbia's Brock Commons Takes the Title of Tallest Wood Tower". Architect. 2016-09-16. Retrieved 2016-12-10. ^ "Anders Berensson proposes wooden skyscraper for Stockholm". Dezeen. 2016-04-25. Retrieved 2016-12-10. ^ "Tratoppen, Stockholm - Designing Buildings Wiki". designingbuildings.co.uk. Retrieved 2018-03-22. ^ a b Hunt, Elle (2018-02-16). "Plyscraper city: Tokyo to build 350m tower made of wood". The Guardian. Retrieved 2018-03-22. ^ "The Tallest Timber Tower Yet: Perkins + Will's Concept Proposal for River Beech Tower". ArchDaily. 2016-10-06. Retrieved 2018-03-22. ^ "Building materials: Top of the tree". The Economist. Retrieved 2016-12-10. ^ "Are High-Rise Wood Buildings in Seattle's Future?". Seattle Business Magazine. Retrieved 2016-12-10. Further reading[edit] Adam, Robert. "How to Build Skyscrapers". City Journal. Retrieved 4 April 2014. Judith Dupré. Skyscrapers: A History of the World's Most Extraordinary Buildings-Revised and Updated. (2013). Hachette/Black Dog & Leventhal. 2013 ed.: ISBN 978-1-57912-942-2 Skyscrapers: Form and Function, by David Bennett, Simon & Schuster, 1995. Landau, Sarah; Condit, Carl W. (1996). Rise of the New York Skyscraper, 1865–1913. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-07739-1. OCLC 32819286. Willis, Carol, Form Follows Finance: Skyscrapers and Skylines in New York and Chicago. Princeton Architectural Press, 1995. 224 P. ISBN 1-56898-044-2 Van Leeuwen, Thomas A P, The Skyward Trend of Thought: The Metaphysics of the American Skyscraper, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Skyscrapers. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Skyscrapers at Curlie Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat SkyscraperCity construction updates magazine Skyscraper definition on Phorio Standards Skyscraper Museum SkyscraperPage Technical information and diagrams v t e Tallest buildings and structures History Skyscraper Storey Buildings By region Africa Asia Indian subcontinent Southeast Europe Balkans Baltic states Scandinavia Oceania The Americas North America South America Central America Latin America By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Kosovo Kuwait Latvia Lebanon Lithuania Macau Malaysia Malta Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Netherlands Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Serbia Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Zimbabwe By other British Empire and Commonwealth European Union Lists 100+ floors Architects Buildings by height to roof Cities with most skyscrapers Churches Designed by Women Eastern Orthodox Mosques Educational Future Hospitals Hotels Most expensive Residential Twin buildings Voluntarily demolished Wood Early skyscrapers Supertall Megatall Structures (of any type) By region Africa Europe former Soviet Union former Yugoslavia Asia West Asia The Americas South America By country Albania Algeria Australia Austria Bahrain Belgium Bulgaria Canada China Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Italy Japan Kosovo Luxembourg Myanmar Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Romania Saudi Arabia Serbia Slovakia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan United Kingdom United States Uzbekistan By other Commonwealth of Nations Lists 300 to 400 metres 400 to 500 metres Before the 20th century Bridges Chimneys Crosses Dams Ferris wheels Freestanding Lighthouses Statues Towers Twin structures Related topics Additionally guyed tower Air traffic obstacle All buildings and structures Antenna height considerations Architectural engineering Construction Early skyscrapers Height restriction laws Groundscraper Oil platform Partially guyed tower Tower block v t e Supertall skyscrapers (300 m/984 ft and taller) Completed North America 1 Manhattan West 3 World Trade Center 30 Hudson Yards 35 Hudson Yards 53W53 432 Park Avenue 875 North Michigan Avenue Aon Center Bank of America Plaza Bank of America Tower Chrysler Building Comcast Technology Center Empire State Building Franklin Center JPMorgan Chase Tower One57 One World Trade Center One Vanderbilt Salesforce Tower St. Regis Chicago The New York Times Building Trump International Hotel and Tower Two Prudential Plaza U.S. Bank Tower Wells Fargo Plaza Willis Tower Wilshire Grand Center World Trade Center (1973–2001) South America Gran Torre Santiago Asia China and Hong Kong Bank of China Tower Central Plaza The Center Chang Fu Jin Mao Tower Changsha IFS Tower T1 China Resources Headquarters China World Trade Center Tower III Chongqing IFS T1 Chongqing World Financial Center CITIC Plaza Dalian International Trade Center Diwang International Fortune Center East Pacific Center Eton Place Dalian Fortune Center Gate to the East Golden Eagle Tiandi Tower A Golden Eagle Tiandi Tower B Greenland Puli Center Guangzhou CTF Finance Centre Guangzhou International Finance Center Guiyang International Financial Center Tower 1 Hanking Center Hon Kwok City Center KK100 Leatop Plaza Logan Century Center 1 Longxi International Hotel Minsheng Bank Building Nanjing International Youth Cultural Centre Tower 1 Nina Tower Pearl River Tower Ping An Finance Centre The Pinnacle Shanghai Tower Shanghai World Financial Center Shimao International Plaza Shun Hing Square Spring City 66 Suning Plaza 1, Wuxi Suzhou IFS Tianjin CTF Finance Centre Tianjin World Financial Center Wanda Plaza Heartland 66 Office Tower Wenzhou World Trade Center Wuhan Center Wuxi IFS White Magnolia Plaza International Commerce Centre International Finance Centre Jiangxi Nanchang Greenland Central Plaza Jin Mao Tower Jin Wan Plaza 9 Wuxi Maoye City – Marriott Hotel Yantai Shimao No.1 The Harbour Zhongzhou Holdings Financial Center Zhuhai St. Regis Hotel & Office Tower Zhujiang New City Tower Zifeng Tower Middle East 23 Marina Abraj Al Bait Address Boulevard The Address Downtown Dubai ADNOC Headquarters Al Hamra Tower Almas Tower Arraya Tower Aspire Tower Burj Al Arab Burj Khalifa Cayan Tower Elite Residence Emirates Office Tower Etihad Towers Gevora Hotel HHHR Tower The Index Jumeirah Emirates Towers Hotel JW Marriott Marquis Dubai Kingdom Centre The Landmark Marina 101 The Marina Torch Ocean Heights Princess Tower Rose Tower World Trade Center Abu Dhabi 85 Sky Tower Abenobashi Terminal Building Skyscraper (Abeno Harukas) Baiyoke Tower II Grand Hyatt Manila Haeundae Doosan We've the Zenith Haeundae LCT The Sharp Keangnam Hanoi Landmark Tower ICONSIAM MahaNakhon Lotte World Tower Northeast Asia Trade Tower Parc1 Tower Petronas Towers Taipei 101 Telekom Tower Vincom Landmark 81 Europe City of Capitals Eurasia Federation Tower Lakhta Center Mercury City Tower Neva Towers 2 OKO Tower The Shard Australia Q1 Australia 108 Under construction North America 9 DeKalb Avenue 50 Hudson Yards 111 West 57th Street Central Park Tower The One The Spiral Asia China Baoneng Center Changsha A9 Financial District Chengdu Greenland Tower Chongqing Corporate Avenue 1 Dongguan International Trade Center 1 Evergrande Center Eye of Spring Trade Center Gemdale Gangxia Tower 1 Goldin Finance 117 Huaguoyuan Tower 1 Huaguoyuan Tower 2 Jinan Center Financial City Mandarin Oriental Chengdu Nanjing World Trade Center Tower 1 Nanning China Resources Tower Ningbo Center One Shenzhen Bay Phoenix Towers Runhua Global Center 1 Shandong IFC Shenglong Global Center Shimao Hunan Center Shum Yip Upperhills Tower 1 South Asian Gate Suning Plaza Tower 1, Zhenjiang Suzhou Zhongnan Center Tianjin Modern City Office Tower Wuhan Greenland Center Xiamen International Centre Yuexiu Fortune Center Tower 1 India Three Sixty West Japan Torch Tower Toranomon-Azabudai District Saudi Arabia Capital Market Authority Headquarters South Korea Busan Lotte Town Tower Hyundai Global Business Center UAE DAMAC Residenze Other Abu Dhabi Plaza The Exchange 106 Gate of Kuwait Gate of Taipei Iconic Tower Merdeka PNB 118 The Stratford Residences Europe One Tower Construction delayed or suspended 45 Broad Street Al Quds Endowment Tower Baoneng Shenyang Global Financial Center Barwa Tower Dalian Greenland Center Diamond Tower (Jeddah) Dubai Pearl Dubai Towers Doha Forum 66 Haikou Tower Jeddah Tower JW Marriott International Finance Centre Lamar Towers Marina 106 Millennium Tower Namaste Tower Nanjing Olympic Suning Tower Orchid Heights Palais Royale, Mumbai Pentominium Qatar National Bank Tower Ryugyong Hotel Signature Tower Jakarta Sino-Steel Tower Skycity Square Capital Tower Tameer Commercial Tower The Skyscraper Tianjin R&F Guangdong Tower Tour Financial Hub Center VietinBank Business Center Office Tower See also Proposed supertall skyscrapers List of architects of supertall buildings v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center (Shopping mall) Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Company town Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment Penthouse apartment Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multi-family residential Private community Public housing Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Science/education Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban open space parks Buildings Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Park Parking Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning Zoning