Figure sculpted from snow This article is about the sculptures made of snow. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). A classic three-ball snowman in Winona Lake, Indiana, USA A snowman is an anthropomorphic snow sculpture often built in regions with sufficient snowfall. In many places, typical snowmen consist of three large snowballs of different sizes with some additional accoutrements for facial and other features. Due to the sculptability of snow, there is also a wide variety of other styles. Common accessories include branches for arms and a rudimentary smiley face, with a carrot used for a nose. Clothing, such as a hat or scarf, may be included. The low cost and availability of materials mean snowmen are usually abandoned once completed. Contents 1 Construction 2 History 3 In popular culture 3.1 In media 3.2 Snowman-themed items 3.3 Giant snowmen and records 4 Variations 4.1 Japan 4.2 Unicode 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Construction[edit] Snow becomes most suitable for packing when it approaches its melting point and becomes moist and compact. Making a snowman of powdered snow is difficult since it will not stick to itself, and if the temperature of packing snow drops, it will form an unusable denser form of powdered snow called the crust. Thus, a good time to build a snowman may be the next warm afternoon directly following a snowfall with a sufficient amount of snow. Using more compact snow allows for the construction of a large snowball by simply rolling it until it grows to the desired size. If the snowball reaches the bottom of the grass it may pick up traces of grass, gravel, or dirt. In North America, snowmen are generally built with three spheres representing the head, torso, and lower body.[1] In the United Kingdom, two spheres are used, one sphere representing the body and one representing the head. The usual practice is to then decorate and optionally dress the snowman. Sticks can be used for arms, and a face is traditionally made with stones or coal for eyes and a carrot for a nose. Some like to dress their snowmen in clothing such as a scarf or hat, while others prefer not to risk leaving supplies outdoors where they could easily be stolen or become stuck under melting ice. There are variations to these standard forms; for instance, the popular song "Frosty the Snowman" describes a snowman being decorated with a corncob pipe, button nose, coal eyes and an old silk hat (usually depicted as a top hat). These other types range from snow columns to elaborate snow sculptures similar to ice sculptures. A "snow family" in Boise, Idaho with various accessories Snowman on a frozen lake in Finland A snowman in the United Kingdom Two small snowmen on a train station in Täby, Sweden Snowman with hat, scarf, and winter gloves in Germany Snowman in an apartment courtyard in Virginia, the United States at night One book describes classic snowman attachments as a black felt top hat, red scarf, coal eye pieces, carrot nose, and corn cob pipe.[2] History[edit] The earliest known photograph of a snowman, c.1853 Documentation of the first snowman is unclear. However, Bob Eckstein, author of The History of the Snowman, documented snowmen from medieval times by researching artistic depictions in European museums, art galleries, and libraries. The earliest documentation he found was a marginal illustration from a 1380 book of hours, found in the Koninklijke Bibliotheek in The Hague.[3] The earliest known photograph of a snowman was taken in 1853 by Welsh photographer Mary Dillwyn, the original of which is in the collections of the National Library of Wales. In popular culture[edit] This article appears to contain trivial, minor, or unrelated references to popular culture. Please reorganize this content to explain the subject's impact on popular culture, providing citations to reliable, secondary sources, rather than simply listing appearances. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2020) In media[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In this illustration from 1867, a snowman is surrounded by children. Snowmen are a popular theme for Christmas and winter decorations and also in children's media. A famous snowman character is Frosty, the titular snowman in the popular holiday song "Frosty the Snowman" (later adapted into film and television specials), who was magically brought to life by the old silk hat used on his head. In addition to numerous related music and other media for Frosty, snow-men also feature as: Bouli, a French animated series about a snowman's adventures in a magical place. Der Schneemann, a 1943 animated short film created in Germany. Doc McStuffins features a plush snowman named Chilly. Jack Frost, a 1996 horror movie in which a serial killer is transformed into a snowman. Jack Frost, a 1998 movie with Michael Keaton in which he wakes up as a snowman after a car accident. Oswald features a snowman named Johnny who runs an ice cream shop. The Snowman, British picture book (1978) by Raymond Briggs and animation (1982) directed by Dianne Jackson about a boy who builds a snowman that comes alive and takes him to the North Pole. Calvin and Hobbes, an American cartoon by Bill Watterson, contains many instances of Calvin building snowmen, many of which are deformed or otherwise abnormal, often used to poke fun at the art world. Hans Christian Andersen wrote a winter fairy story, The Snowman. Dennis Jürgensen's horror story "The Snowman", about a boy traumatized by being locked in a meat freezer. R. L. Stine's Goosebumps story titled "Beware, the Snowman" featured a monstrous snowman. The 2013 film Frozen features a living snowman named Olaf who longs to see summer. The film score includes a song about building a snowman, titled "Do You Want to Build a Snowman?".[4] Snowman-themed items[edit] Snowmen can also be a theme for toys, costumes, and decorations. They have been featured on New Year stamps, for example, in Russia and other post-Soviet states. One common time for snowman-themed decorations is during the winter holiday and Christmas season, where it is celebrated.[5] One craft book suggested a plan making a small snowman doll out of white glove, ribbon, and other craft supplies.[5] One book on snowmen, which included instructions on working with real snow, also mentions snowman-themed sweets and confections.[6] Some options for snowman-themed dessert items include ice cream, marshmallows, and macaroons.[6] Snowman-themed cookies Snowman-inspired bronze sculpture Person in snowman costume Snowman display statue A snowman in ushanka playing on a garmon, 2019 New Year stamp of Russia Giant snowmen and records[edit] Larger style of a snowman with a conical base. The angle of repose of a piled substance may be an aspect of snowman building at this size, depending on the properties of the snow and the method of construction. In 2015, a man from the U.S. State of Wisconsin was noted for making a large snowman 22 feet tall and with a base 12 feet wide.[7] The record for the world's largest snowman was set in 2008 in Bethel, Maine. The snow-woman stood 122 feet 1 inch (37.21 m) in height, and was named in honor of Olympia Snowe, a U.S. Senator representing the state of Maine.[8][9] The previous record was also a snowman built in Bethel, Maine, in February 1999. The snowman was named "Angus, King of the Mountain" in honor of the then-current governor of Maine, Angus King. It was 113 feet 7 inches (34.62 m) tall and weighed over 9,000,000 pounds (4,080,000 kg).[10] A large snowman known as "Snowzilla" has been built each winter in Anchorage, Alaska. In December 2016 the smallest snowman of sorts was created in a nano-fabrication facility at University of Western Ontario.[11] It consisted of three roughly 0.9 micron spheres of silica, platinum arms and nose, and a face made by an ion beam.[11] 122 feet 1 inch (37.21 m) tall "snowwoman" Variations[edit] In addition to snowmen, other things can be produced. Typical variations on the snowman concept involve producing other snow creatures or snow decorations. The Yuki Cone, named after the Japanese word for snow, involves building a small cone-shaped structure from snowballs, illuminated from the inside with a tea-light. The Yuki Cone Sometimes other raw material might be used to create objects that mimic the snowman concept. Snowrabbit Desert "snowmen" in Tohono Chul Park, Tucson, Arizona, made out of tumbleweeds Japan[edit] In Japanese, snowmen are called "Yukidaruma" (Japanese: 雪だるま). Possibly because the shape is related to a Daruma doll, they usually only have two sections instead of three.[12] There is also a longstanding tradition in Japan of creating snow rabbits, or "Yukiusagi" (Japanese: 雪うさぎ).[13] Japanese snowman ("Yukidaruma") with 2 parts and a bucket hat. Painting the Eyes on a Snow Rabbit by Isoda Koryūsai (circa 1780, Japan) depicts a rabbit snow sculpture. Unicode[edit] Sample Unicode HTML Description ☃ U+2603 &#9731; Snowman ⛄ U+26C4 &#9924; Snowman without snow ⛇ U+26C7 &#9927; Black snowman See also[edit] Snow sculpture Inuksuk References[edit] ^ "Snowmen: Slowly Melting Away Forever?". News Shopper. Retrieved 20 December 2017. ^ Armstrong, Nancy; McCauley, Adam (1 January 2002). Snowman in a Box: Everything You Need to Build Classic and Cool Snow Creations Just Add Snow Even Works in Sand!. Running Press Book Publishers. ISBN 9780762413522. ^ Eckstein, Bob (2 December 2008). "My Search for The First Snowman". The History of the Snowman. Open Salon. Retrieved 11 January 2010. ^ "Review: Do you want to build a snowman?". 13 February 2014. ^ a b Ross, Kathy (1 January 2002). The Best Christmas Crafts Ever!. Millbrook Press. ISBN 9780761316886. ^ a b Cole, Peter; Frankeny, Frankie; Jonath, Leslie (1 September 1999). Snowmen: Creatures, Crafts, and Other Winter Projects. Chronicle Books. ISBN 9780811825542. ^ "Wisconsin man builds giant Olaf snowman". 21 February 2015. ^ "Topping 122 Feet, Snowman in Maine Vies for World Record". Fox News (Associated Press). 1 March 2008. Retrieved 8 January 2016. ^ "Tallest snowman". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 8 January 2016. ^ "Angus, King of the Mountain — World's Largest Snowman". Sunday River On-Line. 19 February 1999. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. ^ a b "Researcher created the world's smallest snowman". 23 December 2016. ^ "Netsuke in the form of a boy rolling a yuki daruma, or snowman". collections.ashmolean.org. Retrieved 2021-02-15. ^ Hall, Stephanie (14 January 2018). "Yuki Usagi: The Japanese Snow Hare | Folklife Today". blogs.loc.gov. Retrieved 28 January 2019. Further reading[edit] Bob Eckstein, The History of the Snowman: From the Ice Age to the Flea Market (2007) Scottie Davis, Snow Day, A Photographic Journal of the Best Snowmen (2004) External links[edit] Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125