Snow Dragon Directed by Eugen Sokolovský Starring Petr Lněnička, Petra Tenorová Country of origin Czech Republic Original language Czech Production Running time 81 Minutes Production company Czech Television Release Original release 2013 (2013) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Warning: Page using Template:Infobox television with unknown parameter "editing". See Infobox instructions. (this message is shown only in preview). Warning: Page using Template:Infobox television with unknown parameter "gross". See Infobox instructions. (this message is shown only in preview). Snow Dragon (Czech: Sněžný drak) is a 2013 Czech television film directed by Eugen Sokolovský. It premiered on 25 December 2013.[1] It was viewed by 700,000 people.[2] It is a fantasy, action film.[3] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] The film tells story of Princess Laura and Prince Jan. It was prophesied that Jan will make Laura unhappy and Queen Vilma cast a curse upon him. Jan turns into a Snow dragon every night. Vilma then leaves Laura and her husband Valentin. When Laura grows up and has to choose her husband she meets Jan and they fall in love. King disagrees and wants to prevent it. They escape and princes finds out about the curse. They set of to remove it from him. It is revealed during the journey that Jan is coward and is unable to help Laura when she is in danger. It eventually leads to conflict between them and Laura returns home. She is set to marry evil Dacián but Jan finds courage to face him and Dacián turns into a black dragon. Jan fights him in is Snow dragon form and wins. The curse is removed and Jan marries Laura. Cast[edit] Petr Lněnička as Prince Jan Petra Tenorová as Princess Laura Martin Mysicka as Prince Dacián Saša Rašilov as King Valentin Jitka Cvancarová as Queen Vilma Arnost Goldflam as Hubert Reception[edit] The film has won an award at Zlín film festival for children.[3] References[edit] ^ "Na vánoční obrazovku míří "valtická" pohádka Sněžný drak". Deník.cz (in Czech). 19 December 2013. Retrieved 18 September 2017. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Nejúspěšnější pořady: Všechnopárty a Sněžný drak na ČT 1 - DigiZone.cz". DigiZone.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 18 September 2017. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ a b "PRVNÍ DOJMY: Na Boží hod zbyl Sněžný drak, pohádka po brněnsku". iDNES.cz. 25 December 2013. Retrieved 18 September 2017. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at IMDb Official website