The National Emblem of Socialist Republic of Vietnam is typical of socialist and communist heraldry. The colour red and the star are symbols of communism; grains are often used to represent agriculture, farmers, or the common people, the cogwheel or other industrial tools represent the industrial proletariat. Socialist heraldry, also called communist heraldry, consists of emblems in a style typically adopted by socialist states and filled with communist symbolism. Although commonly called coats of arms, most such devices are not actually coats of arms in the heraldic sense.[1] Many communist governments purposely diverged from the traditional forms of European heraldry in order to distance themselves from the monarchies that they usually replaced, with actual coats of arms being seen as symbols of the monarchs. The Soviet Union was the first state to use socialist heraldry, beginning at its creation in 1922. The style became more widespread after World War II, when many other communist states were established. Even a few non-socialist (or communist) states have adopted the style, for various reasons —usually because communists had helped them to gain independence or establish their republican governments. After the fall of the Soviet Union and the other communist states in Eastern Europe between 1989 and 1992, this style of heraldry was often abandoned for the old heraldic practices, with many (but not all) of the new governments reinstating the traditional heraldry that was previously cast aside. Contents 1 Origin and history 2 Characteristics 3 Present 4 Galleries 4.1 Current emblems 4.1.1 Marxist-Leninist states 4.1.2 Other Socialist states 4.1.3 Non-Marxist-Leninist states 4.2 Historical emblems 5 See also 6 References 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 Bibliography 8 External links Origin and history[edit] Soviet leaders sought to distinguish their insignia from the emblems used by the Russian Emperor and aristocracy. They replaced and omitted the traditional heraldic devices, substituting an emblem that did not conform to traditional European practices. The Soviet Union, created after the 1917 revolution, required insignia to represent itself in line with other sovereign states, such as emblems, flags and seals, but the Soviet leaders did not wish to continue the old heraldic practices which they saw as associated with the societal system the revolution sought to replace. In response to the needs and wishes, the national emblem adopted would lack the traditional heraldic elements of a shield, helm, crest and mantling, and instead be presented more plainly. This style was followed then by other socialist and communist states, which wished to also focus attention on the nation's workers and diverge from feudalism and all of its associations.[2] In some communist countries, the socialist heraldry was never adopted fully. The coat of arms of Poland was only changed slightly under the communist era, retaining the traditional heraldic form. In Hungary, the "Rákosi badge", an emblem in the form of socialist heraldry, was adopted following the Second World War, but after the 1956 uprising, a new emblem was created combining communist symbolism with a heraldic shield in the colours of the Hungarian flag. Czechoslovakia became a Communist country in 1948 but retained its original coat of arms until 1961, when they were replaced with a non-traditional shield depicting the heraldic Bohemian lion without a crown and with a red star above head. Some of the states of Yugoslavia also used heraldic shields coupled with socialist imagery in their emblems, as did two republics within the USSR: the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. Characteristics[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Socialist heraldry typically makes use of the following symbols: Hammer and sickle, representing respectively the workers and peasantry. More rarely, a hammer may be used on its own, to represent the working class(es) as a whole. The five-pointed Red star, representing the five fingers of the worker's hand and the five continents on the earth. Often displayed with a yellow border, or a yellow five-pointed star, often on a red background Wreaths of grain or other domesticated plants encircling the emblem, representing agriculture and plenty Interwoven ribbons in national and/or red colors, sometimes used for a motto Single or multiple gears, often crossed, representing industry The rising sun, representing revolution Earth Landscapes Books, representing the intelligentsia. Modern industrial accessories such as cogwheels and electricity pylons Emblems following socialist heraldry generally have a circular or oval shape. Present[edit] With the dissolution of the Eastern Bloc in Europe, most of these countries' socialist heraldry has been replaced with old pre-communist symbols or by wholly new coats of arms. Socialist heraldry is still seen in the emblems of several countries, such as the People's Republic of China. North Korea has a national emblem in pure socialist style, as do Vietnam and Laos. During the infancy years of the Russian Federation (the successor to the Soviet Union), the country used the modified version of the emblem of the RSFSR with the inscription was changed from RSFSR (РСФСР) to the Russian Federation (Российская Федерация/Rossiyskaya Federaciya) until the new coat of arms was adopted in 1993. The national emblem of Belarus was adopted in 1995 following a controversial referendum. It is reminiscent of that of the Byelorussian SSR and replaced the coat of arms of 1991-1995 which followed the traditional heraldic style. Tajikistan and Uzbekistan retained components of their respective republics for similar reasons. The national emblem of North Macedonia is reminiscent of that of the Socialist Republic of Macedonia (once a constituent socialist republic of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia). In Africa, the emblems of Angola and Mozambique, as well as Guinea-Bissau, use socialist heraldry. The Republic of Serbia used the coat of arms of the Socialist Republic of Serbia[3] until the recommended symbols by the National Assembly on August 17, 2004. The recommended usage was made Law on May 11, 2009 thus officially replacing the socialist heraldic Coat of arms.[4] The unrecognised state of Transnistria has a state emblem based on a Soviet-era design, despite not being a socialist state. Galleries[edit] Below are galleries of historical and current national emblems. The years given are for the emblems, not for the countries. This is not an exhaustive gallery, since they are here to illustrate the article, not to show every example. Only long-lasting emblems of independent countries are shown. They also exclude emblems which were a mix of traditional heraldry and socialist symbolism, like the present arms of São Tomé e Príncipe and of East Timor, the 1960-1990 Emblem of Czechoslovakia, or the 1974-2008 state seal of Burma, or traditional heraldic coats of arms of socialist countries, like those of Guyana and Cuba. Current emblems[edit] Marxist-Leninist states[edit] National Emblem of the People's Republic of China (1950–present) Emblem of Laos (1992–present) Emblem of Vietnam (1976–present), previously of North Vietnam (1955–1976) Other Socialist states[edit] Emblem of North Korea (1948–present) Non-Marxist-Leninist states[edit] Emblem of Angola (1990–present) National emblem of Belarus (1995–present) Emblem of Guinea-Bissau (1973–present) National emblem of North Macedonia (2009–present) Emblem of Mozambique (1982–present) Emblem of Nepal (2008–present) Emblem of Tajikistan (1993–present) Emblem of Uzbekistan (1992–present) Historical emblems[edit] Emblem of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (1978–1980) Emblem of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (1980–1987) Emblem of the Socialist People's Republic of Albania (1946–1991) Emblem of the People's Republic of Benin (1975–1990) Emblem of Burkina Faso (1984–1987) Emblem of the People's Republic of Bulgaria (1971–1990) Emblem of the Republic of Cape Verde (1975–1992) Emblem of the People's Republic of the Congo (1970–1992) Emblem of the Ethiopian Derg (1975–1987) Emblem of the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (1987–1991) Emblem of the German Democratic Republic (1950–1953) Emblem of the German Democratic Republic (1955–1990) Emblem of the Iraqi Republic (1959–1965)[5] Emblem of the Hungarian People's Republic (1949–1956) Emblem of the Hungarian People's Republic (1957–1989) and the Hungarian Republic (1989–1990) Emblem of Democratic Kampuchea (1975–1979) Emblem of the People's Republic of Kampuchea (1979–1989) Emblem of the Kirghiz SSR (1948–1991) and the Republic of Kyrgyzstan (1991–1994) Emblem of Laos (1975–1991) Emblem of the Republic of Macedonia (1991–2009) Emblem of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar (1975–1992) Emblem of the Mongolian People's Republic (1960–1992) Emblem of the Socialist Republic of Romania (1965–1989) Emblem of the Russian Federation (1992–1993) Emblem of the Ukrainian SSR (1949–1991) and the Republic of Ukraine (1991–1992)[6] Emblem of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (1963–1993) See also[edit] Heraldry portal Socialism portal Communism portal Hammer and sickle Red star Emblems of the Soviet Republics Emblem of East Germany Emblem of Laos Emblem of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (including emblems of the Yugoslav Socialist Republics) References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ von Volborth, Carl-Alexander (1981). Heraldry – Customs, Rules and Styles. Ware, Hertfordshire: Omega Books Ltd. p. 11. ISBN 0-907853-47-1. ^ von Volborth, Carl-Alexander (1972). Alverdens heraldik i farver (in Danish). Editor and translator from English to Danish: Sven Tito Achen. Copenhagen: Politikens Forlag. p. 158. ISBN 87 567 1685 0. ^ Law on the use of the coat of arms of the Socialist Republic of Serbia (Serbian: Zakon o upotrebi grba Socijalisticke Republike Srbije ("SG SRS", br. 6/1985.) ^ "Zakon o izgledu i upotrebi grba, zastave i himne Republike Srbije" [Law on the Appearance and Use of the Coat of arms, the Flag and the Anthem of the Republic of Serbia]. Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia – No. 36/2009 (in Serbian). Narodna skupština Republike Srbije – JP "Službeni glasnik" (published 2009-05-11). 2009-05-19. Archived from the original on 2009-08-02. Retrieved 2009-12-15. ^ P.J. Symes, "The First Banknotes of the Central Bank of Iraq" ^ Constituent republic of the Soviet Union, but was a separate member of the United Nations. Sources[edit] Slater, Stephen (2002). The complete book of Heraldry. London. Bibliography[edit] Arvidsson, Stefan (2017). Style and Mythology of Socialism: Socialist Idealism, 1871–1914. Routledge Gorman, John (1985). Images of Labour: Selected Memorabilia from the National Museum of Labour History. London: Scorpion Publications. Gorman, John (1986). Banner bright: An Illustrated History of Trade Union Banners. Buckhurst Hill, Essex: Scorpion Publications. External links[edit] Blog: Heart in a Heartless World v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Collective leadership Collectivization Commanding heights of the economy Cult of personality Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism One-party state Partiinost' People's democracy Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State Socialist Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Variants Castroism Dengism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path National Stalinism Titoism Xi Jinping Thought People Ernst Thälmann Joseph Stalin Gonchigiin Bumtsend José Díaz Palmiro Togliatti Ho Chi Minh Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Mao Zedong Josip Broz Tito Lazar Kaganovich Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Deng Xiaoping Che Guevara Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il-sung Nicolae Ceaușescu Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Fidel Castro Mathieu Kérékou Alfonso Cano Abimael Guzmán Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Communist rebellion in the Philippines Maoist insurgency in Turkey Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Argentina (Extraordinary Congress) Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes Mass killings Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Communism portal Socialism Portal v t e Socialism Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian (from below) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Left-wing market Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Participism Platformism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Third camp Authoritarian (from above) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche (originally) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism Tkachevism Trotskyism Neo-Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Trotskyism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anarchist economics Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism Impossibilism "The Internationale" Internationalism State-owned enterprise Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism Trade union Welfare state Concepts Adhocracy Anarchist economics Basic income Calculation in kind Commune Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th century Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th century Gracchus Babeuf Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th century Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Albert Laponneraye Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th century Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Louis Aragon Clement Attlee Henri Barbusse Zygmunt Bauman Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Hugo Chávez Noam Chomsky G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Bob Crow Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Chris Hedges Eric Hobsbawm Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Elfriede Jelinek Martin Luther King Jr. Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin Ken Livingstone György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela Mao Dun Vladimir Mayakovsky Maurice Merleau-Ponty China Miéville François Mitterrand Evo Morales Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Otto Neurath Paul Nizan Abdullah Öcalan Seán O'Casey George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Pier Paolo Pasolini Karl Polanyi Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Yanis Varoufakis H. G. Wells Cornel West Richard D. Wolff Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn Slavoj Žižek Organizations Communist International Fifth International Foro de São Paulo Fourth International International League of Peoples' Struggle International League of Religious Socialists International Marxist Tendency International Socialist Alternative International Union of Socialist Youth International Workingmen's Association Second International Socialist International World Federation of Democratic Youth World Socialist Movement See also Anarchism Criticism of socialism Communism Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialist calculation debate Politics portal Socialism portal