Erotic still photography or film that is less sexually explicit than hardcore pornography 1880s French postcard showing (presumed) intercourse without showing actual penetration. A still from an erotic art film showing a couple from the waist up, thus leaving ambiguous to what degree sexual activity is occurring, a typical framing technique for a softcore porn film, Circa 2010. Softcore pornography or softcore porn, is commercial still photography or film that has a pornographic or erotic component but is less sexually graphic and intrusive than hardcore pornography, defined by a lack of sexual penetration. Softcore pornography includes stripteases, lingerie modeling, simulated sex and emphasis on the sensual appreciation of the female or male form. It typically contains nude or semi-nude actors involved in love scenes and is intended to be sexually arousing and aesthetically beautiful. Contents 1 Components 2 Regulation and censorship 3 History 4 See also 5 References Components[edit] Softcore pornography may include sexual activity between two people or masturbation. It does not contain explicit depictions of sexual penetration, cunnilingus, fellatio, or ejaculation. Depictions of erections of the penis may not be allowed (see Mull of Kintyre Test), although attitudes towards this are ever-changing.[1] Commercial pornography can be differentiated from erotica, which has high-art aspirations.[2] Portions of images that are considered too explicit may be obscured in a variety of ways, such as the use of draped hair or clothing, carefully positioned hands or other body parts, carefully positioned foreground elements in the scene (often plants, pillows, furniture or drapery) and carefully chosen camera angles. Pornographic filmmakers sometimes make both hardcore and softcore versions of a film, with the softcore version using less explicit angles of sex scenes[3] or using the other techniques to "tone down" any objectionable feature. The softcore version may, for example, be edited for the in-house hotel pay-per-view market. Total nudity is commonplace in several magazines, as well as in photography[4] and on the internet. Regulation and censorship[edit] Softcore films are commonly less regulated and restricted than hardcore pornography, and cater to a different market. In most countries softcore films are eligible for movie ratings, usually on a restricted rating, though many such films are also released unrated. As with hardcore films, availability of softcore films varies depending on local laws. Also, the exhibition of such films may be restricted to those above a certain age, typically 18. At least one country, Germany, has different age limits for hardcore and softcore pornography, softcore material usually receiving a FSK-16 rating (no one under 16 allowed to buy) and hardcore material receiving a FSK-18 (no one under 18 allowed to buy). In some countries, broadcasting of softcore films is widespread on cable television networks,[5] with some such as Cinemax producing their own in-house softcore films and television series. In some countries, images of women's genitals are digitally manipulated so that they aren't too "detailed".[6] An Australian pornographic actress says that images of her own genitals sold to pornographic magazines in different countries are digitally manipulated to change the size and shape of the labia according to censorship standards in different countries.[7][8][9] History[edit] Originally, softcore pornography was presented mainly in the form of "men's magazines", when it was barely acceptable to show a glimpse of a woman's nipple in the 1950s. By the 1970s, in such mainstream magazines as Playboy, Penthouse and Hustler, no region of the body was considered off limits.[4] After the formation of the MPAA rating system in the United States and prior to the 1980s, numerous softcore films, with a wide range of production costs, were released to mainstream movie theatres, especially drive-ins.[citation needed] Some, such as Emmanuelle[10] and Alice in Wonderland,[11] received positive reviews from noted critics such as Roger Ebert. From the 2000s, relaxed standards for cable television has allowed for the production of a number of television series with sexually explicit or violent content to air that would have been restricted to the softcore movie market in the past.[citation needed] See also[edit] Erotica and pornography portal Ecchi Erotic photography Fan service Sexploitation film References[edit] ^ Dubberley, Emily (2005). Carly Milne (ed.). Naked Ambition: Women Who Are Changing Pornography. Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN 0-7867-1590-1. OCLC 62177941. ^ "Pornography". Encarta. Archived from the original on February 18, 2009. ^ Amis, Martin (March 17, 2001). "A rough trade". guardian.co.uk. Retrieved April 10, 2009. ^ a b "P20th Century Nudes in Art". The Art History Archive. Retrieved July 19, 2009. ^ Battista, Kathy (2011). "Cindy Hinant's make-up, glamour and TV show". Phaidon. Retrieved November 23, 2014. Similarly, Softcore are pornographic images obscured to the point of obliteration, give the appearance of grey monochromes. The sexually charged imagery only emerges in feint detail within intimate distance. ^ The Labiaplasty Fad? - Sex. Hungry Beast. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 15 April 2010. ^ KATY MARRINER. The Vagina Diaries - a study guide (PDF). Australian Teachers of Media magazine. ISBN 978-1-74295-374-8.[permanent dead link] ^ "Labiaplasty and Censorship - is there a link?". Mamamia. ^ "BLAME IT ON THE BRAZILIAN". BIRDEE. ^ Ebert, Roger (January 1, 1975). "Emmanuelle". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved March 18, 2008. ^ Ebert, Roger (November 24, 1976). "Alice in Wonderland". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved March 18, 2008. v t e Pornography Pornography Types Amateur Cartoon Hentai Tijuana bible Child Erotica Simulated Deepfake Feminist Hardcore Internet Mobile Phone Revenge Sexting Softcore Genres Alt Bisexual Bondage Casting couch Celebrity Sex tape Clothed female, naked male Clothed male, naked female Convent Ethnic Gang bang Gay Gonzo Incest Lesbian MILF Mormon Queer Rape Reality Tentacle Transgender Women's Related History Film actor Organizations Adult Film Association of America Critics Adult Film Association Fans of X-Rated Entertainment Free Speech Coalition X-Rated Critics Organization List of pornography companies List of pornographic film studios Opposition to pornography Movements Anti-pornography movement in the United Kingdom Anti-pornography movement in the United States Antipornography Civil Rights Ordinance Organizations Churchmen's Committee for Decent Publications Feminists Fighting Pornography Fight the New Drug The Marriage Vow No More Page 3 Stop Bild Sexism Stop Child Trafficking Now Stop Porn Culture Women Against Pornography Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media XXXchurch.com Overuse NoFap Content-control software Accountability software Parental controls Employee monitoring software Views Feminist Religious Sex-positive feminist Media Audio Film Parody Cartoon Magazines List Video games Eroge Newspaper features Page 3 Possible effects Addiction Internet sex addiction Pornography addiction Sex addiction Objectification of women / sexism STDs People Performers by decade British performers Gay male performers Pornographic actors who appeared in mainstream films Mainstream actors who have appeared in pornographic films Film directors Events Adultcon AVN Adult Entertainment Expo Barcelona International Erotic Film Festival Brussels International Festival of Eroticism Exotic Erotic Ball Exxxotica Expo HUMP Porn Sunday Miscellaneous Adult movie theater Blue Movie Golden Age Not safe for work Pornographication Pornotopia R18 certificate Rule 34 Sex shop Sexualization X rating See also Erotica Art Comics Film Literature Photography Sexual activity Ribaldry Right to sexuality Sex-positive movement Sexual repression Sexual revolution Category Erotica and pornography portal Human sexuality portal v t e Nudity Naturism Christian naturism Freikörperkultur Gay naturism Gymnosophy Naturist magazines Naturist resort Anarchist naturism Nude recreation Nude beach Nude swimming Streaking Naked yoga Public bathing Sauna Massage Naked party Nude wedding Nude beaches Clothing-optional events Depictions of nudity Nude (art) Body painting Naked News Nude modeling (art) Nudity in film Nude photography Nude photography (art) Glamour photography Nudity in American television Nudity in music videos Nudity in advertising Nude calendar Nudity and sexuality Intimate part Exhibitionism Voyeurism Anasyrma Candaulism Mooning Striptease Stripper feminist stripper Softcore pornography Erotic photography Sexual objectification Clothed female, naked male Clothed male, naked female Issues in social nudity Indecent exposure Obscenity Toplessness Topfreedom Wardrobe malfunction Nudity and protest Sex segregation Breastfeeding in public Dress code Clothing laws by country Modesty Nudity in religion Awrah Strip search Undress code Barefoot By location Africa Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Social nudity advocates Kurt Barthel Lee Baxandall Paul Bindrim Ilsley Boone Henry S. Huntington Heinrich Pudor Elton Raymond Shaw Richard Ungewitter See also History of nudity Timeline of social nudity Nudity in combat Nudity clause Imagery of nude celebrities Social nudity organizations