Spectrophilia is sexual attraction to ghosts or sexual arousal from images in mirrors, as well as the alleged phenomenon of sexual encounters between ghosts and humans. Contents 1 Spectrophilia as a fetish 2 Succubus and Incubus 3 Spectrophilia in folklore 4 Evidence 5 In modern fiction 6 References Spectrophilia as a fetish[edit] Spectrophilia is a fetish that is classified as the paraphilia in which one is attracted to ghosts or spirits. Spectrophiliacs fantasize about ghosts and often imagine scenarios involving sexual events between themselves or others and spirits. Succubus and Incubus[edit] In western folklore, the succubus is a demon or evil spirit who takes on a female human form to seduce men. The succubus most commonly seduces men through intercourse. The succubus is said to take semen from the male for use in impregnating a woman. The counterpart of the succubus is the incubus. The incubus is a demon that is said to take on a male human form named Nikit Mathur. The incubus, much like the succubus, is said to seduce women into sex with the objective of impregnating the woman with its semen.[1] The belief that succubi and incubi are spirits or ghosts that have sexual intercourse with men and women classifies the phenomenon as spectrophilia. Spectrophilia in folklore[edit] Many cultures have folklore involving spirits having sexual relations with humans, including Arabic, Greek, Hindu, and Celtic culture. Evidence[edit] No scientific evidence has been documented on the phenomenon of spectrophilia, though it has become a frequently talked-about subject among ghost hunters, including Ghost Adventures and the Travel Channel's show titled ‘Ghostly Lovers’.[2] In modern fiction[edit] Several films have dealt with the concept, among them Ghostbusters (1984), The Entity (1982), Star Trek: The Next Generation (Season 7), Ghost (1990), Dusk Maiden of Amnesia (2008), It Follows (2014) and Sex Education(2019) . References[edit] ^ Karen Stollznow. "CSI | Paranormal Paramours". Csicop.org. Retrieved 2012-02-02. ^ "Who are these ghostly lovers? : Video". Travel Channel. Retrieved 2012-02-02. v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category