Customary name given by spiritists to the set of books codified by Allan Kardec This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Spiritist Codification (or Spiritist Pentateuch) is the customary name given by spiritists to the set of books codified by Allan Kardec. The books are a compilation of questions made by Allan Kardec and answers allegedly dictated by Spirits, between the years 1857 and 1868. The series contains the fundamental details of the Spiritism movement. The collection of the first five books, written and published by French teacher, educator and Spiritism codificator Allan Kardec, are called "The Five Fundamental Works of Spiritism". These books contain several explanations of the Spiritism Doctrine, as well as religious teachings and essays on the spirit world, mediumship, miracles, paranormal and supernatural phenomena. Two other books were published to complement the teachings of Allan Kardec: Qu'est-Ce Le Spiritisme? ("What is Spiritism?") in 1859 and Oeuvres Posthumes ("Posthumous Works") in 1890. Contents 1 The Spirits' Book (Le Livre des Esprits) 2 The Mediums' Book (Le Livre des Médiums) 3 The Gospel According to Spiritism (L'Évangile Selon le Spiritisme) 4 Heaven and Hell (Le Ciel et L'Enfer) 5 The Genesis According to Spiritism (La Genèse) 6 See also 7 References The Spirits' Book (Le Livre des Esprits)[edit] Main article: The Spirits Book First published in 1857, this book explains the fundamentals of the Spiritist Doctrine concerning the nature of Spirits, their manifestations, and how they relate to men, moral laws, and the present and future life and destiny of humankind. The book is both an introduction to the other works and a summary of them, which, in their turn, can each be seen as an unfolding of one of the issues it covers. The Mediums' Book (Le Livre des Médiums)[edit] Main article: The Book on Mediums First published in 1861 with a subtitle of "Guide des Médiums et des Évocateurs", this book deals with the teachings of the Spirits on the various kinds of manifestations, the means of communication with the invisible world, the development of mediumship, the difficulties and embarrassments that one can face during Spiritist practice; The Gospel According to Spiritism (L'Évangile Selon le Spiritisme)[edit] Main article: The Gospel According to Spiritism First published in 1864, this book explains the moral teachings of Jesus, showing how they are in accordance to Spiritism and how they can be applied to the many aspects of life. Heaven and Hell (Le Ciel et L'Enfer)[edit] Main article: Heaven and Hell (Allan Kardec) First published in 1865, this book examines "La Justice Divine Selon le Spiritisme". It compares doctrines and explains the passage from the physical life to the life of the spirit, to a future penalty or reward, angels and devils and eternal damnation. Many examples are given of the condition of the soul before and after physical death. The Genesis According to Spiritism (La Genèse)[edit] Main article: The Genesis According to Spiritism First published in 1868 with the subtitle "Les Miracles et les Preditions Selon le Spiritisme", this book examines theories about Earth's emergence and evolution and scriptural texts on the matter. See also[edit] Allan Kardec Chico Xavier The book on mediums The Gospel According to Spiritism Heaven and Hell (Allan Kardec) The Genesis According to Spiritism References[edit]