Religious movement started in the 19th century by Allan Kardec This article is about Spiritism. For the similar movements prominent in most English-speaking countries, see Spiritualism. This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Allan Kardec, portrait from L'Illustration, 10 March 1869 Part of a series on Spiritualism Main articles Spirit Spiritualism Spiritualist beliefs Spiritism Practices Mediumship Faith healing Psychometry Automatic writing Related topics Afterlife Spirit world Spirit guide Shamanism Animism Psychic Clairvoyance Paranormal Occult Ouija Parapsychology  Philosophy portal ·  Religion portal v t e Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune telling Ghost hunting Indigo children Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychokinesis Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Reportedly haunted locations: India United Kingdom United States World Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific skepticism Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend Parapsychology Death and culture Parapsychology Scientific literacy v t e Spiritism is a religion, self-described as a spiritualistic philosophy, that started in the 19th century by the French educator Hippolyte Léon Denizard Rivail, who, under the pen name Allan Kardec, wrote books on "the nature, origin, and destiny of spirits, and their relation with the corporeal world".[1][2][3] Spiritists refer to Kardec as the codifier. Spiritist philosophy postulates that humans, along with all other living beings, are essentially immortal spirits that temporarily inhabit physical bodies for several necessary incarnations to attain moral and intellectual improvement. It also asserts that disembodied spirits, through passive or active mediumship, may have beneficent or malevolent influence on the physical world.[4] Spiritism is an evolution-affirming religion.[citation needed] The term first appeared in Kardec's book, The Spirits Book, which sought to distinguish Spiritism from spiritualism.[1] Spiritism is currently represented in 35 countries by the International Spiritist Council.[5] It has influenced a social movement of healing centers, charity institutions and hospitals involving millions of people in dozens of countries, with the greatest number of adherents in Brazil.[1] Spiritism is a major component of the syncretic Afro-Brazilian religion Umbanda and also very influential in Cao Đài, a Vietnamese religion started in 1926 by three spirit mediums who claimed to have received messages that identified Allan Kardec as a prophet of a new universal religion.[6] Contents 1 Origins 1.1 Swedenborg 1.2 Fox sisters 1.3 Talking boards 1.4 Franz Mesmer 2 Difference from spiritualism 3 Beliefs 3.1 Spiritist Codification 3.2 Fundamental principles 3.3 Basic tenets 3.4 Mediumship 4 Spiritist practice 4.1 Meetings 4.2 Organization 5 Geographic distribution 6 Criticisms 6.1 Before World War I 6.2 Interwar period 6.3 Post–World War II 7 Chico Xavier 8 In popular culture 8.1 Films 8.2 Soap operas 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Origins[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Spiritism is based on the five books of the Spiritist Codification written by French educator Hypolite Léon Denizard Rivail under the pseudonym Allan Kardec, in which he reported observations of phenomena at séances that he attributed to incorporeal intelligence (spirits). His work was later extended by writers such as Léon Denis, Gabriel Delanne, Arthur Conan Doyle, Ernesto Bozzano, Gustav Geley, Chico Xavier, Divaldo Pereira Franco, Emídio Brasileiro, Alexandr Aksakov, William Crookes, Oliver Lodge, Albert de Rochas, and Amalia Domingo Soler. Kardec's research was influenced by the Fox sisters and the use of talking boards.[citation needed] Interest in Mesmerism also contributed to early Spiritism.[citation needed] Swedenborg[edit] Main article: Emanuel Swedenborg Emanuel Swedenborg, 75, holding the manuscript of Apocalypsis Revelata (1766). Emanuel Swedenborg (January 29, 1688 – March 29, 1772) was a Lutheran Swedish scientist, philosopher, seer, and theologian. Swedenborg had a prolific career as an inventor and scientist. At 56, he claimed to have experienced visions of the spiritual world and talked with angels, devils, and spirits by visiting heaven and hell. He claimed he was directed by the Lord Jesus Christ to reveal the doctrines of his second coming. Swedenborg, however, warned against seeking contact with spirits. In his work Apocalypse Explained, #1182.4, he wrote, "Many persons believe that man can be taught by the Lord by means of spirits speaking with him. But those who believe this, and desire to do so, are not aware that it is associated with danger to their souls."[7] See also Heaven and Hell #249.[8] Nevertheless, Swedenborg is often cited by Spiritists as a major precursor for their beliefs.[citation needed] Fox sisters[edit] Main article: Fox sisters Fox sisters, left to right: Margaret, Kate, Leah Sisters Leah (1814–90), Margaretta (1836–93), and Catherine (1838–92) Fox played an important role in the development of Modern Spiritualism. The daughters of John and Margaret Fox, they were residents of Hydesville, New York. In 1848, the family began to hear unexplained rapping sounds.[citation needed] Kate and Maggie conducted channeling sessions in an attempt to contact the presumed spiritual entity creating the sounds, and claimed contact with the spirit of a peddler who was allegedly murdered and buried beneath the house. A skeleton later found in the basement seemed to confirm this. The Fox girls became instant celebrities. They demonstrated their communication with the spirit by using taps and knocks, automatic writing or psychography, and later even voice communication, as the spirit took control of one of the girls.[citation needed] Skeptics suspected this was deception and fraud, and sister Margaretta eventually confessed to using her toe-joints to produce the sound. Although she later recanted this confession, she and her sister Catherine were widely considered discredited, and died in poverty. Nonetheless, belief in the ability to communicate with the dead grew rapidly, becoming a religious movement called Spiritualism, which contributed significantly to Kardec's ideas.[citation needed] Talking boards[edit] Main article: Ouija See also: Table-turning After the news of the Fox sisters came to France, people became more interested in what was sometimes termed the "Spiritual Telegraph".[citation needed] Planchette, the precursor of the pencil-less Ouija boards, simplified the writing process which achieved widespread popularity in America and Europe.[9] Franz Mesmer[edit] Main article: Franz Mesmer Franz Anton Mesmer Franz Anton Mesmer (May 23, 1734 – March 5, 1815) discovered what he called magnétisme animal (animal magnetism),[citation needed] which became known as mesmerism. The evolution of Mesmer's ideas and practices led Scottish surgeon James Braid (1795–1860) to develop hypnotism in 1841.[citation needed] Spiritism incorporated various concepts from Mesmerism,[citation needed] among them faith healing and the energization of water to be used as a medicine.[citation needed] Difference from spiritualism[edit] Spiritism differs from Spiritualism primarily in that it believes in reincarnation. Spiritism was not accepted by UK and US Spiritualists of the day as they were undecided whether or not to agree with the Spiritist view on reincarnation.[10] In What Is Spiritism?, Kardec calls Spiritism a science dedicated to the relationship between incorporeal beings (spirits) and human beings.[citation needed] Thus, some Spiritists see themselves as not adhering to a religion, but to a philosophical doctrine with a scientific fulcrum and moral grounds.[citation needed] Another author in the Spiritualist movement, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle included a chapter[11] about Spiritism in his book History of Spiritualism, in which he states that Spiritism is Spiritualist, but not vice versa.[citation needed] Many Spiritualist works are widely accepted in Spiritism, particularly the works of 19th-century physicists William Crookes[12] and Oliver Lodge.[13] Beliefs[edit] Spiritist Codification[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Main article: Spiritist Codification The basic doctrine of Spiritism ("the Codification") is defined in five of Allan Kardec's books: The Spirits' Book—defines the guidelines of the doctrine, covering concepts such as God, Spirit, Universe, Man, Society, Culture, Morals and Religion; The Mediums' Book—makes claims about the mechanics of the spiritual world, such as the processes involved in channeling spirits and techniques to be developed by mediums; The Gospel According to Spiritism—comments on the Gospels, highlighting passages that Kardec believed represent the ethical fundamentals shared by all religious and philosophical systems; Heaven and Hell—purports to provide interviews with spirits of deceased people intending to establish a correlation between the lives they led and their conditions in the beyond; The Genesis According to Spiritism—attempts to reconcile religion and science, dealing with three major conflicts between the two: the origin of the universe (and of life, as a consequence) and the concepts of miracle and premonition. Kardec also wrote a brief introductory pamphlet (What Is Spiritism?) and was the most frequent contributor to the Spiritist Review. His essays and articles were posthumously collected into the Posthumous Works. Fundamental principles[edit] As defined in The Spirits' Book, the main principles of spiritism are: "God is the Supreme Intelligence-First Cause of all things."[14] "God is eternal, immutable, immaterial, unique, all powerful, sovereignly just and good."[15] "A spirit is not an abstract, undefined being, only to be conceived of by our thought; it is a real, circumscribed being, which, in certain cases, is appreciable by the senses of sight, hearing, and touch."[15] "All Spirits are destined to attain perfection by passing through the different degrees of the spirit-hierarchy. This amelioration is effected by incarnation, which is imposed on some of them as an expiation, and on others as a mission. Material life is a trial which they have to undergo many times until they have attained to absolute perfection"[16] "A spirit's successive corporeal existences are always progressive, and never retrograde; but the rapidity of our progress depends on the efforts we make to arrive at the perfection."[16] "The soul possessed its own individuality before its incarnation; it preserves that individuality after its separation from the body."[16] "On its re-entrance into the spirit world, the soul again finds there all those whom it has known upon the earth, and all its former existences eventually come back to its memory, with the remembrance of all the good and of all the evil which it has done in them."[16] "Spirits exert an incessant action upon the moral world, and even upon the physical world; they act both upon matter and upon thought, and constitute one of the powers of nature, the efficient cause of many classes of phenomena hitherto unexplained or misinterpreted."[16] "Spirits are incessantly in relation with men. The good spirits try to lead us into the right road, sustain us under the trials of life, and aid us to bear them with courage and resignation; the bad ones tempt us to evil: it is a pleasure for them to see us fall, and to make us like themselves."[17] "The moral teaching of the higher spirits may be summed up, like that of Christ, in the gospel maxim, 'Do unto others as you would that others should do unto you;' that is to say, do good to all, and wrong no one. This principle of action furnishes mankind with a rule of conduct of universal application, from the smallest matters to the greatest."[18] According to Kardec, the Spiritist moral principles are in agreement with those taught by Jesus.[19] Other individuals such as Francis of Assisi, Paul the Apostle, Buddha and Gandhi are also sometimes considered[clarification needed] by the Spiritists.[citation needed] Spiritist philosophical inquiry is concerned with the study of moral aspects in the context of an eternal life in spiritual evolution through reincarnation, a process believers hold as revealed by Spirits.[citation needed] Sympathetic research on Spiritism by scientists[weasel words] can be found in the works of Oliver Lodge, William Crookes, William Fletcher Barrett, Albert de Rochas, Emma Bragdon, Alexander Moreira-Almeida and others.[citation needed] Basic tenets[edit] The five chief points of the Spiritism are:[20][21] There is a God, defined as "The Supreme Intelligence and Primary Cause of everything"; There are Spirits, all of whom are created simple and ignorant, but owning the power to gradually perfect themselves; The natural method of this perfection process is reincarnation, through which the Spirit faces countless different situations, problems and obstacles, and needs to learn how to deal with them; As part of Nature, Spirits can naturally communicate with living people, as well as interfere in their lives; Many planets in the universe are inhabited. The central tenet of Spiritism is the belief in spiritual life. From this perspective, the spirit is eternal,[22][failed verification] and evolves through a series of incarnations in the material world.[23] Mediumship[edit] Main article: Mediumship Spiritists assert that communication between the spiritual world and the material world happens all the time, to varying degrees.[citation needed] They believe that some people barely sense what the spirits tell them in an entirely instinctive way, and are not aware about their influence. In contrast, they believe that mediums have these natural abilities highly developed, and are able to communicate with spirits and interact with them visually or audibly, or through writing (known by Kardecists as psychography or automatic writing).[24] Spiritist practice[edit] Main article: Spiritist practice Kardec's works do not establish any rituals or formal practices. Instead, the doctrine suggests that followers adhere to some principles common to all religions.[citation needed] Meetings[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The most important types of practices within Spiritism are:[citation needed] Regular meetings—with a regular schedule, usually on evenings, two or three times a week. They involve a short lecture followed by some interactive participation of the attendees. These meetings are open to anyone; Medium meetings—usually held after a regular meeting, only those deemed prepared or "in need" are expected to attend; Youth and children's meetings—once a week, usually on Saturday afternoons or Sunday mornings; the Spiritist equivalent to Protestant Christian Sunday schools; Healing; Lectures—longer, in-depth lectures to a broader audience on subjects thought to be "of general interest", sometimes at theatres or ballrooms, often given by guest speakers; Special meetings—séances held discretely, intended to conduct some worthy work; Spiritist week and book fairs. Organization[edit] Main article: Spiritist centre Spiritist associations have various degrees of formality, with some groups having local, regional, national or international scope.[citation needed] Local organizations are usually called Spiritist centres or Spiritist societies. Regional and national organizations are called federations[citation needed], such as the Federação Espírita Brasileira[25] and the Federación Espírita Española;[26] international organizations are called unions[citation needed], such as the Union Spirite Française et Francophone.[27] Spiritist centres (especially in Brazil) are often active book publishers and promoters of Esperanto.[citation needed][clarification needed] For many of its followers, the description of Spiritism is three-fold:[citation needed] science, for its studies on the mechanisms of mediumship; philosophy, for its theories on the origin, meaning and importance of life; and religion, for its guidance on Christian behavior which will bring spiritual and moral evolution to mankind. Spiritism is not considered a religion by some of its followers because it does not endorse formal adoration, require regular frequency or formal membership. However, the mainstream scientific community does not accept Spiritism as scientific, and its belief system fits within the definition of religion.[28] Geographic distribution[edit] Spiritism has adherents in many countries, including Canada, Britain, France, Germany, Jamaica, Japan, Portugal, Spain, United States, and particularly in Latin American countries such as Argentina, Uruguay, Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Brazil, which has the largest proportion and greatest number of followers, largely in the form of Umbanda.[29] The largest Spiritist group in Asia are the Vietnamese followers of Cao Đài or Caodaists, who formed a new religion building on the legacy of Allan Kardec in 1926 in Saigon and Tây Ninh in what was then French Indochina[30] In Brazil, the movement has become widely accepted, largely due to Chico Xavier's works.[31] There, the number of self-identified Spiritists accounts to 3.8 million, according to the 2010 national census,[31] although some elements of Spiritism are more broadly accepted and practiced in various ways by at least three times as many people across the country, when the estimates include syncretisms.[32] According to the Brazilian Spiritist Federation, around 30 million sympathizers (especially among catholics) attend to Spiritist study sessions and practices,[31] and other statistics[weasel words] suggest an adherence to Spiritist practices by 40 million people in Brazil.[33] In the Philippines, there is the Union Espiritista Cristiana de Filipinas, Incorporada (Union of Christian Spiritists in the Philippines, Inc.), which was founded at the turn of the 1900s and registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1905. The religious organization, which uses human mediums to communicate with spirits that have already attained purity or divinity for moral and spiritual guidance, has tens of thousands of members and worship centers in many parts of the country, mostly in Northern Luzon, Central Luzon and the National Capital Region. Its motto: "Towards God through wisdom and love." Its doctrine: "Without charity (good deed), there is no possible salvation." It uses the Holy Bible as the basis of its teachings, supplemented by messages from divine spirits. Criticisms[edit] Before World War I[edit] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2014) Since its early development, Spiritism has attracted criticism. Kardec's own introductory book on Spiritism, What is Spiritism?, published only two years after The Spirits' Book, includes a hypothetical discussion between him and three idealized critics, "The Critic", "The Skeptic", and "The Priest", summing up much of the criticism Spiritism has received. The broad areas of criticism relate to charlatanism, pseudoscience, heresy, witchcraft, and Satanism. Until his death, Kardec continued to address these issues in various books and in his periodical, the Revue Spirite. Later, a new source of criticism came from Occultist movements such as the Theosophical Society, a competing new religion,[citation needed] which saw the Spiritist explanations as too simple or even naïve.[34] Interwar period[edit] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2014) During the interwar period a new form of criticism of Spiritism developed. René Guénon's influential book The Spiritist Fallacy criticized both the more general concepts of Spiritualism, which he considered to be a superficial mix of moralism and spiritual materialism, as well as Spiritism's specific contributions, such as its belief in what he saw as a post-Cartesian, modernist concept of reincarnation distinct from and opposed to its two western predecessors, metempsychosis and transmigration.[35] Post–World War II[edit] The Catechism of the Catholic Church (paragraph 2117) states that "Spiritism often implies divination or magical practices; the Church for her part warns the faithful against it".[36] In Brazil, Catholic priests Carlos Kloppenburg and Óscar González-Quevedo, among others, have written extensively against Spiritism from both a doctrinal and parapsychological perspective. Quevedo, in particular, has sought to show that Spiritism's claims of being a science are invalid. In addition to writing books on the subject,[37] he has also hosted television programs debunking supposed paranormal phenomena, most recently in a series that ran in 2000 on Globo's news program, Fantástico.[38] Brazilian Spiritist, Hernani Guimarães Andrade, has in turn written rebuttals to these criticisms.[37] Scientific skeptics also frequently target Spiritism in books, media appearances, and online forums, identifying it as a pseudoscience. Chico Xavier[edit] Main article: Chico Xavier Monument to Chico Xavier in Chico Xavier Square, Pedro Leopoldo City. Chico Xavier (April 2, 1910 – June 30, 2002) was a popular Spiritist medium and philanthropist in Brazil's Spiritist movement who wrote more than 490 books and over 10,000 letters to family members of deceased people, ostensibly using psychography. His books sold millions of copies, all of which had their proceeds donated to charity. They purportedly included poetry, novels, and even scientific treatises, some of which are considered by Brazilian Spiritist followers to be fundamental for the comprehension of the practical and theoretical aspects of Allan Kardec's doctrine. One of his most famous books, The Astral City, details one experience after dying. The book became a movie in 2010 available in multiple languages in addition to over 15 other movies. In popular culture[edit] The following works contain concepts related to Spiritist beliefs: Films[edit] Chico Xavier, Brazilian film, casting Nelson Xavier and Ângelo Antônio. A box office success in Brazil, it follows the story of Brazilian medium Chico Xavier. Nosso lar, (literally "Our Home", but distributed under the title Astral City: A Spiritual Journey internationally) is a 2010 Brazilian film directed by Wagner de Assis, based on the novel of the same name by Chico Xavier about spiritual life after death.[39] Kardec, a 2019 Brazilian biographical drama film that follows the story of Allan Kardec, from his days as an educator to his contribution to the spiritist codification.[40] Soap operas[edit] In Brazil, a number of soap operas have plots incorporating Spiritism. "A Viagem" (The Journey), produced in 1976/77 by Tupi TV, involving mediumship, death, obsession, reincarnation, etc. It was remade by Globo TV in 1994.[citation needed] "Alma Gêmea" (Soulmate), produced in 2005/06 by Rede Globo, tells of a woman who dies and is reborn to find her soulmate again.[citation needed] "O Profeta" (The Prophet), produced in 1977/78 by Tupi TV and remade by Globo TV (2006/07), included spiritism as one of the philosophies trying to explain the main character's gifts, including being able to predict the future.[citation needed] "Duas Caras" (Two-Face), aired by Rede Globo in 2007/8, includes a character named Ezekiel, who is a born-again Christian challenged by manifestations of his mediumship. "Escrito nas Estrelas" (Written in the Stars), ongoing as of July 2010, includes various Spiritist themes including reincarnation, spirit evolution, and mediumship.[citation needed] "Além do Tempo" (Beyond Time), ongoing as of October 2015, also includes many Spiritist themes, including a second phase in which the characters reincarnate, in order to show the ongoing fights between them, and also that in future incarnations, their social class changes, being that low class characters come back as rich people and vice versa. See also[edit] References[edit] ^ a b c Moreira-Almeida, Alexander (2008). ^ “Paralisia do sono" Revisado. ^ Allan Kardec and the development of a research program in psychic experiences. Proceedings of the Parapsychological Association & Society for Psychical Research Convention. Winchester, UK. ^ Lucchetti G, Daher JC Jr, Iandoli D Jr, Gonçalves JP, Lucchetti AL. Historical and cultural aspects of the pineal gland: comparison between the theories provided by Spiritism in the 1940s and the current scientific evidence. Archived 2014-04-09 at the Wayback Machine. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2013;34(8):745-55. Indexed on PubMed. ^ International Spiritist Council, Members website. ^ Hoskins, Janet Alison 2015. The Divine Eye and the Diaspora: Vietnamese Syncretism Becomes Transpacific Caodaism. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. p. 15, 36, 45, 51,63. ISBN 978-0-8248-5140-8. ^ "Apocalypse Explained #1182 (Tansley (1952)) - New Christian Bible Study". ^ "Heaven and Hell #249 (Dole (2000)) - New Christian Bible Study". ^ Sargent, Epes, Planchette or, The Despair of Science, Roberts Brothers, Boston, 1869 ^ Arthur Conan Doyle. (1926). The History of Spiritualism. New York: G.H. Doran, Co ^ Arthur Conan Doyle. (1926). The History of Spiritualism. New York: G.H. Doran, Co ^ William Crookes. (1874). Researches on the Phenomena of Spiritualism. Burns, London ^ Oliver Lodge. (1930). The Reality of a Spiritual World. E. Benn ^ Allan Kardec: The Spirits' Book, page 63. ^ a b Allan Kardec: The Spirits' Book, page 32. ^ a b c d e Allan Kardec: The Spirits' Book, page 33. ^ Allan Kardec: The Spirits' Book, page 33, 34. ^ Allan Kardec: The Spirits' Book, page 35. ^ Kardec, Allan, The Gospel Explained by the Spiritist Doctrine ISBN 0-9649907-6-8 ^ A. T. Schofield. (2003) Modern Spiritism: Its Science and Religion. Kessinger Publishing ^ Lewis Spence. (2003). Encyclopedia of Occultism & Parapsychology. Kessinger Publishing ^ "New Page 1". www.explorespiritism.com. Retrieved 2018-03-31. ^ "Reincarnation According to Spiritism". www.explorespiritism.com. Retrieved 2018-03-31. ^ (See The Book of Mediums by Allan Kardec Chapters X to XIII) ^ FEB TI. "Federação Espírita Brasileira / FEB - Conteúdo espírita em artigos, notícias, estudo, pesquisa, especialmente para você". febnet.org.br. ^ "Federación Espírita Española - Espiritismo". espiritismo.cc. ^ "Orange". orange.fr. ^ Jonathan Smith. (2009). Pseudoscience and Extraordinary Claims of the Paranormal: A Critical Thinker's Toolkit. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-1405181228 ^ David Hess. Spirits and Scientists: Ideology, Spiritism, and Brazilian Culture, Pennsylvania State Univ Press, 1991 ^ Hoskins, Janet Alison 2015. The Divine Eye and the Diaspora: Vietnamese Syncretism Becomes Transpacific Caodaism. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. p. 4, 239. ISBN 978-0-8248-5140-8 ^ a b c Engler, Steven; Isaia, Artur Cesar (2016-10-07). "Kardecism". In Schmidt, Bettina; Engler, Steven (eds.). Handbook of Contemporary Religions in Brazil. BRILL. ISBN 978-90-04-32213-4. ^ Yearbook of International Religious Demography 2018. BRILL. 2018-07-19. ISBN 978-90-04-37263-4. ^ Kardec's Spiritism: Home for Healing and Spiritual Evolution - Emma Bragdon, PhD ^ Blavatsky, H. P. (1875-02-16). "Letter to Prof. Hiram Corson". Some Unpublished Letters of H. P. Blavatsky. Theosophical University Press Online Edition. Retrieved 2008-06-23. In my eyes, Allan Kardec and Flammarion, Andrew Jackson Davis and Judge Edmonds, are but schoolboys just trying to spell their A B C and sorely blundering sometimes. ^ Guénon, René (2004-06-25) [1923]. The Spiritist Fallacy. Collected Works of René Guénon. trans. Alvin Moore, Jr. and Rama P. Coomaraswamy. Hillsdale, NY: Sophia Perennis Books. ISBN 978-0-900588-71-6. ^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church". Holy See. Retrieved 2015-02-02. ^ a b Machado, Dr. Fátima Regina. "Parapsicologia no Brasil: Entre a cruz e a mesa branca" (in Portuguese). Ceticismo Aberto. Retrieved 2008-06-23. ^ Guerrero, Cesar (2000-01-17). "Quevedo, o Mr. M de batina". IstoÉ Gente (in Portuguese). Editora Três. Retrieved 2008-06-23. ^ "Astral City: A Spiritual Journey". IMDB. ^ "Crítica: Filme sobre Allan Kardec atrai apenas os iniciados no espiritismo". Folha de S.Paulo (in Portuguese). 2019-05-16. Retrieved 2019-07-26. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. For a list of writings by Allan Kardec see his biographic article. API at Curlie U.S. Spiritist Council British Union of Spiritist Societies v t e Spiritualism and spiritism History and beliefs Apport Automatic writing Cross-Correspondences Ectoplasm Faith healing Materialization Mediumship Séance Spirit guides Spiritual healing Spirit obsession Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Table-turning Theism Spiritualists Derek Acorah Rosemary Altea Dan Aykroyd Charles Bailey Bangs Sisters Ada Besinnet Stephen E. Braude William Breeze Rosemary Brown Sylvia Browne Eva Carrière Doris Collins Florence Cook Mina Crandon William Crookes Geraldine Cummins Pearl Curran Frank Decker Arthur Conan Doyle Helen Duncan Eddy Brothers Harry Edwards John Edward William Eglinton Colin Evans Fox sisters Leslie Flint Arthur Ford Colin Fry Eileen Garrett Kathleen Goligher Rita Goold Jan Guzyk Robert Hare Alec Harris Gordon Higginson Richard Hodgson Daniel Dunglas Home Elizabeth Hope William Hope Swami Laura Horos Cecil Husk James H. Hyslop Allan Kardec Franek Kluski Gladys Osborne Leonard Oliver Lodge Heinrich Melzer Carmine Mirabelli Francis Ward Monck William Usborne Moore Lorin Morgan-Richards William Stainton Moses Einer Nielsen Eusapia Palladino Leonora Piper Ethel Post-Parrish James Van Praagh Bert Reese Estelle Roberts Jane Roberts William Roy Rudi Schneider Maria Silbert Henry Slade Doris Stokes Emanuel Swedenborg Rosina Thompson Stanisława Tomczyk Ena Twigg George Valiantine Jack Webber Etta Wriedt Chico Xavier Organizations List of Spiritualist organizations Spiritualist churches Spiritist centres London Spiritualist Alliance National Spiritualist Association of Churches Spiritualists' National Union Spiritualist Association of Great Britain Spiritual church movement Arthur Findlay College International Spiritualist Federation Skeptics David Abbott John Henry Anderson George Miller Beard Ruth Brandon Lionel Branson Derren Brown William Carpenter Milbourne Christopher Edward Clodd Edmund Smith Conklin Millais Culpin Stuart Cumberland Eric Dingwall Joseph Dunninger Henry Evans Chris French Martin Gardner G. Stanley Hall Trevor H. Hall William A. Hammond C. E. M. Hansel Carlos María de Heredia Carl Hertz Terence Hines Harry Houdini Joseph Jastrow Stanley LeFevre Krebs Rose Mackenberg David Marks John Nevil Maskelyne Henry Maudsley Joseph McCabe Henry C. McComas Georgess McHargue Charles Arthur Mercier Albert Moll John Mulholland Fulton Oursler Joe Nickell E. Clephan Palmer Ronald Pearsall Frank Podmore Massimo Polidoro Harry Price Julien Proskauer James Randi Donovan Rawcliffe Joseph Rinn C. E. Bechhofer Roberts Chung Ling Soo Gordon Stein Amy Tanner Ivor Lloyd Tuckett Lyttelton Winslow Richard Wiseman v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Phantom vehicle Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African South Africa Asian Burmese Chinese locations Ghost Festival Tibetan Filipino locations Indian locations Bengali Japanese Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe France Slavic religion Romania United Kingdom Scotland North America Canada Caribbean Navajo Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States District of Columbia South America Colombia Oceania Maori Polynesian History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical Antiquity Ghosts in English-speaking cultures Ghosts in Spanish-speaking cultures Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon kaidan Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Stories about ghosts Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Spiritism The Ghost Club Category