One of the seven Pleiades sisters from Greek mythology For other uses, see Sterope. The Pleiades In Greek mythology, Sterope (/ˈstɛrəpiː/; Ancient Greek: Στερόπη, [sterópɛː], from στεροπή, steropē, lightning),[1] also called Asterope (Ἀστερόπη), was one of the seven Pleiades,[2] the daughters of Atlas and Pleione, born to them at Mount Cyllene in Arcadia. She was the wife of King Oenomaus of Pisa, or according to some accounts, his mother by Ares.[3] Sterope was also credited to be the mother of Evenus (father of Marpessa) by the said Olympian god.[4] Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Aquatic deities Chthonic deities Mycenaean deities Personified concepts Other deities Nymphs Alseid Auloniad Aurai Crinaeae Dryads Eleionomae Hamadryads Hesperides Hyades Lampads Leuce Limnades Meliae Melinoë Minthe Naiads Napaeae Nephele Nereids Oceanids Oreads Pegaeae Pegasides Pleiades Potamides Semystra Thriae v t e Contents 1 Legacy 2 Notes 3 External links 4 References Legacy[edit] USS Sterope (AK-96) was a United States Navy Crater class cargo ship named after the star. Asterope was a name of 21 Tauri and 22 Tauri in the Pleiades cluster of stars 233 Asterope is a T-type main belt asteroid Notes[edit] Ancient Greece portal Myths portal ^ Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert. "sterope". A Greek-English Lexicon. Perseus Project, Tufts University. Retrieved December 13, 2012. ^ Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio 5.10.5 ^ Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca 3.10.1 ^ Plutarch, Parallela minora 40 External links[edit] Theoi Project - Sterope References[edit] Lucius Mestrius Plutarchus, Moralia with an English Translation by Frank Cole Babbitt. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. London. William Heinemann Ltd. 1936. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website. Pausanias, Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio. 3 vols. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library. Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca. English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd) This article relating to a Greek deity is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e