Steven E. Schend Born 1967 (age 53–54) Madison, Wisconsin, United States Occupation Writer, game designer Nationality United States Genre Role-playing games, fantasy Steven E. Schend is a game designer and editor who has worked on a number of products for the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game from TSR throughout the 1990s. Contents 1 Biography 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Biography[edit] Steven Schend was born in Madison, Wisconsin in 1967.[1] Schend developed an interest in the worlds of L. Frank Baum's Oz and Edgar Rice Burroughs's Barsoom.[2] Schend grew up in Kenosha, Wisconsin, and started gaming in high school; he attended college in Madison, and graduated with a degree in English in 1989.[1] He previously worked as a teacher, a street sweeper, a concrete curb builder and a landscaper before gaining employment in fantasy.[2] TSR hired Schend as a Games Department editor in early 1990, and he also managed the original Marvel Super Heroes RPG line: "I started working on Marvel pretty much the day I walked in the door".[1] At TSR, Schend also worked on the Forgotten Realms setting. "Most of all, I'm proud of my body of work within the Realms. So much of it ties together that it's hard to pick favorites. If I had to, I'd choose the... Sea of Fallen Stars accessory as the most original world-building I've ever done."[1] Schend and Julia Martin served as the continuity monitors for the Realms, and Schend also served as the assistant manager to the Realms product group for three years before returning to full-time design work in 1998.[1] Schend then began working on the Alternity game line and the Star*Drive setting.[1] Schend worked for over fifteen years with TSR, Inc., Wizards of the Coast, and other game companies as an editor, a designer, an assistant manager, and world builder.[2] As a game designer and editor he has worked for TSR, Inc., Wizards of the Coast, Bastion Press, Green Ronin, and Goodman Games. He later worked as an adult instructor of World Building for Writers and Game & Adventure Design workshops/seminars; also teaching college classes at various venues, including Kendall College of Art & Design. He claims his favorite role is as spokesperson for the denizens of the Forgotten Realms. Schend has taught writing at a local college in Grand Rapids, Michigan.[3] Schend works as a bookseller, and also writes novels, novellas, and short stories from the Forgotten Realms to his own contemporary fantasies.[4] He has also worked on a novel in his "Vanguard" universe and a non-fiction World-Building book for writers. Works[edit] Steven Schend worked on several Dungeons & Dragons game products from 1990-2001. His design work includes several products for the Forgotten Realms line, such as City of Splendors (1994), Undermountain: Maddgoth's Castle (1996), Undermountain: The Lost Level (1996), Lands of Intrigue (1997), Hellgate Keep (1998), Cormanthyr: Empire of the Elves (1998), Wyrmskull Throne (1999), Skullport (1999), Sea of Fallen Stars (1999), and Drizzt Do'Urden's Guide to the Underdark, (1999). Schend also did some work for Bastion Press and Green Ronin Publishing. His Forgotten Realms novels include Blackstaff (2006) and Blackstaff Tower (2008). References[edit] ^ a b c d e f Kenson, Stephen (August 1999). "Profiles: Steven Schend". Dragon. Renton, Washington: Wizards of the Coast (#262): 112. ^ a b c "Steven E. Schend". Archived from the original on February 24, 2009. ^ Greenberg, Martin H.; Hughes, Kerrie, eds. (2009). Gamer Fantastic. NY, NY: Daw Books. p. 236. Retrieved August 4, 2014. ^ Schend, Steven E. (2007). "Carcassonne". In Lowder, James (ed.). Hobby Games: The 100 Best. Green Ronin Publishing. pp. 46–48. ISBN 978-1-932442-96-0. External links[edit] "Steven E. Schend's Blog". Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Official website "Steven E. Schend's Livejournal". Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. "Steven Schend at Pen & Paper". Archived from the original on June 30, 2009. v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125