Monster from Greek mythology, eldest of the Gorgons Stheno (Gorgon) Personal information Parents Phorcys and Ceto or Typhon and Echidna Siblings The Hesperides, Euryale, Medusa, Graeae, Thoosa, Scylla, and Ladon or Cerberus, Hydra, Chimera, and many more monsters In Greek mythology, Stheno (/ˈsθiːnoʊ/ or /ˈsθɛnoʊ/; Greek: Σθενώ, 'forceful') was the eldest of the Gorgons, vicious female monsters with brass hands, sharp fangs and "hair" made of living venomous snakes. Mythology[edit] The daughter of Phorcys and Ceto, Stheno was born in the caverns beneath Mount Olympus. She and her sister Euryale were both immortal, and the third sister, Medusa, was mortal.[1] Of the three Gorgons, she was known to be the most independent and ferocious, having killed more men than both of her sisters combined. In Greek mythology, she was transformed into a Gorgon because of standing with her sister Medusa, who was raped by the sea god Poseidon in the Temple of Athena. Athena, bearing no emotion and finding no fault in Poseidon, was furious with Medusa. As a punishment, Medusa was changed into a terrible monster, along with her sisters Stheno and Euryale. Stheno tends to be depicted as a thin gorgon monster with red snakes curling around her head instead of hair. Earlier accounts, however, describe her as having a scaly head, a boar's tusks, bronzed hands, a protruding tongue, glaring eyes and a snake around the waist as a belt.[2] When the Gorgon Medusa was beheaded by Perseus, Stheno and Euryale tried to kill him, but failed due to his use of Hades' cap, which made him invisible.[2] See also[edit] Cultural depictions of Medusa and Gorgons References[edit] ^ Wilk, Stephen R. "Mythological Evidence for Ancient Observations of Variable Stars." Journal of the American Association of Variable Star Observers 24 (1996): 129-133. ^ a b Wilk, Stephen R. Medusa: Solving the mystery of the Gorgon. Oxford University Press, 2000. Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This article relating to Greek mythology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e