The Sts'ailes (also known as Chehalis) are an indigenous people from the Lower Mainland region of British Columbia, Canada. Their band government is the Chehalis First Nation, formerly known as the Chehalis Indian Band.[1] The band's name community is located on Indian Reserve lands at Chehalis, which is on the lower Harrison River between the towns of Mission and Agassiz. Their band's mailing address is in nearby Agassiz.[2] Contents 1 Name 2 Heritage 3 Language 4 Negotiations with British Columbia 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Name[edit] The name Sts'ailes means "beating heart", which became the name of their village, located on the west side of the Harrison River.[3] Their usual English name, Chehalis, is identical to that of the much more numerous Chehalis people of southern Puget Sound in Washington.[citation needed] By Sts'ailes tradition, the southern Chehalis were separated from their homeland as a consequence of the Great Flood.[citation needed] Heritage[edit] In Sts'ailes tradition, Xals, the Transformer, defeated a powerful shaman known as "the Doctor". Xals turned the shaman to stone, and broke the stone to pieces, spreading the fragments to prevent his return. The heart of the shaman fell on the shores of the home lake (Harrison Lake), and became the place where the Sts'ailes originated.[4] There is evidence of this culture in the form of lithic (stone working) and mortuarial practices going back at least 1500 years.[5] There is evidence that the Sts'ailes people relied primarily on the salmon from the Fraser-Harrison watershed as their most important food source. Many of their religious ceremonies are derived from significant periods of the year important to the fishery.[4] While there is no modern link between the people (often referred to as Chehalis) and the Chehalis tribe of Eastern Washington, Sts'ailes heritage does speak of a flood that separated a southern portion of its people many years before. The Sts'ailes have a rich and unique culture around visual arts and music. Language[edit] Sts'ailes people traditionally speak Halqemeylem, the Upriver dialect of Halkomelem. Negotiations with British Columbia[edit] The Sts'ailes do not participate in the 1999 framework Treaty process with British Columbia, citing the need to establish cultural identity and to be stewards of their ancestral homeland.[6] Because of this, there is no process to settle any aboriginal rights issues, which the nation regards as unnecessary. The governing tribal council also points to an increasingly self-reliant community with jobs and services. Salmon fishing rights have been a point of controversy, which reached a climax in 2012 when the provincial government sued the Sts'ailes council for operating an illegal fishery.[7] In the suit, then-chief Willie Charlie and fisheries manager Kim Charlie allegedly conspired to illegally fish for salmon in the Harrison River and Harrison Lake. Chief Harvey Paul argued that the salmon stock had been faithfully managed by the Sts'ailes for millennia, and that the illegal fishery was both hearsay, and the result of provincial mismanagement. The case was dropped in 2016, although a counter-suit by the nation is still pending. See also[edit] Sto:lo Coast Salish peoples References[edit] ^ "Welcome." Sts'ailes. Retrieved 13 Aug 2013. ^ "Sts'ailes Band." British Columbia Assembly of First Nations. Retrieved 13 Aug 2013. ^ "Sts'ailes." SFU Stepping Stones. Retrieved 13 Aug 2013. ^ a b [1][dead link] ^ [2][dead link] ^ [3][dead link] ^ Chilliwack court dismisses fisheries charge against former Sts'ailes chief, Paul J. Henderson, Chilliwack Times, August 29, 2016 Chilliwack court dismisses fisheries charge against former Sts'ailes chief External links[edit] Sts'ailes official website v t e Coast Salish Peoples Chawathil Cheam Chehalis (WA) Chemainus Clemclemaluts Comiaken Copalis Cowlitz Duwamish Esquimalt Halalt Hoh Homalco Humptulips Katzie Khenipsen Kilpahlas Klahoose Klallam Koksilah Kwa-kwa-a-pilt Kwantlen Kway-quit-lam Nuxalk Sliammon Nanoose Malahat Snuneymuxw Tsawwassen Tsleil-Waututh Shishalh Squamish Musqueam Semiahmoo Matsqui Sumas Scowlitz Sts'Ailes Leq' a: mel Popkum Seabird Island Skwah Skway Shxw'ow'hamel Skawahlook Skowkale Soowahlie Squiala Tzeachten Yakweakwioose T'souk-e Tsartlip Somena Quamichan Penelakut Lamalcha Saanich Lummi Nooksack Lower Skagit Upper Skagit Skokomish (Twana) Muckleshoot Sammamish Samish Sauk-Suiattle Snohomish Snoqualmie Nisqually Puyallup Stillaquamish Suquamish Swinomish Tulalip Quinault Sahewamish Wynoochee Satsop Nehalem (Tillamook) Siletz Quamichan Somena Governments Aitchelitz Band Chawathil First Nation Cheam Indian Band Kwantlen First Nation Katzie First Nation Kwaw-kwaw-a-pilt First Nation Leq' a: mel First Nation Matsqui First Nation Popkum Band Scowlitz First Nation Seabird Island Band Skwah First Nation Skway First Nation Shxw'ow'hamel First Nation Skawahlook First Nation Skowkale First Nation Soowahlie First Nation Squiala First Nation Sumas First Nation Tzeachten First Nation Yakweakwioose First Nation Chehalis First Nation Tsleil-waututh First Nation Musqueam Indian Band Katzie First Nation Kwikwetlem First Nation Semiahmoo First Nation Chemainus First Nation Halalt First Nation Homalco First Nation Klahoose First Nation Malahat First Nation Nanoose First Nation Peters Band Sliammon First Nation Snuneymuxw First Nation Tsawwassen First Nation Yale First Nation Yakweakwioose First Nation Tseycum First Nation Tsleil-Waututh First Nation Squamish Nation Union Bar First Nation Nuxalk Nation T'sou-ke First Nation Esquimalt First Nation Tsawout First Nation Cowichan Tribes Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community of Oregon Confederated Tribes of Siletz Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Cowlitz Indian Tribe Suquamish Tribe Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe Lummi Nation Makah Tribe Muckleshoot Indian Tribe Nisqually Indian Tribe Quinault Indian Nation Sauk-Suiattle Indian Tribe Samish Indian Nation Skokomish Indian Tribe Snoqualmie Indian Tribe Squaxin Island Tribe Stillaguamish Tribe of Indians Suquamish Tribe Swinomish Indian Tribal Community Tulalip Tribes Organizations & Institutions NorthWest Indian Fisheries Commission South Puget Intertribal Planning Agency Washington Indian Gaming Association Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs Culture & Society Music Mythology Art Languages Coast Salish languages Comox/Island Comox (†) Sliammon/Mainland Comox Pentlatch Halkomelem Sechelt Squamish Nooksack Saanich Lummi Klallam Lushootseed Whulshootseed Twana Cowlitz Quinault