This article is about the ITV channel in Scotland, owned by STV Group. For its central Scotland franchise, see Scottish Television. For an article about Scottish television, see Television in Scotland. For other uses, see STV. For ITV in the rest of the UK, see ITV (TV channel) and UTV (TV channel). Television channel in Scotland STV Country United Kingdom Broadcast area Central and northern Scotland Network ITV Headquarters Pacific Quay, Glasgow, Scotland Programming Picture format 1080i HDTV (downscaled to 16:9 576i for the SDTV feed) Ownership Owner STV Group History Launched 30 May 2006; 14 years ago (2006-05-30) Replaced Grampian Television (Northern Scotland); Scottish Television (Central Scotland) Links Website stv.tv Availability Terrestrial Freeview Channel 3 (SD) (all regions) Channel 34 (+1) (central west, north) Channel 103 (HD) (central west) Cable Virgin Media Channel 103 (HD) Channel 114 (+1) Satellite Freesat Channel 103 (SD) (all regions) Channel 111 (HD) (Central West) Sky Channel 103 (HD) (all regions) Channel 803 (SD) (all regions) Astra 2E 10906 V 22000 5/6 Astra 2F 11068 V 23000 2/3 S2 (HD) Streaming media STV Player Watch live (STV regions only) STV is a Scottish free-to-air television channel owned by STV Group plc and is a part of the ITV network. It operates the two Channel 3 licences in northern and central Scotland, formerly known as Grampian Television (now legally STV North Ltd) and Scottish Television (now legally STV Central Ltd). However the STV brand name refers to the on-air name used by Scottish Television for much of its history - notably in the 70s and early 80s. This name remained in conversational use amongst the local public afterwards. The modern STV brand was adopted on Tuesday 30 May 2006 replacing both franchises' previous identities. The sense of continuity in the name was demonstrated when STV celebrated its 60th birthday in 2017, with special programmes broadcast on STV itself and the now defunct STV2. STV is the only part of the ITV Network which is not owned by ITV plc. Because of this, the station does not carry ITV branding or show ITV’s network trails and idents. It is the last example of ITV’s old structure where each regional station was independently owned and run. In 2013, STV won licences to launch local TV channels in Glasgow and Edinburgh. STV Glasgow launched on 2 June 2014, with STV Edinburgh following on 12 January 2015. From 24 April 2017, the city channels were rebranded as "STV2" and operated in combination with new franchises centred on Aberdeen, Dundee and Ayr.[1] STV2 closed down in June 2018. Contents 1 Programming 2 Withdrawal of networked output 2.1 Ofcom investigation 3 Studios 3.1 STV Central 3.2 STV North 4 Subsidiary channels 4.1 STV HD 4.2 STV +1 5 Regions and frequencies 5.1 Regions 5.2 Frequencies 5.2.1 STV Central 5.2.2 STV North 6 Retaining identity 7 Online presence 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Programming[edit] The two licences still produce regional programmes, although the only difference between them is the respective news programmes: STV News broadcasts separate bulletins to Northern Scotland (including an opt-out for the Tayside area), Glasgow/West Central Scotland, and Edinburgh/East Central Scotland. There is no STV South as Southern Scotland is part of the ITV Border region (Border being owned by ITV plc) and programmes are presented there under the ITV Border brand. Emphasising the fact that STV is essentially one channel across the two regions, there is a single director of channels (Bobby Hain – former managing director of Scottish Television), and a single head of news (Gordon MacMillan – former head of news of Scottish TV).[2] Terms in the renewed licences for both STV Central and STV North also mean that regional non-news programmes are shared (and identically scheduled) across both licences. Although the stations are only required to produce 1.5 hours a week of regional non-news programmes (a single arrangement covering both North and Central regions), the chief executive of STV Group, the stations have long aimed to deliver more output.[3] Today, news and current affairs forms the bulk of STV's regular programming on Channel 3, which includes the topical analysis programme Scotland Tonight. The company also produces many Gaelic programmes, some of which are now produced for the Gaelic-language channel, BBC Alba, alongside archive material including Speaking our Language and Machair. On a network scale, one of STV's most famous exports is the long-running crime drama Taggart, set in Glasgow. The network's range of programmes was dramatically expanded during the 1990s under director Alistair Moffat. Previous TV programming includes the serial dramas Take the High Road, Garnock Way & High Living, gameshows Now You See It and Wheel of Fortune, crime series Crimedesk with Bill Knox, long-running documentary series Weir's Way, lifestyle show Room at the Top, and Glen Michael's Cartoon Cavalcade, which lasted 26 years. Another of the station's best-known programmes, Scotsport, ran continuously for 51 years until May 2008 and remains one of the world's longest-running television sports programmes. Withdrawal of networked output[edit] In July 2009, STV announced that it was withdrawing some networked programmes such as The Bill, Doc Martin, Midsomer Murders, Poirot, Lewis and a number of other high-profile ITV network dramas from its schedules, instead preferring to concentrate on programming made within Scotland.[4] The practice of dropping networked shows had been in operation for other programmes since November 2008 when STV announced it would opt out of programmes they claimed were not performing well in their broadcast region, including Sharpe's Peril, Al Murray's Happy Hour, Moving Wallpaper, Benidorm and The Alan Titchmarsh Show. ITV's coverage of the FA Cup was also dropped. ITV plc claimed that STV were in breach of their network agreements by making this decision and sued STV for £38 million.[5][6] STV launched its own legal action against ITV plc,[7] claiming the company was owed money and unhappy about promotional advertising of their services. The then executive chairman of ITV plc, Michael Grade claimed his company was the "victim" in the ongoing dispute.[8] Amid many protests, the company's chief executive Rob Woodward admitted in December 2009 that STV had made a 'major mistake' by dropping some of the networked dramas and replacing them in some cases with imported output, repeats and films. The company pledged to continue with its plan to produce more regional programming and opt out of networked output with further plans announced in August 2010.[9] On 27 April 2011, ITV plc and STV Group plc settled their legal dispute, with the former receiving £18 million from STV.[10][11] The £18 million consists of a £7.2 million cash payment payable in 2011 and £10.8 million either in programme rights at the end of the year or cash, as adjusted, depending on further discussions with ITV plc. The programming rights payment is capped at a maximum of £15 million. In addition, STV will receive £2.4 million of credit for programme opt outs in 2011.[12] STV said it believed it was in the best interests of shareholders to end the long period of uncertainty. The parties have agreed the basis of a more collaborative relationship for the future. In March 2012, a deal was announced between ITV and the other Channel 3 licence holders which would transform its commercial relationship with them after the broadcasters negotiated new Channel 3 networking arrangements. The deal would see STV and UTV become "affiliates" of the network, meaning they would pay an up-front fee for the rights to broadcast ITV content. At the time, the licence holders paid a percentage of the Channel 3 network costs based on their share of qualifying revenue.[13][14] On 23 August 2012 STV confirmed the new network agreement with ITV was in operation.[15] Ofcom investigation[edit] In March 2010, The Daily Telegraph reported that Ofcom would launch an investigation over claims that STV allowed the Scottish Government to influence its schedules and replace networked series with Scottish-based programmes.[16] An Ofcom report released four months later cleared STV of allowing political interference within feature series, but 18 short social action programmes were found to have been influenced too closely by sponsorship from Government agencies and initiatives.[17] Studios[edit] STV Central[edit] The STV studios in Glasgow were originally located in the former Theatre Royal in the Cowcaddens area of the city. The first programme broadcast by STV from the Theatre Royal studios was This is Scotland on 31 August 1957. In 1974, the company sold the Theatre Royal to Scottish Opera for conversion back to a full theatre and national opera house[18] and moved into custom-built studios next door. The association with Cowcaddens ended in July 2006 when the station moved to new, smaller studios in Pacific Quay, alongside the Glasgow Science Centre. In Edinburgh, STV converted the Gateway Theatre in Leith Walk into colour studios during the mid-late 1960s – a facility which proved especially useful in 1969 when a fire gutted studio A at the Theatre Royal, killing two firemen. The Edinburgh studios later became a permanent production centre for Take the High Road before being closed in the early 1990s to save costs. STV's Edinburgh base now consists of smaller studios for local news and advertising operations. In April 2012, the Edinburgh operation was moved from George Street in the city centre to a new studio at Fountainbridge. STV North[edit] STV North's Aberdeen headquarters moved to new smaller studios in the city's Tullos area in June 2003, vacating a converted tram depot that had been used since Grampian Television's launch in September 1961. Expansions to the Queen's Cross complex were made in 1983 and 1987 – the former as part of a £5 million investment into the company's technical facilities. Around the time of the station's launch, Grampian also established premises in Dundee, later moving to Albany House in 1980 and Harbour Chambers in 1998. In April 2008, a new Dundee studio for local news and advertising operations was opened in the Seabraes area of the city. Grampian opened a base for local Highlands & Islands newsgathering in Inverness in 1983, situated in Huntly Street, which remains open today. A studio complex in Stornoway was opened in 1993 to accommodate the expansion of the station's Scots Gaelic programming production. The studios closed in 2000 following the axing of the Gaelic news service, Telefios. Grampian also established secondary studios in Edinburgh during the late 1960s from where some of the station's light entertainment programming was produced. The studios were closed in 1969. Subsidiary channels[edit] STV HD[edit] On 21 April 2010, STV Group plc. announced their intention to launch an HD channel on digital TV, before the 2010 World Cup.[19] The station launched on 6 June 2010, initially broadcasting on Freeview channel 51, from the Black Hill, Keelylang Hill and Bressay transmitters, and now broadcasts from all post-digital switchover transmitters in its coverage area. STV HD was also made available on Virgin Media channel 113 in STV's transmission area soon after the launch of Freeview.[20] The channel follows the launch of ITV HD, which became available on 2 April 2010 to viewers in the Scottish borders (who are served by ITV Border), England and Wales. STV Group plc. had been in talks with BSkyB, Freesat and the ITV Network with a view to making STV HD available via Sky and Freesat soon after the channels' initial launch.[21] A test version of the channel was available free-to-air via satellite, but had to be manually tuned as it was not included on either the Sky or Freesat EPGs. In September 2013, STV announced via Twitter that STV HD will be available for the first time on the Sky and Freesat from April 2014, nearly four years after first launching the channel on Freeview and Virgin Media.[citation needed] STV HD was added to Freesat and Sky on 28 April 2014.[22] Currently, STV HD is delivered across four transmission areas; North, West, East and Tayside. Only the Western region is broadcast Free-to-Air.[23] STV +1[edit] On 4 January 2011, Freeview announced details for the launch of ITV +1, together with the possibility that both STV and UTV would launch their own timeshift services, STV +1 and UTV +1 in Scotland and Northern Ireland respectively.[24] STV later confirmed that it would launch STV +1 at 8 pm on 11 January 2011. The channel is available to Freeview viewers on channel 34 and Virgin Media cable customers on channel 114. The timeshift channel STV +1 has been replaced with the micro Channel 3 region serving the Dundee area on satellite. STV +1 had been available on satellite till then, but not carried on either Sky EPG or Freesat channel guides. There are two regional variations of STV +1 on Freeview and Virgin.  One for North and one for Central Scotland. The North service shows Aberdeen-based news and commercials and the Central service carries the West region news bulletins and commercials.  The Edinburgh news programme is substituted in the evening on the Central +1 service. Regions and frequencies[edit] Regions[edit] STV serves central and northern Scotland. Within STV, Scotland is split into two regions and four sub-regions. Networked and regional programming is the same in both regions, apart from regional news and advertising. Within both regions, there are further opt-outs providing sub-regional news and commercials. STV North (formerly Grampian Television) is based in Aberdeen and serves Northern Scotland. The main news programme serving the area is the North edition of STV News at Six, alongside short regional bulletins (STV News/Good Morning Scotland) on weekdays. The main 6 pm programme on weeknights includes local opt-outs from Aberdeen (serving the North East and Highlands and Islands) and Dundee (serving Tayside and North East Fife). The two sub-regions also receive separate commercials. STV Central (formerly Scottish Television) is based at the STV Group headquarters in Glasgow and serves Central Scotland. Two editions of STV News at Six are produced and broadcast each weeknight from Edinburgh (for Fife, the Lothians and parts of Central Scotland), and Glasgow (for western parts of Central Scotland and Lochaber). The two sub-regions also receive separate late night news bulletins and local commercials. Lunchtime bulletins are broadcast from Glasgow across the Central region – the Glasgow newsroom also produces pan-regional bulletins for the North and Central regions at weekends. Altogether, the regions and sub-regions serve a population of 4,993,590. STV North (pop: 1,309,110): STV Aberdeen (pop: 827,390) – Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, Highland (except Lochaber), Moray, na h-Eileanan Siar, Orkney and Shetland STV Dundee (pop: 481,720) – Angus, Dundee, North East Fife, Perth and Kinross STV Central (pop: 3,684,480): STV Edinburgh (pop: 1,191,030) – Clackmannanshire, East Lothian, Edinburgh, Fife (except North East Fife), Midlothian and West Lothian STV Glasgow (pop: 2,493,450) – Argyll and Bute, East Ayrshire, East Dunbartonshire, East Renfrewshire, Falkirk, Glasgow, Inverclyde, Lochaber, North Ayrshire, North Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire, Stirling, South Ayrshire, South Lanarkshire, West Dunbartonshire. The areas of Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders are currently served by ITV Border. Frequencies[edit] STV is broadcast on the Digital 3&4 multiplex from the following main transmitters (and their dependent relays): STV Central[edit] West Black Hill: Channel 43 Darvel: Channel 23 Rosneath: Channel 61 Torosay: Channel 25 East Craigkelly: Channel 24 STV North[edit] North East, Highlands & Islands Durris: Channel 25 Knockmore: Channel 23 Rosemarkie: Channel 49 Rumster Forest: Channel 24 Eitshal: Channel 23 Keelylang Hill: Channel 43 Bressay: Channel 25 Tayside & North East Fife Angus: Channel 53 Retaining identity[edit] STV has resisted the adoption of the generic ITV branding that is now commonplace throughout the ITV plc regions in the south of Scotland, England and Wales, and the Channel Islands, although it has now adopted a single identity for both its franchises. The only mentioning of the ITV brand on Channel 3 in the STV regions occurs during live TV shows (like Ant & Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway), ITV Breakfast (Good Morning Britain and Lorraine), which operates as a separate station, networked programmes, national ITV News bulletins, and Nightscreen. ITV is also the network sustaining feed, which is shown if technical difficulties occur at the STV studios. One such event occurred on 20 October 2018, when an airing of a Harry Potter movie was knocked off air by an internal power cut.[25] Online presence[edit] Main article: stv.tv STV's official website, stv.tv, consists of news, sport, entertainment, weather, competitions and programming information. The website also features a video catch-up service, STV Player, offering a chance to see networked and regional programming aired on the station for 30 days after their original broadcast. Exclusive online programming in the form of regular video blogs are also produced for the website. In September 2010 TV Genius' content discovery platform was chosen by STV to incorporate an online recommender system for its STV site.[26][27] See also[edit] Television portal Scotland portal Scottish Broadcasting Commission Sky Scottish S2 STV2 References[edit] ^ New channel STV2 to launch in April, stv.tv, 10 April 2017 ^ "Gordon takes control of Scotland ..." Sunday Herald. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. Retrieved 3 October 2007. ^ Westminster speech by Rob Woodward Archived 28 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, stvplc.tv, 16 October 2008 ^ Tryhorn, Chris (11 September 2009). "STV defends dropping ITV dramas". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 23 May 2010. ^ Sweeney, Charlene (23 September 2009). "ITV to take STV to court over 38m programme bill". The Times. London. Retrieved 23 May 2010. ^ "ITV launches £38m STV legal claim". BBC News. 22 September 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2010. ^ "UK | STV sues ITV in new legal action". BBC News. 17 November 2009. Retrieved 7 January 2011. ^ "Michael Grade says ITV is the victim in battle with STV". BBC News. 8 December 2009. Retrieved 7 January 2011. ^ STV viewers to miss out on new ITV dramas, The Daily Telegraph, 1 August 2010 ^ "STV agrees 18 million stg legal settlement with ITV". London South East. Reuters. 27 April 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2015. ^ "STV ends legal stand-off with ITV". BBC News. ^ "DJ STV Group PLC Settlement of Legal Actions with ITV". London Stock Exchange. 27 April 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011.[permanent dead link] ^ Kanter, Jake (5 March 2012). "ITV strikes 'landmark' agreements with STV and UTV". Broadcast. Retrieved 5 May 2013. ^ Farey-Jones, Daniel (5 March 2012). "ITV, STV and UTV agree new network arrangements". Media Week. Retrieved 5 May 2013. ^ "STV confirms network deal is up and running". BBC News. 23 August 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2013. ^ Johnson, Simon (3 March 2010). "Ofcom probes Alex Salmond 'cash-for-programmes' row". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved 3 March 2010. ^ OFCOM broadcast bulletin – STV sponsorship report, 26 July 2010 ^ The Theatre Royal : Entertaining a Nation by Graeme Smith ISBN 978-0-9559420-0-6 ^ "STV Group plc Chairman's AGM Statement and IMS" (PDF). STV Group plc. 21 April 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2011. ^ "HD television is coming to STV". STV. Retrieved 1 June 2010. ^ "STV Launches HD Service on Freeview and Virgin Media". allmediascotland. 1 June 2010. ^ "STV announces its HD channel to be on satellite from end of April". STV News. 26 March 2014. ^ "Sky Channel Listing". Lyngsat.com. ^ "ITV1 + 1 to launch on 11 January 2011". Freeview. Archived from the original on 9 January 2011. Retrieved 11 January 2011. ^ "Apologies for the technical difficulties on Saturday night. During Harry Potter we had a power outage at STV in Pacific Quay so switched temporarily to ITV Border to ensure you could watch your shows. Normal service has been resumed and we are sorry for the interruption!". 21 October 2018. ^ "TV Genius to Power Content Discovery for STV". Digital Spy. 13 September 2010. Retrieved 7 January 2011. ^ "STV opts for TV Genius". Cuesupplychain.com. 10 September 2010. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 7 January 2011. External links[edit] STV at stv.tv API on Twitter STV Group plc Links to related articles v t e STV Group plc Television STV Northern Scotland: Grampian Television (STV North) Central Scotland: Scottish Television (STV Central) Defunct Sky Scottish S2 STV2 (STV Glasgow, STV Edinburgh) Production STV Studios Ginger Productions Online stv.tv STV Player other internet See also STV News Scotland Tonight North Tonight (defunct) Scotland Today (defunct) STV Children's Appeal Pacific Quay Television in Scotland ITV ITV channels United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting v t e ITV Channels Domestic SD: ITV, STV, UTV ITV2 ITV3 ITV4 ITVBe CITV HD: ITV HD, STV HD, UTV HD ITV2 HD ITV3 HD ITV4 HD ITVBe HD Former ITV Box Office ITV Choice ITV Encore ITV News Channel ITV Play ITV Sport Channel S2 UTV2 UTV Ireland Merit The Store Companies Current ITV plc STV Group plc Former Alpha Television Associated Television Carlton Communications plc Granada plc ITV Digital Ltd Trident Television UTV Media plc Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television Friends Reunited Divisions, brands and services Current children's: CITV, LittleBe news: ITV News (ITN) sport: ITV Sport production: ITV Studios, ITV Studios Australia, 12 Yard, Big Talk Productions, Gameface, The Garden, Mammoth Screen, Multistory Media, Possessed, Potato, Silverprint Pictures, So Television, Tall Story Pictures, Twofour, World Productions weather: ITV Weather online: itv.com, stv.tv catch up: ITV Hub, STV Player Defunct ITV Day ITV Digital ITV Local ITV Play ITV Schools u.tv Franchises and regions National franchises breakfast: TV-am (1983–1992), GMTV (1993–2010), ITV Breakfast (2010–present) teletext: ORACLE (1974–1992), Teletext Ltd. (1993–2010) Regional franchises Northern Scotland: Grampian Television Central Scotland: Scottish Television Southern Scotland and Cumbria: Border Television Northern Ireland: UTV North East England: Tyne Tees Television Yorkshire: Yorkshire Television North of England (weekdays), later North West England and Isle of Man (all week): Granada Television North of England and Midlands (weekends): ABC Television Wales and the West of England: TWW, WWN/Teledu Cymru, ITSWW, Harlech Television, ITV Cymru Wales Midlands (weekdays), later Midlands (all week): Associated Television Midlands (all week): Central Independent Television East Anglia: Anglia Television London (weekdays): Rediffusion Television, Thames Television, Carlton Television London (weekends): Associated Television, London Weekend Television South and South East England: Southern Television, Television South, Meridian Broadcasting South West England: Westward Television, Television South West, Westcountry Television Channel Islands: Channel Television Unsuccessful franchise bids London Weekday, East Anglia and South and South East England: CPV-TV North West England: North West Television Non-franchise regions Current ITV London ITV West Country ITV Tyne Tees & Border STV Defunct ITV Thames Valley Regulators Independent Television Authority (1954–72) Independent Broadcasting Authority (1972–90) Independent Television Commission (1991–2003) Ofcom (2003–present) Other Freesat History of ITV Idents ITV Emergency National Service (1968) ITV Telethon Night Network Timeline of ITV Timeline of ITV Digital Channels ITV Nightscreen Journalists and newsreaders Programmes ITV2 CITV Television House List of ITV regions United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting ITV advertising operations ITV 50 BritBox Quibi Category v t e Television in Scotland BBC BBC One Scotland BBC Scotland ITV STV STV North STV Central STV HD ITV ITV Border ITV HD Gaelic BBC Alba Defunct Sky Scottish S2 STV2 STV Edinburgh STV Glasgow Channel Six Dundee Thistle TV Celtic TV Rangers TV TeleG BBC Two Scotland v t e Media in the United Kingdom UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals Newspapers (History) Broadsheet Financial Times The Daily Telegraph The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Compact i The Times The Guardian The Observer Middle-market Daily Express Daily Mail The Mail on Sunday Tabloid Daily Mirror Sunday Mirror Morning Star The Sunday People Daily Star Daily Star Sunday The Sun Sunday Sport Magazines and other periodicals List of magazines by circulation Radio in the UK National stations BBC BBC Radio 1 BBC Radio 1Xtra BBC Radio 2 BBC Radio 3 BBC Radio 4 BBC Radio 4 Extra BBC Radio 5 Live BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra BBC Radio 6 Music BBC Asian Network BBC World Service BBC National DAB (multiplex) Independent / commercial Absolute Radio Absolute 80s Absolute 90s BFBS Radio Classic FM Capital Capital Xtra Country Hits Radio Digital One (multiplex) Greatest Hits Radio Heart Heart 70s Heart 80s Heart 90s Heart Dance heat Hits Radio Jazz FM Kerrang! Kiss Kisstory LBC LBC News Magic Planet Rock Premier Christian Radio Radio X RNIB Connect Radio Scala Radio Sound Digital (multiplex) Smooth Radio talkSPORT talkRADIO Times Radio UCB UK Virgin Radio UK Regional and local stations BBC List of BBC Local Radio stations BBC Radio Scotland BBC Radio nan Gàidheal BBC Radio Ulster BBC Radio Foyle BBC Radio Wales BBC Radio Cymru Independent / commercial List of community radio stations List of local commercial radio stations List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations Other stations List of hospital radio stations Pirate radio Restricted Service Licence (RSL) List of RSL stations List of satellite radio stations List of student and schools radio Other Broadcasting House FM broadcasting The Studios, MediaCityUK Radio Academy Radio Academy Awards Radio Independents Group RAJAR Most listened to programmes Television in the UK Principal channels (List) BBC BBC One BBC Two BBC Four BBC News BBC Parliament BBC Alba BBC Scotland CBBC CBeebies ITV ITV, STV, UTV ITV2 ITV3 ITV4 ITVBe CITV Ch 4/S4C Channel 4 S4C E4 Film4 More4 4seven 4Music The Box Box Hits Kiss TV Magic TV Kerrang! TV ViacomCBS Channel 5 5Star 5USA 5Select Paramount Network Comedy Central Comedy Central Extra MTV MTV Music MTV Hits MTV Base MTV Classic Nickelodeon Nicktoons Nick Jr. Nick Jr. Too Sky UK Challenge Pick Sky One Sky Replay Sky Arts Sky Atlantic Sky Cinema Sky Comedy Sky Crime Sky Documentaries Sky History Sky History 2 Sky Nature Sky News Sky Sports Sky Sports Box Office Sky Sports F1 Sky Sports News Sky Sports Racing Sky Witness UKTV Alibi Dave Drama Eden Gold W Yesterday Discovery Animal Planet Discovery Channel Discovery History Discovery Science Discovery Turbo DMAX Food Network HGTV Investigation Discovery Quest Quest Red Really TLC Sony Pop Pop Max Sony Channel Sony Movies Sony Movies Action Sony Movies Classic Tiny Pop Services and platforms Current All 4 BBC iPlayer BBC Three BT TV cable digital digital terrestrial List of channels Disney+ Freesat Freesat+ Freeview high-definition List of channels ITV ITV Hub, STV Player local television My5 Now TV Netflix Prime Video Restricted Service Licence satellite List of channels Sky Group Freesat from Sky On Demand Sky+ Sky+ HD TalkTalk TV TVPlayer Virgin Media FilmFlex TiVo V+ YouView Zattoo Defunct analogue analogue terrestrial BBC Store TalkTalk TV Store Film4oD Real Digital Top Up TV Studios Current 3 Mills Studios BBC Cymru Wales New Broadcasting House BBC Elstree Centre BBC Pacific Quay The Bottle Yard Studios Broadcasting House Broadcasting House, Belfast Broadcasting House, Bristol dock10 Elstree Studios (Shenley Road) Gas Street Studios The Leeds Studios The Maidstone Studios Mailbox Birmingham MediaCityUK Riverside Studios Roath Lock The Sharp Project Sky Campus Space Studios Manchester Television Centre, London Defunct Broadcasting House, Cardiff British and Dominions Imperial Studios Fountain Studios Gate Studios Granada Studios The Hospital Club Lime Grove Studios Limehouse Studios The London Studios MGM-British Studios Pebble Mill Studios Teddington Studios Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne Television Centre, Southampton Upper Boat Studios Other Defunct channels Edinburgh International Television Festival History List of years List of channels Student television Viewing statistics Most-watched broadcasts Companies and organisations Major companies Archant Ascential Bauer Radio BBC Bloomsbury Publishing BT Group Channel Four Television Corporation Daily Mail and General Trust Dentsu Aegis Network Economist Group EMI Music Publishing Endemol Shine UK Global Media & Entertainment Guardian Media Group Haymarket Media Group Informa ITN ITV plc Johnston Press Mecom Group News UK Newsquest Northern & Shell Pearson plc Press Holdings Reach plc RELX Reuters Sky STV Group Syco Sony Pictures Television Networks TalkTalk Group TI Media UBM plc ViacomCBS Networks UK & Australia Virgin Media Wireless Group Resources Arqiva List of largest UK book publishers Government and regulatory bodies Advertising Standards Authority BBC Trust British Board of Film Classification British Film Institute Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Independent Press Standards Organisation Ofcom Press Recognition Panel S4C Authority Industry and trades bodies British Academy of Film and Television Arts British Phonographic Industry Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union Clearcast Digital TV Group Digital UK Equity Federation Against Copyright Theft National Union of Journalists The Publishers Association Royal Television Society United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting Other BBC Academy National Film and Television School National Science and Media Museum Regional and student media Regional media Media in England Birmingham London Manchester Media in Scotland Aberdeen Dundee Glasgow Media in Wales Cardiff Student media Student television Student press Category