Wikipedia list article This list (which may have dates, numbers, etc.) may be better in a sortable table format. Please help improve this list or discuss it on the talk page. (April 2010) A succubus (plural succubi) is a type of demoness referenced in various works of fiction.[1][2] Contents 1 Literature 2 Film 3 Television 4 Animation 5 Comics 6 Manga and anime 7 Webcomics 8 Music 9 Gaming 9.1 Tabletop 9.2 Video games 9.3 MMORPGS 10 References Literature[edit] Thomas Middleton's 1605 play A Mad World, My Masters, the philandering Master Penitent Brothel is tempted by a succubus assuming the form of his illicit partner, using song and dance in a failed attempt to seduce him. Honoré de Balzac's early 1800s short story "The Succubus" concerns a 1271 trial of a she-devil succubus in the guise of a woman, who, amongst other things, could use her hair to entangle victims.[3] Charles Williams's 1937 novel Descent into Hell portrays an academic who consciously rejects the potential affections of a real woman in favor of a physically identical but perfectly obedient and pliable succubus. Richard Matheson's 1962 short story "The Likeness of Julie" portrays a teenage succubus named Julie (later adapted into the TV film Trilogy of Terror) Irving A. Greenfield's 1970 novel Succubus has the ancient demon hitching a ride on a woman marrying an archeologist In Poul Anderson's 1971 novel Operation Chaos, the protagonists are visited shortly after being married by a succubus/incubus who changes genders in its attempts to seduce both of them. Tanith Lee's 1976 short story The Demoness features a pale red-haired woman in an isolated tower who seduces men and vampirically drains them of their thoughts and emotions. It was first published in Lin Carter's The Year's Best Fantasy Stories: 2. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America later included it in the Fantasy Hall of Fame in 1998.[4][5][6] Kenneth Rayner Johnson's 1979 novel, The Succubus, outlines the story of a male afflicted by the incarnation of the demon Lilith. Alfred Bester's 1979 short story, "Galatea Galante", describes its title character, a young woman genetically engineered to order by an arrogant but brilliant geneticist, as possessing the powers of a succubus through a genetic anomaly deliberately introduced in her creation. Unbeknownst to either of them, she seduces her creator while they are both asleep and is impregnated by him. Stephen King's 1982 novel The Dark Tower: The Gunslinger, and the rest of The Dark Tower series, Roland encounters a succubus in a circle of stones while following the Man in Black. This succubus then later helps an incubus in impregnating Susanna Dean with Roland's child, Mordred, a villain in later books. Roald Dahl's 1983 children's novel The Witches, witches are being known for succubi but they're bald, toeless, claw-fingered creatures are killing children, instead of men. Toni Morrison's 1987 Beloved novel's protagonist, Beloved, has been discussed in academic works as a modern use of this theme.[7][8] In For Love of Evil (1988), by Piers Anthony, succubi, including Lilith, make up the Kingdom of Hell, which reflects Dante's Seven Circles of Hell. Eric (1990) by Terry Pratchett (from the Discworld series) has a small reference to succubi, in which a demonologist describes how his grandfather spent his entire life trying to summon one, only to succeed in conjuring a Neuralger, a female demon that has a headache every night. Ray Garton's 1991 novel The New Neighbor tells the story of a family who has an attractive new neighbor move in across the street. She turns out to be a succubus. In Laurell K. Hamilton's 1993 Anita Blake: Vampire Hunter series, the main character, Anita Blake, finds herself becoming a succubus. In Orson Scott Card's 1996 novel Treasure Box, a witch conjures a succubus, who represents the dreams and desires of the protagonist in order to convince him to open a mysterious box. The White Court of Vampires in Jim Butcher's 2000 series Dresden Files are described as succubi and incubi. One of these incubi is the major supporting character Thomas Raith. Once (2001), written by James Herbert, has a description of a "demon form" succubus. Jonathan Stroud's 2003 series Bartimaeus Trilogy describes a succubus as a kind of demon preferred by male magicians, and also that Mr. Tallow might be the offspring of a magician and a succubus. The Felix Castor series (2006) by Mike Carey, features a succubus who takes the name Juliet, gives up feeding on men and enters into a lesbian relationship while working as an exorcist. 2007's Hell on Earth, a dark paranormal series by Jackie Kessler, stars the succubus Jezebel, who runs away from Hell, hides on Earth as an exotic dancer, and learns the hard way about being mortal. In the 2008 novel Breaking Dawn by Stephenie Meyer, the three original sisters of the Denali coven (Tanya, Kate, and Irina) were revealed to be the originators of the myth of the succubus, as they would seduce men and drain them of blood following intercourse. The three sisters also appear in the Breaking Dawn films, but their history as succubi is not mentioned. 2009 or earlier, Georgina Kincaid, a 21st-century urban fantasy novel series by Richelle Mead, features succubus Georgina Kincaid trying to find a vampire hunter. In Vitaly Grigorowski's The Secrets of Witch Falls novel series, succubi are the main characters and antagonists. Film[edit] Necronomicon – Geträumte Sünden (a.k.a. Succubus (1968), Jess Franco La plus longue nuit du diable (The Devil's Nightmare) (1971), Jean Brismée Spectre (1977) television film by Gene Roddenberry; the main character Sebastian is lured by a succubus in the opening minutes of the episode Ghostbusters (1984) Dr. Raymond Stantz is visited by a succubus The Unholy (1988) a priest's fight with a succubus Def by Temptation (1990) The Haunted (1991) television film based on The Smurl Family haunting drama, Jack Smurl is visited and raped by a succubus. Serpent's Lair (1995) The Ninth Gate (1999) a succubus helps the protagonist find satanic engravings Saint Sinner (2002), a 19th-century monk is sent to the 21st century to retrieve two succubi that he unleashed Flesh for the Beast (2003) Demon Hunter (2005) features a succubus as an antagonist. Succubus: The Demon (2006) a man grieving over the loss of his wife attempts to raise her soul, only to instead summon a succubus Succubus: Hell Bent (2007) about the ancient succubus Lilith, as she attempts to hunt down the direct descendant of Adam and can only be stopped by the direct descendant of Eve See Dick Run (2009) Kel Mitchell portrays a man who has his genitalia stolen by a succubus Umbrage (2009) about how the ancient succubus Lilith is brought to the world by a magic mirror Jennifer's Body (2009) Megan Fox portrays a teenage cheerleader-turned-succubus who kills the boys in her town Case 39 (2009) Jodelle Ferland plays a little girl named Lilith, who is a succubus and can create illusions to torment her victims V/H/S (2012) the segment Amateur Night features three friends who run afoul of a succubus, played by Hannah Fierman, who is listed in the credits as Lily, apparently a reference to Lilith Under the Skin (2013) Though the main character is literally an alien, she/it shares many similarities to succubi: it takes the form of a human woman, lures men with sexual seduction, and then uses men for personal gain (which often leads to the death of the seduced man). Siren (2016), a spin-off of the aforementioned V/H/S, focuses on the same succubus, played by Hannah Fierman Suicide Squad (2016) Television[edit] 1975 February Kolchak: The Night Stalker episode 16 "Demon in Lace", a succubus is the cause of the mysterious deaths of men 1989 Superboy season 1, episode 25 "Succubus" features a succubus, played by Sybil Danning. 1990 October (to April 1991) She-Wolf of London episode features a succubus who could cause immediate and extreme aging in her victims. 1996 April X-Files episode "Avatar", Assistant Director Skinner has troubles with a succubus that he has seen since he served in the Vietnam War. 1996 December The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest episode "Eclipse", Jonny and Jesse try to save Hadji from a succubus-like creature. 1997 March Poltergeist: The Legacy episode 23, "Black Widow", the group encounters a succubus in which is unkillable and develops feelings for the character "Nick"; they are only able to stop it by using enchanted chains that sap her strength and dumping her in a river. 1999 April South Park episode "The Succubus", Chef falls in love with and plans to marry a succubus. The boys defeat her by singing the love theme from The Poseidon Adventure backwards. 1999 November Charmed episode "She's a Man, Baby, a Man!", Prue becomes a man in order to attract a succubus who is murdering local men. The succubus is portrayed as a beautiful woman with a razor-sharp tongue who sucks all the testosterone out of a man's body. They were previous witches who made a pact with darkness to keep themselves from heartbreak. 2004 October Hex, the demon Malachi turns the women he has sex with into slaves, which Ella Dee refers to as "succubi". 2005 November Masters of Horror episode, Jenifer, a policeman succumbs a succubus-like female who can entrance men in spite of her hideous appearance. 2007 March to September "Blood Ties" An Incubus was featured in the episode ??? 2008 May Reaper episode "Cancun", Sock (Tyler Labine) falls for a succubus who feeds off human life and whenever she kisses him, he gets a rush of energy but loses a year of his life. By the end, Sock says that he only has a few years left to live. 2008 June Metalocalypse episodes 33 "Klokblocked" (and maybe also "Black Fire Upon Us") feature Lavona Succuboso, a woman who intends to use a "loin extractor" to extract the semen of Nathan Explosion and use it to impregnate the women in her group Succuboso Explosion, to create a race of warriors that will conquer the world. May or may not be an actual succubus.[speculation?] 2010 March Ugly Americans Comedy Central animated series features a succubus main character named Callie Maggotbone. 2010 June–September The Gates features different mythological and occult creatures, among them succubi. 2010 September Lost Girl is a Canadian television series that features succubi, the main character Bo being one of them. They have to feed on the sexual energy of humans, both female and male, to sustain themselves. Feeding also permits them to heal as though they never took any damage. They also have the power to make others do their bidding by touching them or other means. 2011 February Regular Show episode "Benson Be Gone", the new boss named Susan, she concentrates the groundskeepers to become clones of hers. After slacking, she became her true gigantic form like a succubus. 2012 March Being Human episode 28 "Hold the Front Page" features a succubus named Yvonne who has to the power to make men fall in love with her upon physical contact, however having sex with her would result in death. She is unable to kill vampires like this though, because they are already dead. A succubus is described as the child of a human and a demon. 2017 August Midnight, Texas. A succubus kills men until she is gotten rid of by Manfred. Animation[edit] 1993 Words Worth the character called Delta. 1995 Darkstalkers (the American cartoon version) features, among its villains, the succubus Morrigan Aensland. Night Warriors OVA, based on the second Darkstalkers game, also features Morrigan Aensland. 2010 Dante's Inferno: An Animated Epic, Dante encounters and slays succubi in the second circle of hell, lust. 2020 Dragon's Dogma (TV series), Ethan encounters and defeats a succubi in the episode titled ‘Lust’. The 2021 Helluva Boss episode "Spring Broken" features a succubus pop singer named Verosika Mayday who uses her singing to make humans lustful. Comics[edit] In 1973, Marvel Comics debuted the succubus character, Satana. In 1991, the succubus Chantinelle is introduced by DC Comics, and later befriends John Constantine, the star of the Hellblazer comic series. In 2004, UDON Comics created, among other titles by Capcom, the Darkstalkers Comic series that ran for six issues and a trade paperback. In the comic, the succubus Morrigan Aensland plays a large role. Her other half Lilith is seen only briefly in the Belial prequel and on the cover of some of the issues. Unlike the original games, both are portrayed as amoral and evil succubi. In 2014, Deadpool: The Gauntlet saw succubus Shiklah make her debut. She is currently married to Deadpool. Manga and anime[edit] 1989 anime Grimms Fairy Tale Classics implies that the main antagonist of its version of The Iron Stove is a succubus rather than a witch. 1996 manga Night Warriors: The Comic Series by Run Ishida, adaptation of Darkstalkers. 2000 manga Lilim Kiss by Mizuki Kawashita, features title character Lilim who is a succubus. 2002 Viper GTS, hentai anime, features three succubi who have sex with men in the mortal realm (including each other) in order to steal their souls. Angels in heaven realize the souls stolen by the succubi are not able to reincarnate, so they travel to hell and try to "purify" the female devils with a huge orgy in order to sap them of their sexual strength. 2002 anime show Digimon, the character named Lilithmon, based on the mythological Lilith and one of the Seven Great Demon Lords representing the sin of lust. In some official profiles of the franchise,[which?] it is stated that "it confounds its opponents with its bewitchingly lovely appearance, and it is said that those who are taken in by its temptations are invariably granted death." 2004 manga Rosario + Vampire by Akihisa Ikeda, features succubus Kurumu Kurono as one of the main characters. 2004 light novel series Good Luck! Ninomiya-kun is about a shy succubus Mayu Tsukimura who cohabitates with the main guy character. The protagonist's childhood friend, Reika Houjou, who is Mayu's romance rival, is also revealed to be a succubus. 2005 manga Mark of the Succubus, a world of demons and the main character is a succubus called Maeve. 2007 manga Lotte no Omocha! by Yui Haga, features title character heroine Astrarotte "Lotte" Ygvar, a 10-year-old succubus princess. 2012 light novel The Testament of Sister New Devil by Tetsuto Uesu, features succubus Maria Naruse, the guardian of the main female protagonist and title character. 2012 light novel Overlord (novel series) by Kugane Maruyama, features succubus Albedo as the female lead character. 2014 manga Interviews with Monster Girls by Petos, features Sakie Satou, a math teacher who is a succubus. 2016 manga Ishuzoku Reviewers by Amahara, features a massive brothel complex "Succubus Tower" with thousands of succubi working as prostitutes. Webcomics[edit] In 2000, webcomic Sinfest, the major supporting characters Baby Blue and Fuchsia are succubi, working directly for the devil. In 2002, Pibgorn, Drusilla is a succubus dressed in mufti Dan and Mab's Furry Adventures by Amber M. Williams, several main characters are succubi and incubi, also in the comic is an academy for succubi and incubi known as SAIA (Succubi and Incubi Academy) as early as 2004[9] 2005 series[10] Demon Candy: Parallel webcomic, the main characters include two succubi, Victoria and Noelle, and an incubus, Jonathan. In 2009, Eerie Cuties features, among its support cast, a pubescent succubus named Chloe[11] She later got her own spinoff book,[12] with a number of other succubi. 2010 or earlier Darkness Within webcomic stars a succubus named Nicole Richards; Lucia and her mother Lilith are also prominent succubi in the series and Lucia's brother Roger is an incubus[citation needed] In 2011[13] Heartcore, Amethyst is the young (in demon terms) succubus princess of the demonic realm of Hell known as 'Asgar'. She was once sweet and demure, but is now brash after some key events in her life. She holds a deep grudge towards her father, Royce. She has two minions named Rip and Tear. Music[edit] The Rolling Stones' 1973 song "Dancing With Mr. D" depicts an encounter with a succubus. In 1976, Cliff Richard's "Devil Woman" tells of one man's bad luck with a beautifully evil woman Xmal Deutschland's 1982 song "Incubus/Succubus" was one of their most popular songs. Lords of Acid's 1994 Album Voodoo-U features cover art with succubuses. In 1997 Norwegian symphonic black metal band Dimmu Borgir has a song called "A Succubus In Rapture" on their album Enthrone Darkness Triumphant, which describes this creature. The namesake song of Steely Dan's February 2000 album "Two Against Nature" includes a description of a succubus, "Madame Arzulie, she come last night, bang you silly but leave a nasty bite". Part 3 of the May 2000 album Wishmaster's song "FantasMic" by Nightwish briefly mentions a succubus. Alan O'Day's 1977 song Undercover Angel describes a romantic encounter with a benevolent succubus, who seduces him and then leaves, urging him to find love in the real world. In 2001 Bitter Suites to Succubi was released by British band Cradle of Filth, who have performed several songs about succubi. In 2010, Cradle of Filth released the album Darkly, Darkly, Venus Aversa which like its predecessor listed above have numerous songs about succubi. Lilith Immaculate is a single release from the album that is about succubus Lilith. In September 2002 Tech N9NE mentions in Absolute Power (Tech N9ne album) (along with D12 minus Eminem) a succubus in his song "She Devil". The song "Serpentine" from American rock band Disturbed's fifth studio album from August 2010 Asylum is reportedly about a succubus who utilizes her sexuality to seduce men. The Grammy and Academy Award-winning American hip-hop star, Eminem mentions the word "succubuses" to describe women in the March 2011 song, "Space Bound". He raps, "Don't ask me why I have no love for these motherfucking hos/Blood sucking succubuses what the fuck is up with this..." 1969 or later, the succubus is frequently visually depicted in liner notes and cover arts[citation needed] of Jim Steinman works. 1974–1996 Joey Ramone, lead singer of The Ramones, wrote a song called "Succubus"[citation needed] which was rejected by the band because they did not know what a succubus was. In 2013, Azealia Banks released a song titled "Succubi". Gaming[edit] Illustration of a succubus as used in the game, Dungeons & Dragons Dungeons & Dragons, the succubus is a type of tanar'ri demon. The succubus is one of the earliest monsters to be included in the game, having appeared under the demon entry in the Eldritch Wizardry supplement (1976).[14] Demons like the succubus were considered among the "standard repertoire of "Monsters"" of the game by Fabian Perlini-Pfister.[15] Rob Bricken of io9 identified the succubus as one of "The 12 Most Obnoxious Dungeons & Dragons Monsters".[16] Tabletop[edit] Warhammer 40,000, succubi are squad leaders for Dark Eldar Wych squads, while incubi form the bodyguard of Dark Eldar lords A succubus named "Sophie" is the mascot for the tabletop miniatures company Reaper Miniatures Video games[edit] In Catherine, the title character is a succubus and is central to the game's main conflict. Darkstalkers has two characters, Morrigan and Lilith, who are succubi and also appear in several other Capcom titles, in particular cross-over fighting games. Lilith is actually a third part of Morrigan's power which takes form itself after being separated for a long time, and since then Lilith has returned to Morrigan but sometimes still retains her shape as a succubus. Although in most games Succubi appear as evil beings, Morrigan is an anti-heroine as she is not evil despite her demonic appearance as a succubus. Devil May Cry 3, Dante is almost seduced by, yet manages to fight against, a succubus named Nevan. Her appearance is that of a seductive woman with long red hair covering her breasts, and with her lower body shrouded in bats. Amongst others, her attacking methods include striking her opponent with lightning. DmC: Devil May Cry, a 1200-year-old succubus named Poison serves as one of the main bosses. Unlike the attractive Nevan from Devil May Cry 3, Poison has the form of a large grotesque caterpillar. She is the secret ingredient of the soft drink Virility that Mundus uses to keep humans weak and docile. Dante finds Poison under the Virility Factory and fights her. He cuts of her support cables and kills her by knocking her into stirring rotors that slice her up. Diablo, the two most recognizable succubi in the world are Lilith (Queen of the Succubi) and Andariel (Maiden of Anguish). Other characters like Cydaea (Azmodan's consort) can also be considered as succubi. Drakan: Order of the Flame, succubi is a type of enemy Castlevania: Symphony of the Night and Castlevania: Lament of Innocence, Scarlet is a succubus who appears as a boss and as one of Dracula's attendants, similar to Carmilla, who also is a boss in Castlevania: Circle of the Moon. Succubi are also recurring minor enemies found throughout the castle in many of the games in the Castlevania series. Catacomb Armageddon, the level The Lair of the Succubus features enemies who appear as pale skinned naked demon girls with long red hair covering their private parts. They shoot hearts at the player. Planescape: Torment, Fall-From-Grace (or "Grace") is a chaste succubus priestess who can join the player's party. A beautiful blonde woman with bat wings, she is the only healer in the game and may be a potential romantic interest for the player's character. Fall-From-Grace is voiced by Jennifer Hale. Disciples II, succubus is the highest class available in the Witch upgrade tree for Cultists in the Legions of the Damned. They are capable of transforming an entire enemy party into Imps. Star Ocean: Till the End of Time, a succubus appears as a monster in Level 2 at the Maze of Tribulations; her attacks include Charm Person, which causes the chaos status ailment on male party members Warrior Kings (RTS), succubus is a unit available to Pagan players through the Henge (which are constructed by the High Priestess). Succubi are able to charm enemy units, thus making them switch to the player's side, possess a unit and make him commit acts of heresy to stop opposing peasants from working, and send enemy units into a rage, where they will attack anyone near them Disgaea series, succubus is a class of demon that has the appearance of a lightly-dressed big-breasted woman with horns and bat wings. Overlord, succubi are encountered as strong enemies and a particular succubus queen is responsible for the corruption of one of the seven fallen hero antagonists in the game, each of whom embodies one of the seven deadly sins—the sin in this case being lust; they attack by seducing the player's minions, then capturing them, and flying away and killing them one-by-one Heroes of Newerth, Succubus is a playable hero whose abilities focus primarily on seducing and mesmerizing opponents. She is depicted as an attractive red devil girl. Might and Magic Book One: The Secret of the Inner Sanctum, in the town of Portsmith, where only women live, and male characters are drained of life, a succubus is found in a hidden area Heroes of Might and Magic V, Succubus and Succubus Mistress are magic units in the Inferno faction and have red skin, wings, horns, claws, and cloven feet; Succubus Mistress also has fire instead of hair and more intense red skin and a unique attack that strikes up to four non inferno units in a row. Biara, the main antagonist of the story, is a succubus. Dark Messiah of Might and Magic, Xana, a being tied to the protagonist Sareth, is later revealed to be a succubus. Also, succubi are mentioned in books found during the game. Warlords: Battlecry II, succubi are flying units available to the Daemon race. The daemon's Titan is also a very large blue succubus named Balora (or at least seems to be). Succbus as a named enemy exists in the Persona role-playing game series. Lost Kingdoms and Lost Kingdoms II, a succubus is one of the monsters the protagonist must fight against and can capture and use via mystic cards. It appears as a thin pale scantily clad woman with batwings Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures, succubi is a type of enemy Starship Titanic, by Douglas Adams, features a transportation system consisting of robots connected by pneumatic tubes, called the Succ-U-Bus, an ironic pun: the Succ-U-Bus speaks with a deep male voice (voiced by Adams himself), and does not behave at all like a succubus Noctropolis, a 1994 DOS computer third-person adventure game by Flashpoint Productions, Inc. and published by Electronic Arts. In the game, the player assumes the role of the character Peter Grey, a lonely bookstore owner who winds up in the world of his favorite comic book. In this game is a character known as The Succubus. The Witcher 2: Assassins of Kings, Succubus is a minor character who is accused of murdering young townsmen. She is presented as a beautiful girl with horns, goat legs and a small tail. The main character may engage in a sexual intercourse with her. There is also a minor quest in The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt featuring a succubus.[17] Dota 2, Queen of Pain is a playable hero that is portrayed as a succubus. Hearthstone, Succubus is a Warlock-exclusive minion. The Binding Of Isaac Rebirth, Lilith is a succubus that was added as a playable character in the Afterbirth DLC. MMORPGS[edit] Aura Kingdom has a demonic Eidolon, who can become your adventuring partner, by the name of Succubus.[18][circular reference] City of Heroes and City of Villains, succubi are members of the Circle of Thorns arcane enemy group and appear as red-skinned women with small horns and thigh-high boots. Their powers include Come Hither (confusion), Entrance (hold), Hellish Bolts, and Blackclaw (combat attacks).[19] EverQuest II, the necromancer class can summon a succubus, which has red skin, a devil tail, a short skirt, and a tube top; she grows horns when fighting, and is voiced by Susan Boyd Gaia Online has an evolving item called Alruna's Rose. This item, upon completion, features a pair of scantily-clad demons named Alruna the Succubus and Anurla the Incubus; the item gained infamy and popularity on the website for the provocative items and poses it yielded each phase Mabinogi, Succubi are the boss or bosses in a solo or advance run of the Rabbie Dungeon[20] Ragnarok Online, the succubus is a high-level dark attribute monster The Matrix Online, Succubi are Merovingian/Exile-affiliated NPCs who have the appearance of a beautiful woman and have a purple, red, or green see-through dress with matching long hair and eye colors World Of Warcraft, players who choose the Warlock class can summon a succubus as one of their controllable demons, who is depicted with bat wings, dark hair, pale red skin, hooves instead of feet, and a barbed tail, and whose abilities include "Seduction", a skill which renders humanoid monsters and players immobile Vindictus, The succubus is a boss type monster. she wears black clothing and has long black hair and black boots. Lineage II,The succubus are winged female monsters, dressed in seductive clothes.They are described as being either low-rank servants of the land dragon Antharas or maids employed by Palibati Queen Themis, a powerful undead located in the Seal of Shilen. References[edit] ^ Blood thirst: 100 years of vampire fiction ed. by Leonard Wolf. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-511593-7 ^ this is crazy Clute, John; John Grant (1999). The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. St. Martin's Griffin. p. 908. ISBN 978-0-312-19869-5. ^ Balzac, Honoré de. "The Succubus" ^ "Women as Demons, Tanith Lee". SF Mistressworks. 7 October 2014. Retrieved 1 February 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Two late '70s Tanith Lee stories: "The Demoness" & "Red as Blood"". MPorcius Fiction Log. 26 April 2015. Retrieved 1 February 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ ""The Demoness" by Tanith Lee (1975)". RAGEmachine Books. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Figurations of Rape and the Supernatural in Beloved" by Pamela E. Barnett. PMLA, Vol. 112, No. 3 (May 1997), pp. 418-427 JSTOR ^ "Utopias Limited: Post-sixties and Postmodern American Fiction" by DeKoven, Marianne. MFS Modern Fiction Studies - Volume 41, Number 1, Spring 1995, pp. 75-97 MUSE "Sethe's miraculous milk drains off into the succubus Beloved has become." ^ Issue 388 of Dan and Mab: "the succubus Destania had a child" .. "I just can't understand what would make you not want to be an incubus" ^ TheWebComicList: Demon Candy ^ "Cloe debut". Archived from the original on 2014-08-20. Retrieved 2016-11-18. ^ Dangerously Chloe ^ "Heartcore Page 1". Archived from the original on 2013-01-17. Retrieved 2013-02-11. ^ Gygax, Gary; Blume, Brian (1976). "Eldritch Wizardry" (1 ed.). Lake Geneva, WI: TSR. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ Bornet, Philippe (2011). Religions in play: games, rituals, and virtual worlds. Theologischer Verlag Zürich. p. 282. ISBN 978-3-290-22010-5. Retrieved 19 December 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ http://io9.gizmodo.com/the-12-most-obnoxious-dungeons-dragons-monsters-1628502769 ^ Hall, Mat (20 May 2015). "The Witcher 3 - Deadly Delights: how to kill Lilith, the succubus". Eurogamer. Gamer Network. Retrieved 29 August 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Aura Kingdom ^ http://paragonwiki.com/wiki/Circle_of_Thorns#Succubus ^ http://wiki.mabinogiworld.com/index.php?title=Rabbie_Dungeon