Sumerian inscription on a ceramic stone plaque. History of literature by era Bronze Age Ancient Egyptian Akkadian Sumerian Classical Avestan Chinese Greek Hebrew Latin Tamil Pali Prakrit Sanskrit Syriac Early Medieval Matter of Rome Matter of France Matter of Britain Armenian Byzantine Old English Georgian German Japanese Kannada Middle Persian Turkish Medieval Old Bulgarian Middle English Arabic Persian Armenian Byzantine Castilian Catalan Dutch French Georgian German Bengali Hindi Old Irish Italian Japanese Korean Malayalam Nepal Bhasa Norse Portuguese Russian Serbian Telugu Turkish Welsh Early Modern Renaissance Baroque Modern by century 18th 19th 20th 21st  Literature portal v t e Sumerian literature constitutes the earliest known corpus of recorded literature, including the religious writings and other traditional stories maintained by the Sumerian civilization and largely preserved by the later Akkadian and Babylonian empires. These records were written in the Sumerian language during the Middle Bronze Age. The Sumerians invented one of the first writing systems, developing Sumerian cuneiform writing out of earlier proto-writing systems by about the 30th century BC. The Sumerian language remained in official and literary use in the Akkadian and Babylonian empires, even after the spoken language disappeared from the population; literacy was widespread, and the Sumerian texts that students copied heavily influenced later Babylonian literature. Contents 1 Poetry 2 Literary works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Poetry[edit] Most Sumerian literature is written in left-justified lines,[1] and could contain line-based organization such as the couplet or the stanza,[2] but the Sumerian definition of poetry is unknown. It is not rhymed,[3][4] although “comparable effects were sometimes exploited.”[5] It did not use syllabo-tonic versification,[6] and the writing system precludes detection of rhythm, metre, rhyme,[7][8] or alliteration.[9] Quantitative analysis of other possible poetic features seems to be lacking, or has been intentionally hidden by the scribes who recorded the writing. Literary works[edit] Important works include: The poetry and hymns of Enheduanna A Creation and Flood Myth (translation) Three epic cycles: Two Enmerkar legends: Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta (translation) Enmerkar and En-suhgir-ana (translation) Two tales of Lugalbanda during Enmerkar's campaign against Aratta: Lugalbanda in the Mountain Cave (translation) Lugalbanda and the Anzud Bird (translation) Five stories in the Gilgamesh epic cycle: Gilgamesh and Huwawa (version A, version B) Gilgamesh and the Bull of Heaven (translation) Gilgamesh and Aga (translation) Gilgamesh, Enkidu and the Netherworld (translation) The Death of Gilgamesh (translation) The Kesh Temple Hymn (translation) The Lament for Ur (translation) A series of long poems about the exploits of the goddess Inanna Inanna and the Mes (translation) Inanna and Ebih (translation) Inanna and Shukaletuda (translation) Inanna and Gudam (translation) Inanna and An (translation) The Descent of Inanna into the Underworld (translation) The Dream of Dumuzid (translation) See also[edit] Asia portal Literature portal Akkadian literature Ancient Egyptian literature Cuneiform law Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature Sumerian creation myth References[edit] ^ Black et al., Introduction ^ Michalowski p. 144 ^ Jacobsen p. xiv ^ Black et al., Introduction ^ Black p. 8 ^ Michalowski p. 146 ^ Jacobsen p. xiv ^ Black et al., Introduction ^ Black et al., Introduction Further reading[edit] Samuel Noah Kramer (1963). The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0226452388. Thorkild Jacobsen (1987). The Harps that Once...: Sumerian Poetry in Translation. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0300072785. JSTOR j.ctt32bjgs. Piotr Michalowski (1996). "Ancient Poetics". In M. E. Vogelzang; H. L. J. Vanstiphout (eds.). Mesopotamian Poetic Language: Sumerian and Akkadian. Styx. Jeremy Black (1998). Reading Sumerian Poetry. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0801435980. Jeremy Black; Graham Cunningham; Eleanor Robson; Gábor Zólyomi (2006). The Literature of Ancient Sumer. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199296330. Shin Shifra (2008). Words as Magic and the Magic in Words. Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, The Israeli Ministry of Defence Press (in Hebrew). These are transcriptions of Shifra's discourses on literature of the Ancient Near East, first broadcast as a "University on the Air" course on the Israeli Army Radio. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature Catalogue of literary works at the Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature v t e Ancient Mesopotamia Geography Modern Euphrates Upper Mesopotamia Mesopotamian Marshes Persian Gulf Syrian Desert Taurus Mountains Tigris Zagros Mountains Ancient Akkad Assyria Babylonia Chaldea Elam Hittites Media Mitanni Sumer Urartu Cities History Pre- / Protohistory Acheulean Mousterian Trialetian Zarzian Natufian Nemrikian Khiamian Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) Hassuna/Samarra Halaf Ubaid Uruk Jemdet Nasr Kish civilization History Early Dynastic Akkadian Gutians Simurrum Ur III Isin-Larsa Old Babylonian Kassite Middle Babylonian Neo-Assyrian Neo-Babylonian Achaemenid Seleucid Parthian Roman Sasanian Muslim conquest Timeline of the Assyrian Empire Hakkari Languages Akkadian Amorite Aramaic Eblaite Elamite Gutian Hittite Hurrian Luwian Middle Persian Old Persian Parthian Proto-Armenian Sumerian Urartian Culture / Society Architecture Art Cuneiform Akkadian literature Sumerian literature Music Religion Indus-Mesopotamia relations Egypt-Mesopotamia relations Royal titles Archaeology Looting Destruction by ISIL Tell