Cover art by Ariel Olivetti Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator is a comic book co-published by DC Comics and Dark Horse Comics. It was written by Mark Schultz, with art by Ariel Olivetti. It is a crossover in which Superman and Batman have to battle both the Aliens and Predator. While both superheroes have had crossovers with the monsters individually, this was the first time they were with both at the same time.[1] The two-part series was released on January 8 and then on February 14, 2007.[1] Contents 1 Plot 2 Publication 3 Other media 3.1 Merchandise 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] The story takes place somewhere in the Andes. It is revealed that during the Ice Age, a Predator ship landed on Earth and could not leave because it could not escape its gravitational pull. The Predators landed in a then-dormant volcano. Now in our modern time, a mountain climbing crew has gone missing in the Andes. Batman becomes the emissary of Superman, whom the Predators believe to be a sun spirit, through a show of strength. They decide to help the Predators leave Earth for the good of themselves and the planet. Publication[edit] Superman and Batman vs. Aliens and Predator (by Mark Schultz and Ariel Olivetti, two-issue miniseries, January 2007, tpb, 112 pages, DC Comics, May 2007, ISBN 1-4012-1328-6) Other media[edit] Merchandise[edit] In 2019, toy company NECA unveiled a series of action figure box sets inspired by the crossover, as well as the prior Superman/Aliens and Batman vs Predator miniseries.[2][3] The figure sets included: Superman and Xenomorph Armored Batman and Predator Batman and Joker Xenomorph Green Lantern (Hal Jordan) (with alternate John Stewart head) and Sinestro Corps Predator See also[edit] Superman/Aliens Superman/Batman Aliens Versus Predator Superman vs. Predator Batman/Aliens Batman Versus Predator Batman: Dead End References[edit] ^ a b Arave, Lynn (2007-01-19). "Superman and Batman join forces". Deseret News. ^ https://www.slashfilm.com/superman-vs-aliens-and-batman-vs-predator-action-figures/ ^ https://thefwoosh.com/2019/08/neca-nycc-exclusive-dc-dark-horse-green-lantern-vs-predator-promotional-images/ Superman and Batman Vs. Aliens and Predator at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) External links[edit] DC page v t e Alien vs. Predator Films Alien vs. Predator (2004) Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem (2007) Characters Alien Predator Music Alien vs. Predator Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem "Wach auf! Comics Aliens versus Predator Aliens/Predator: Deadliest of the Species Aliens versus Predator versus The Terminator Mindhunter Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Alien vs. Predator: Sand Trap Fire and Stone Novels Aliens vs. Predator: Prey Aliens vs. Predator: Hunter's Planet Aliens vs. Predator: War Games Aliens Predator Customizable Card Game Alien vs Predator (SNES) Alien vs. Predator (arcade) Alien vs Predator (Jaguar) Aliens versus Predator (1999) Aliens versus Predator 2 Aliens versus Predator: Extinction Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem Aliens vs. Predator (2010) Other AVPX Franchises Alien Predator Related AVH: Alien vs. Hunter Alien Loves Predator Batman: Dead End Category v t e Batman publications and storylines Current series Detective Comics (#27) Batman Batman Beyond Catwoman Harley Quinn Nightwing Red Hood and the Outlaws Completed ongoing series Azrael Batgirl Batgirl and the Birds of Prey Batman and Robin Batman and the Outsiders Batman: Arkham Unhinged Batman: The Dark Knight Batman: Gotham Knights Batman: Legends of the Dark Knight Batman: Shadow of the Bat Batman: Streets of Gotham The Batman Adventures The Batman Chronicles Batman Confidential Batman Family Batman Incorporated Batman/Superman Batwing Batwoman Birds of Prey The Brave and the Bold Gotham by Midnight Gotham Central Gotham City Sirens The Huntress The Joker Man-Bat Red Hood/Arsenal Red Robin Robin Robin: Son of Batman Superman/Batman We Are... Robin World's Finest Comics Completed limited series Anarky Batgirl: Year One Batman & Dracula trilogy Batman and Robin Eternal Batman and the Mad Monk Batman and the Monster Men Batman: Arkham City Batman: Battle for the Cowl Batman Black and White Batman: Cacophony Batman: The Cult Batman: Damned Batman: The Dark Prince Charming The Dark Knight Returns The Dark Knight Strikes Again The Dark Knight III: The Master Race Batman: Dark Victory Batman: The Doom That Came to Gotham Batman Eternal Batman: Gates of Gotham Batman: GCPD Batman: Gotham County Line Batman: The Long Halloween Batman: Nosferatu Batman: Orpheus Rising Batman: The Return of Bruce Wayne Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Batman: Three Jokers Batman: Thrillkiller Batman: Turning Points Batman: White Knight The Batman Who Laughs Batman: The Widening Gyre Batman: Year 100 Bat-Mite First Wave Gotham Underground Man-Bat Red Hood: The Lost Days Robin: Year One Section 8 Superman & Batman: Generations Trinity The Untold Legend of the Batman One-shots Arkham Asylum: A Serious House on Serious Earth Castle of the Bat Dark Knight Dynasty Dark Night: A True Batman Story Death of Innocents Digital Justice Gotham Noir Holy Terror Batman/Houdini: The Devil's Workshop In Darkest Knight The Killing Joke KnightGallery Leatherwing The Man Who Laughs Nine Lives Noël Son of the Demon The 12 Cent Adventure Two Faces The Batman Adventures: Mad Love The Berlin Batman Gotham by Gaslight Joker Storylines "Dark Moon Rising" "The Man Behind the Red Hood!" "The Joker's Millions" "Year One" "Year Two" "Batman: A Death in the Family" "Year Three" "The Man Who Falls" "Anarky in Gotham City" "Gothic" "The Return of the Joker" "Prey" "The Last Arkham" "Knightfall" "Contagion" "Legacy" "Cataclysm" "No Man's Land" "Joker: Last Laugh" "Bruce Wayne: Fugitive" "Hush" "Batman: Broken City" "War Games" "City of Crime" "Under the Hood" "War Crimes" "Face the Face" "Batman and Son" "The Resurrection of Ra's al Ghul" "Batman R.I.P." "Whatever Happened to the Caped Crusader?" "Batwoman: Elegy" "Bruce Wayne: The Road Home" "Batman: Night of the Owls" "Batman: Death of the Family" "Zero Year" "Batman: Endgame" "Robin War" "Dark Nights: Metal" "Joker War" "Dark Nights: Death Metal" Intercompany crossovers Batman/Aliens Batman/Daredevil: King of New York Batman/Hellboy/Starman Batman/Judge Dredd: Judgment on Gotham Batman-Spawn: War Devil Batman & Spider-Man: New Age Dawning Batman/Tarzan: Claws of the Cat-woman Batman/Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Batman/The Spirit Batman Versus Predator Daredevil/Batman: Eye for an Eye Spawn/Batman Spider-Man and Batman: Disordered Minds Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Incomplete All Star Batman & Robin, the Boy Wonder Batman: Earth One Related topics Batman: Anarky Batman: Child of Dreams Batman: Haunted Knight Batman Legends DC Comics – The Legend of Batman Elseworlds Publications are listed alphabetically by published titles. Storylines are listed in publication order. Compiled without respect for canon or "current" continuity. v t e Superman publications and storylines History Current series Action Comics Superman Supergirl Former series Adventure Comics Batman/Superman DC Comics Presents Superboy Superboy and the Ravers Superman (vol. 2) Superman/Batman Superman Confidential The Superman Family Superman: The Man of Steel Superman: The Man of Tomorrow Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen Superman/Wonder Woman Trinity World's Finest Comics Limited series and one-shots Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Green Lantern/Superman: Legend of the Green Flame The Kents Lex Luthor: Man of Steel Lex Luthor: The Unauthorized Biography Birthright The Man of Steel Superman and Wonder Woman: The Hidden Killer Superman for All Seasons Superman/Shazam: First Thunder Superman Unchained Superman vs. Muhammad Ali Superman: Last Stand of New Krypton Superman: Secret Origin Superman: World of New Krypton Superman: The Wedding Album Superman: War of the Supermen Superman: Lois and Clark World of Krypton Outside continuity All-Star Superman "The K-Metal from Krypton" "The Sandman Saga" Son of Superman Superboy: The Comic Book Superboy's Legion Superman Adventures Superman: At Earth's End Superman: Earth One Superman: The Last Family of Krypton Superman: The Feral Man of Steel Superman: Last Son of Earth Superman: Last Stand on Krypton Superman's Metropolis The Superman Monster Superman: Red Son Superman: Secret Identity Superman: Speeding Bullets Superman: The Dark Side Superman: True Brit Superman: War of the Worlds Superman & Batman: Generations Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow? Whom Gods Destroy Crossovers Superman/Aliens Superman & Bugs Bunny Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Superman vs. The Amazing Spider-Man Superman and Spider-Man Superman/Fantastic Four Superman vs. Predator Superman/Tarzan: Sons of the Jungle Superman vs. The Terminator: Death to the Future Storylines "For the Man Who Has Everything" "The Greatest Hero of Them All" "The Death of Superman" "Worlds Collide" "The Trial of Superman!" "Superman Red/Superman Blue" "What's So Funny About Truth, Justice & the American Way?" "For Tomorrow" "Up, Up and Away!" "Last Son" "Kryptonite" "Superman and the Legion of Super-Heroes" "The Third Kryptonian" "The Coming of Atlas" "Brainiac" "New Krypton" "World of New Krypton" "World Without Superman" "Last Stand of New Krypton" War of the Supermen "Grounded" "Reign of Doomsday" "H'El on Earth" "Superman: Doomed" Superman Reborn (comics) "Super Sons of Tomorrow" Other Superman (comic strip) Superman: The Complete Comic Strips 1939-1966 Action Comics #1 Action Comics #1000 v t e Superman / Batman crossover media Comic books World's Finest Comics Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Superman/Batman Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Television The Batman/Superman Hour The Superman/Batman Adventures The New Batman/Superman Adventures Books Enemies & Allies Film Superman/Batman: Public Enemies Superman/Batman: Apocalypse Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Fan works World's Finest How It Should Have Ended Miscellaneaous Composite Superman Hiro Okamura DC Extended Universe A This Alien media franchise-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This DC Comics–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This Dark Horse Comics-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e