For the American classic motorcycle, see Excelsior Super X. This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) VTOL craft Super X Type VTOL craft Place of origin Japan Specifications Mass 150 tons Length 27.2 meters Height 11.2 meters Crew 4 Main armament Cadmium missiles Secondary armament Machine guns Laser cannons Suspension rotors Maximum speed mach 1 Remotely operated VTOL craft Super X-II Type Remotely operated VTOL craft Place of origin Japan Specifications Mass 220 tons Length 34 meters Height 11 meters Main armament Fire-Mirror Secondary armament Torpedoes Gatling guns Suspension rotors Maximum speed mach 1 VTOL craft Super X-III Type VTOL craft Place of origin Japan Specifications Mass 220 tons Length 38.5 meters Height 7.4 meters Crew 3 Main armament Freezer beam Secondary armament Cadmium missiles Suspension rotors Maximum speed mach 1.7 The Super X (スーパーX, Sūpā Ekkusu) is a fictional Japanese military aircraft featured in the 1984 Heisei Godzilla film The Return of Godzilla. The concept and basic design were reused for the Super X-II in 1989's Godzilla vs. Biollante and the Super X-III in 1995's Godzilla vs. Destoroyah, both under the command of Sho Kuroki, Special Pilot of the Defense Agency. Contents 1 Variations 1.1 Super X 1.2 Super X-II 1.3 Super X-III 2 Appearances 2.1 Films 2.2 Video games 2.3 Literature 3 References Variations[edit] Super X[edit] The Super X was a joint project of the Ground and Air Self-Defense Forces. Designated the Capital Defense Mobile Fortress T-1, it was a piloted VTOL craft constructed in secret to defend the Capital of Japan in case of emergency, in particular a nuclear attack. It was operated by a crew of six, armored with heat-resistant titanium alloy integrated with platinum circuitry, heavily armed with missiles, machine guns, and high-intensity lasers, and used three underside rotors for lift. The craft was thus well-suited to engage Godzilla in Shinjuku when the monster invaded Tokyo in 1984. Its magazine of missiles were fitted with cadmium warheads, which were temporarily able to control the nuclear reactions keeping Godzilla alive. After an American anti-ballistic missile is sent to intercept and destroy an accidentally-launched Soviet nuclear missile in the stratosphere above Tokyo, a spectacular lightning storm occurs that revives Godzilla. Godzilla and the Super X then have a final battle. With its store of cadmium missiles depleted, the Super X no longer had the upper hand. Godzilla fires an atomic breath blast that erodes the warship's armor causing its rotors to fail, and it crash lands near the Sumitomo Building. Godzilla then destroys the Super X by toppling the building on to it. Super X-II[edit] A sleeker but broader shape defined the second Super X, a remotely operated VTOL craft designed specifically to combat Godzilla. It sported TA32 armor, claimed to be twice as resistant as the previous craft's; it also introduced the "Fire Mirror", a configuration of synthetic diamond designed to reflect Godzilla's ray, intensified 1,000-fold, though not as heat-resistant as the TA32. During the Super X-II's first bout with Godzilla, after several effective counterattacks the Fire Mirror began to melt. Godzilla's ray and tail damaged the ship, which was forced to retreat for repairs. Later, in Osaka, the Super X-II served as a decoy to maneuver Godzilla into firing range of a bazooka troop equipped with shells containing a biological agent, the newly-developed Anti-Nuclear Energy Bacteria. The craft lured Godzilla almost into range of the troop until it ran out of missiles, at which point Major Kuroki ordered the still-damaged Fire Mirror to be engaged. Godzilla's next blast crippled the craft, which crashed into Osaka Business Park. Though the Super X-II was lost, Godzilla was now in range of the soldiers, and the mission to infect him with the biological agent succeeded. The Super X-II appeared in Godzilla 2: War of the Monsters, a video game for the Nintendo Entertainment system as a playable unit, and made a cameo appearance in the final portion of the videogame Super Godzilla. The game manual described the Super X-II as being a mobile command center from which the player controlled Godzilla via the use of a special device that had been fired into Godzilla's body. The Super X-II, referred to simply as the Super X, despite the obvious design difference, also shoots down the final alien mothership in the game's final cutscene. The Super X-II also appears in Godzilla Generations, in the sixth and eighth levels. Unlike the Super X, the Super X-II will fly toward the character and strafe him rather than sitting and circling. The first few passes it may do nothing, but if the player begins attacking it will fire cadmium missiles and eventually use the Fire Mirror, which can reflect any playable monster's breath weapon, including the American Godzilla's. The Super X-II is tougher than the Super X and takes more hits to bring down. Alongside the Super X and Super X-III, the Super X-II makes an appearance in the 2014 Godzilla game for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4, where it appears as a stage boss. Befitting its appearance in Godzilla vs. Biollante, the Super X-II can make use of its Fire Mirror to reflect the player’s beam attacks. Super X-III[edit] Whereas Godzilla defense measures had by 1995 become the role of G-Force, the multipurpose fighter plane Super X-III was not designed exclusively as an anti-Godzilla weapon, but rather (as with the original Super X) to respond to a nuclear accident or attack. The winged V/STOL craft's central features are its cooling weapons, the Super-Low Temperature Beam and Freezing Missiles. Also like the original, it is piloted and operated by a three-person crew and equipped with cadmium missiles intended for long-range nuclear reaction control. Artificial diamond is incorporated into its alloy armor, making it strong enough to withstand repeated hits from Godzilla's ray. When Godzilla manifested signs of an imminent nuclear meltdown, G-Force's offensive weapons were determined unusable, and the Super X-III was called into action. Piloted (this time from within) by Kuroki, the craft engaged Godzilla at sea, using its cooling weapons to freeze Godzilla and cadmium missiles to slow its internal reactor. Encased in ice, Godzilla sank into the Bungo aqueduct. During Godzilla's later battle with Destoroyah the Super X-III looked on, preparing to again shell Godzilla with cadmium when it hit a critical meltdown temperature. When Destoroyah attempted to flee, the Super X-III launched an ambush in combination with units on the ground. The aircraft fired its Low Temperature Beam, shredding Destoroyah’s wings and causing the monster to fall from the sky, whereupon he was killed instantly and disintegrated after colliding with the ground that had been superheated by Godzilla. Though it fired several cadmium shells at Godzilla during the subsequent meltdown, protected by its armor from the immense nuclear fallout, it was unable to control the process. This Super X is the only such vehicle to have beaten Godzilla (albeit temporarily) without being destroyed as well. The Super X-III appears in Godzilla: Save the Earth as an obstacle that can be summoned by obtaining a power up. Characters hit by its missiles become temporarily frozen, leaving them vulnerable to their opponent. The Super X-III is the final "boss" enemy in Godzilla Generations. Appearing in the tenth and final level, which is Tokyo from The Return of Godzilla with the main theme from the film, the Super X-III behaves similarly to the Super X-II. However, the Super X-III often begins attacking with the first run and uses both lasers and missiles (without the freezing properties). It has very high armor and is faster than the Super X-II, making it very difficult to take down quickly. It is also much larger than its forerunners, with a length 1/3 that of Godzilla's height and a wingspan over 1/2 his height. All three models in the Super X line appear in Godzilla. Appearances[edit] Films[edit] The Return of Godzilla (1984) - as Super X Godzilla vs. Biollante (1989) - as Super X-II Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995) - as Super X-III Video games[edit] Godzilla Trading Battle (PlayStation - 1998) Godzilla: Save the Earth (Xbox, PS2 - 2004) Godzilla (2014 video game) (PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4) Literature[edit] Terror of Godzilla (Comic - 1998) - as Super X References[edit] v t e Godzilla Films Toho films Shōwa era Godzilla (1954) Godzilla, King of the Monsters! Godzilla Raids Again (1955) King Kong vs. Godzilla (1962) Mothra vs. Godzilla (1964) Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster (1964) Invasion of Astro-Monster (1965) Ebirah, Horror of the Deep (1966) Son of Godzilla (1967) Destroy All Monsters (1968) All Monsters Attack (1969) Godzilla vs. Hedorah (1971) Godzilla vs. Gigan (1972) Godzilla vs. Megalon (1973) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla (1974) Terror of Mechagodzilla (1975) Heisei era The Return of Godzilla (1984) Godzilla 1985 Godzilla vs. Biollante (1989) Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah (1991) Godzilla vs. Mothra (1992) Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II (1993) Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla (1994) Godzilla vs. Destoroyah (1995) Millennium era Godzilla 2000 (1999) Godzilla vs. Megaguirus (2000) Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack (2001) Godzilla Against Mechagodzilla (2002) Godzilla: Tokyo S.O.S. (2003) Godzilla: Final Wars (2004) Reiwa era Shin Godzilla (2016) Godzilla: Planet of the Monsters (2017) Godzilla: City on the Edge of Battle (2018) Godzilla: The Planet Eater (2018) American films TriStar Pictures Godzilla (1998) Legendary Pictures (MonsterVerse) Godzilla (2014) Godzilla: King of the Monsters (2019) Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) Television Japanese Zone Fighter (1973) Godzilland (1992–1996) Godzilla Island (1997–1998) episodes Godzilla Singular Point (2021–) American Godzilla (1978–1979) Godzilla: The Series (1998–2000) Music Blue Öyster Cult song Main Theme 1998 film soundtrack Godzilla March Eminem song Miscellaneous Godzilla in popular culture -zilla Comics Video games Locations The Movie Monster Game Battle Soccer: Field no Hasha Godzilla Game Godzilla (Scott Ciencin series) Godzilla (Marc Cerasini series) Bambi Meets Godzilla Godzilla vs. Charles Barkley Gotengo Miki Saegusa Monsterland and Monster Island Monster Planet of Godzilla Super X Toho SciFi Japan TV MonsterVerse King Kong (franchise) Hibiya Godzilla Square Legendary Giant Beast Wolfman vs. Godzilla Kaiju Godzilla Anguirus Rodan Moguera Varan Mothra King Kong Manda Dogora King Ghidorah Baragon Frankenstein Ebirah Mechani-Kong Gorosaurus Kamacuras Kumonga Minilla Hedorah Gigan Megalon King Caesar Mechagodzilla Titanosaurus Biollante Godzilla Junior SpaceGodzilla Destoroyah Megaguirus Zilla MUTO Book Category