Fictional superhero This article is about the superhero. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Kal-El / Clark Kent Superman Superman in Superman: Secret Origin #6 (October 2010). Art by Gary Frank and Jon Sibal Publication information Publisher DC Comics First appearance Action Comics #1 (cover-dated June 1938; published April 18, 1938) Created by Jerry Siegel (writer) Joe Shuster (artist) In-story information Alter ego Kal-El (birth name) Clark Joseph Kent (adopted name) Species Kryptonian Place of origin Kryptonopolis (Krypton) Smallville / Metropolis (Earth) Team affiliations Justice League Legion of Super-Heroes Superman Family Partnerships Supergirl (various) Superboy (various) Superdog (Krypto) Batman Wonder Woman Notable aliases The Man of Steel The Last Son of Krypton The Man of Tomorrow Abilities See list Superhuman strength, speed, stamina, agility, durability, senses, and longevity Ocular powers Heat vision Electromagnetic spectrum vision Microscopic vision X-ray vision Telescopic vision Infrared vision Superhuman breath Freeze breath Wind breath Invulnerability Accelerated healing Flight Superman is a fictional superhero, who first appeared in American comic books published by DC Comics. The character was created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster, and first appeared in the comic book Action Comics #1 (cover-dated June 1938 and published April 18, 1938).[1] Superman has been adapted to a number of other media which includes radio serials, novels, movies, television shows and theatre. Superman was born on the planet Krypton and was given the name Kal-El at birth. As a baby, his parents sent him to Earth in a small spaceship moments before Krypton was destroyed in a natural cataclysm. His ship landed in the American countryside, near the fictional town of Smallville. He was found and adopted by farmers Jonathan and Martha Kent, who named him Clark Kent. Clark developed various superhuman abilities, such as incredible strength and impervious skin. His adoptive parents advised him to use his abilities for the benefit of humanity, and he decided to fight crime as a vigilante. To protect his privacy, he changes into a colorful costume and uses the alias "Superman" when fighting crime. Clark Kent resides in the fictional American city of Metropolis, where he works as a journalist for the Daily Planet. Superman's supporting characters include his love interest and fellow journalist Lois Lane, Daily Planet photographer Jimmy Olsen and editor-in-chief Perry White. His classic foe is Lex Luthor, who is either a mad scientist or a ruthless businessman, depending on the story. Although Superman was not the first superhero character, he popularized the superhero archetype and established its conventions. Superheroes are usually judged by how closely they resemble the standard set by Superman. He was the best-selling superhero character in American comic books up until the 1980s.[2] Contents 1 Creation and conception 1.1 Influences 2 Comics 2.1 Comic books 2.2 Newspaper strips 2.3 Editors 2.4 Aesthetic style 3 In other media 3.1 Radio 3.2 Stage 3.3 Film 3.4 Television 3.5 Video games 4 Merchandising 5 Copyright issues 5.1 Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster 5.2 Captain Marvel 6 Character overview 6.1 Superman himself 6.2 Clark Kent 6.3 Personality 6.4 Powers, abilities, and weaknesses 6.5 Supporting characters 6.6 Antagonists 6.7 Alternative depictions 7 Cultural impact 7.1 The superhero archetype 7.2 Fine Art 7.3 Parodies and homages 7.4 Musical references 8 Literary analysis 8.1 The superhero archetype 8.2 An allegory for immigrants 8.3 Religious themes 9 See also 10 Footnotes 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Creation and conception[edit] Jerry Siegel, writer Joe Shuster, illustrator Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster met in 1932 while attending Glenville High School in Cleveland and bonded over their admiration of fiction. Siegel aspired to become a writer and Shuster aspired to become an illustrator. Siegel wrote amateur science fiction stories, which he self-published as a magazine called Science Fiction: The Advance Guard of Future Civilization. His friend Shuster often provided illustrations for his work.[3] In January 1933, Siegel published a short story in his magazine titled "The Reign of the Superman". The titular character is a vagrant named Bill Dunn who is tricked by an evil scientist into consuming an experimental drug. The drug gives Dunn the powers of mind-reading, mind-control, and clairvoyance. He uses these powers maliciously for profit and amusement, but then the drug wears off, leaving him a powerless vagrant again. Shuster provided illustrations, depicting Dunn as a bald man.[4] "The Reign of the Superman", a short story by Jerry Siegel (January 1933) Siegel and Shuster shifted to making comic strips, with a focus on adventure and comedy. They wanted to become syndicated newspaper strip authors, so they showed their ideas to various newspaper editors. However, the newspaper editors told them that their ideas weren't sensational enough. If they wanted to make a successful comic strip, it had to be something more sensational than anything else on the market. This prompted Siegel to revisit Superman as a comic strip character.[5][6] Siegel modified Superman's powers to make him even more sensational: Like Bill Dunn, the second prototype of Superman is given powers against his will by an unscrupulous scientist, but instead of psychic abilities, he acquires superhuman strength and bullet-proof skin.[7][8] Additionally, this new Superman was a crime-fighting hero instead of a villain, because Siegel noted that comic strips with heroic protagonists tended to be more successful.[9] In later years, Siegel once recalled that this Superman wore a "bat-like" cape in some panels, but typically he and Shuster agreed there was no costume yet, and there is none apparent in the surviving artwork.[10][11] Siegel and Shuster showed this second concept of Superman to Consolidated Book Publishers, based in Chicago.[12][a] In May 1933, Consolidated had published a proto-comic book titled Detective Dan: Secret Operative 48.[13] It contained all-original stories as opposed to reprints of newspaper strips, which was a novelty at the time.[14] Siegel and Shuster put together a comic book in similar format called The Superman. A delegation from Consolidated visited Cleveland that summer on a business trip and Siegel and Shuster took the opportunity to present their work in person.[15][16] Although Consolidated expressed interest, they later pulled out of the comics business without ever offering a book deal because the sales of Detective Dan were disappointing.[17][18] Cover of an unpublished comic book, 1933 Siegel believed publishers kept rejecting them because he and Shuster were young and unknown, so he looked for an established artist to replace Shuster.[19] When Siegel told Shuster what he was doing, Shuster reacted by burning their rejected Superman comic, sparing only the cover. They continued collaborating on other projects, but for the time being Shuster was through with Superman.[20] Siegel wrote to numerous artists.[19] The first response came in July 1933 from Leo O'Mealia, who drew the Fu Manchu strip for the Bell Syndicate.[21][22] In the script that Siegel sent O'Mealia, Superman's origin story changes: He is a "scientist-adventurer" from the far future when humanity has naturally evolved "superpowers". Just before the Earth explodes, he escapes in a time-machine to the modern era, whereupon he immediately begins using his superpowers to fight crime.[23] O'Mealia produced a few strips and showed them to his newspaper syndicate, but they were rejected. O'Mealia did not send to Siegel any copies of his strips, and they have been lost.[24] In June 1934, Siegel found another partner: an artist in Chicago named Russell Keaton.[25][26] Keaton drew the Buck Rogers and Skyroads comic strips. In the script that Siegel sent Keaton in June, Superman's origin story further evolved: In the distant future, when Earth is on the verge of exploding due to "giant cataclysms", the last surviving man sends his three-year-old son back in time to the year 1935. The time-machine appears on a road where it is discovered by motorists Sam and Molly Kent. They leave the boy in an orphanage, but the staff struggle to control him because he has superhuman strength and impenetrable skin. The Kents adopt the boy and name him Clark, and teach him that he must use his fantastic natural gifts for the benefit of humanity. In November, Siegel sent Keaton an extension of his script: an adventure where Superman foils a conspiracy to kidnap a star football player. The extended script mentions that Clark puts on a special "uniform" when assuming the identity of Superman, but it is not described.[27] Keaton produced two weeks' worth of strips based on Siegel's script. In November, Keaton showed his strips to a newspaper syndicate, but they too were rejected, and he abandoned the project.[28][29] Siegel and Shuster reconciled and resumed developing Superman together. The character became an alien from the planet Krypton. Shuster designed the now-familiar costume: tights with an "S" on the chest, over-shorts, and a cape.[30][31][32] They made Clark Kent a journalist who pretends to be timid, and conceived his colleague Lois Lane, who is attracted to the bold and mighty Superman but does not realize that he and Kent are the same person.[33] Concept art c. 1934/1935. Note the laced boots, based on those of strongmen and classical heroes.[34] In June 1935 Siegel and Shuster finally found work with National Allied Publications, a comic magazine publishing company in New York owned by Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson.[35] Wheeler-Nicholson published two of their strips in New Fun Comics #6 (1935): "Henri Duval" and "Doctor Occult".[36] Siegel and Shuster also showed him Superman and asked him to market Superman to the newspapers on their behalf.[37] In October, Wheeler-Nicholson offered to publish Superman in one of his own magazines.[38] Siegel and Shuster refused his offer because Wheeler-Nicholson had demonstrated himself to be an irresponsible businessman. He had been slow to respond to their letters and hadn't paid them for their work in New Fun Comics #6. They chose to keep marketing Superman to newspaper syndicates themselves.[39][40] Despite the erratic pay, Siegel and Shuster kept working for Wheeler-Nicholson because he was the only publisher who was buying their work, and over the years they produced other adventure strips for his magazines.[41] Wheeler-Nicholson's financial difficulties continued to mount. In 1936, he formed a joint corporation with Harry Donenfeld and Jack Liebowitz called Detective Comics, Inc. in order to release his third magazine, which was titled Detective Comics. Siegel and Shuster produced stories for Detective Comics too, such as "Slam Bradley". Wheeler-Nicholson fell into deep debt to Donenfeld and Liebowitz, and in early January 1938, Donenfeld and Liebowitz petitioned Wheeler-Nicholson's company into bankruptcy and seized it.[3][42] In early December 1937, Siegel visited Liebowitz in New York, and Liebowitz asked Siegel to produce some comics for an upcoming comic anthology magazine called Action Comics.[43][44] Siegel proposed some new stories, but not Superman. Siegel and Shuster were, at the time, negotiating a deal with the McClure Newspaper Syndicate for Superman. In early January 1938, Siegel had a three-way telephone conversation with Liebowitz and an employee of McClure named Max Gaines. Gaines informed Siegel that McClure had rejected Superman, and asked if he could forward their Superman strips to Liebowitz so that Liebowitz could consider them for Action Comics. Siegel agreed.[45] Liebowitz and his colleagues were impressed by the strips, and they asked Siegel and Shuster to develop the strips into 13 pages for Action Comics.[46] Having grown tired of rejections, Siegel and Shuster accepted the offer; at least now they would see Superman published.[47][48] Siegel and Shuster submitted their work in late February and were paid $130 (equivalent to $2,361 in 2019) for their work ($10 per page).[49] In early March they signed a contract (at Liebowitz's request) in which they gave away the copyright for Superman to Detective Comics, Inc. This was normal practice in the business, and Siegel and Shuster had given away the copyrights to their previous works as well[50] (see the Copyright issues section of this article for more details on this matter). The duo's revised version of Superman appeared in the first issue of Action Comics, which was published on April 18, 1938. The issue was a huge success thanks to Superman’s feature.[1][51][52] Influences[edit] Siegel and Shuster read pulp science-fiction and adventure magazines, and many stories featured characters with fantastical abilities such as telepathy, clairvoyance, and superhuman strength. One character in particular was John Carter of Mars from the novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs. John Carter is a human who is transported to Mars, where the lower gravity makes him stronger than the natives and allows him to leap great distances.[53][54] Another influence was Philip Wylie's 1930 novel Gladiator, featuring a protagonist named Hugo Danner who had similar powers.[55][56] Superman's stance and devil-may-care attitude were influenced by the characters of Douglas Fairbanks, who starred in adventure films such as The Mark of Zorro and Robin Hood.[57] The name of Superman's home city, Metropolis, was taken from the 1927 film of the same name.[58] Popeye cartoons were also an influence.[58] Douglas Fairbanks (left) and Harold Lloyd (right) influenced the look of Superman and Clark Kent, respectively. Clark Kent's harmless facade and dual identity were inspired by the protagonists of such movies as Don Diego de la Vega in The Mark of Zorro and Sir Percy Blakeney in The Scarlet Pimpernel. Siegel thought this would make for interesting dramatic contrast and good humor.[59][60] Another inspiration was slapstick comedian Harold Lloyd. The archetypal Lloyd character was a mild-mannered man who finds himself abused by bullies but later in the story snaps and fights back furiously.[61] Kent is a journalist because Siegel often imagined himself becoming one after leaving school. The love triangle between Lois Lane, Clark, and Superman was inspired by Siegel's own awkwardness with girls.[62] The pair collected comic strips in their youth, with a favorite being Winsor McCay's fantastical Little Nemo.[58] Shuster remarked on the artists which played an important part in the development of his own style: "Alex Raymond and Burne Hogarth were my idols – also Milt Caniff, Hal Foster, and Roy Crane."[58] Shuster taught himself to draw by tracing over the art in the strips and magazines they collected.[3] As a boy, Shuster was interested in fitness culture[63] and a fan of strongmen such as Siegmund Breitbart and Joseph Greenstein. He collected fitness magazines and manuals and used their photographs as visual references for his art.[3] The visual design of Superman came from multiple influences. The tight-fitting suit and shorts were inspired by the costumes of wrestlers, boxers, and strongmen. In early concept art, Shuster gave Superman laced sandals like those of strongmen and classical heroes, but these were eventually changed to red boots.[34] The costumes of Douglas Fairbanks were also an influence.[64] The emblem on his chest may have been inspired by the uniforms of athletic teams. Many pulp action heroes such as swashbucklers wore capes. Superman's face was based on Johnny Weissmuller with touches derived from the comic-strip character Dick Tracy and from the work of cartoonist Roy Crane.[65] The word "superman" was commonly used in the 1920s and 1930s to describe men of great ability, most often athletes and politicians.[66] It occasionally appeared in pulp fiction stories as well, such as "The Superman of Dr. Jukes".[67] It is unclear whether Siegel and Shuster were influenced by Friedrich Nietzsche's concept of the Übermensch; they never acknowledged as much.[68] Comics[edit] See also: Publication history of Superman and Superman (franchise) Comic books[edit] See also: List of Superman comics The cover of Superman #6 (Sept. 1940) by Joe Shuster, the original artist and co-creator. Since 1938, Superman stories have been regularly published in periodical comic books published by DC Comics. The first and oldest of these is Action Comics, which began in April 1938.[1] Action Comics was initially an anthology magazine, but it eventually became dedicated to Superman stories. The second oldest periodical is Superman, which began in June 1939. Action Comics and Superman have been published without interruption (ignoring changes to the title and numbering scheme).[70][71] A number of other shorter-lived Superman periodicals have been published over the years.[72] Superman is part of the DC Universe, which is a shared universe of superhero characters owned by DC Comics, and consequently he frequently appears in stories alongside the likes of Batman, Wonder Woman, and others. Superman has sold more comic books over his publication history than any other American superhero character.[73] Exact sales figures for the early decades of Superman comic books are hard to find because, like most publishers at the time, DC Comics concealed this data to deny competitors, but given the general market trends at the time, sales of Action Comics and Superman probably peaked in the mid-1940s and thereafter steadily declined.[74] Sales data first became public in 1960, and showed that Superman was the best-selling comic book character of the 1960s and 1970s.[2][75][76] Sales rose again starting in 1987. Superman #75 (Nov 1992) sold over 23 million copies,[77] making it the best-selling issue of a comic book of all time, thanks to a media sensation over the supposedly permanent death of the character in that issue.[78] Sales declined from that point on. In March 2018, Action Comics sold just 51,534 copies, although such low figures are normal for superhero comic books in general (for comparison, Amazing Spider-Man #797 sold only 128,189 copies).[79] The comic books are today considered a niche aspect of the Superman franchise due to low readership,[80] though they remain influential as creative engines for the movies and television shows. Comic book stories can be produced quickly and cheaply, and are thus an ideal medium for experimentation.[81] Whereas comic books in the 1950s were read by children, since the 1990s the average reader has been an adult.[82] A major reason for this shift was DC Comics' decision in the 1970s to sell its comic books to specialty stores instead of traditional magazine retailers (supermarkets, newsstands, etc.) — a model called "direct distribution". This made comic books less accessible to children.[83] Newspaper strips[edit] See also: Superman (comic strip) Beginning in January 1939, a Superman daily comic strip appeared in newspapers, syndicated through the McClure Syndicate. A color Sunday version was added that November. Jerry Siegel wrote most of the strips until he was conscripted in 1943. The Sunday strips had a narrative continuity separate from the daily strips, possibly because Siegel had to delegate the Sunday strips to ghostwriters.[84] By 1941, the newspaper strips had an estimated readership of 20 million.[85] Joe Shuster drew the early strips, then passed the job to Wayne Boring.[86] From 1949 to 1956, the newspaper strips were drawn by Win Mortimer.[87] The strip ended in May 1966, but was revived from 1977 to 1983 to coincide with a series of movies released by Warner Bros.[88] Editors[edit] Initially, Siegel was allowed to write Superman more or less as he saw fit because nobody had anticipated the success and rapid expansion of the franchise.[89][90] But soon Siegel and Shuster's work was put under careful oversight for fear of trouble with censors.[91] Siegel was forced to tone down the violence and social crusading that characterized his early stories.[92] Editor Whitney Ellsworth, hired in 1940, dictated that Superman not kill.[93] Sexuality was banned, and colorfully outlandish villains such as Ultra-Humanite and Toyman were thought to be less nightmarish for young readers.[94] Mort Weisinger was the editor on Superman comics from 1941 to 1970, his tenure briefly interrupted by military service. Siegel and his fellow writers had developed the character with little thought of building a coherent mythology, but as the number of Superman titles and the pool of writers grew, Weisinger demanded a more disciplined approach.[95] Weisinger assigned story ideas, and the logic of Superman's powers, his origin, the locales, and his relationships with his growing cast of supporting characters were carefully planned. Elements such as Bizarro, Supergirl, the Phantom Zone, the Fortress of Solitude, alternate varieties of kryptonite, robot doppelgangers, and Krypto were introduced during this era. The complicated universe built under Weisinger was beguiling to devoted readers but alienating to casuals.[96] Weisinger favored lighthearted stories over serious drama, and avoided sensitive subjects such as the Vietnam War and the American civil rights movement because he feared his right-wing views would alienate his left-leaning writers and readers.[97] Weisinger also introduced letters columns in 1958 to encourage feedback and build intimacy with readers.[98] Weisinger retired in 1970 and Julius Schwartz took over. By his own admission, Weisinger had grown out of touch with newer readers.[99] Schwartz updated Superman by removing overused plot elements such as kryptonite and robot doppelgangers and making Clark Kent a television anchor.[100] Schwartz also scaled Superman's powers down to a level closer to Siegel's original. These changes would eventually be reversed by later writers. Schwartz allowed stories with serious drama such as "For the Man Who Has Everything" (Superman Annual #11), in which the villain Mongul torments Superman with an illusion of happy family life on a living Krypton. Schwartz retired from DC Comics in 1986 and was succeeded by Mike Carlin as an editor on Superman comics. His retirement coincided with DC Comics' decision to streamline the shared continuity called the DC Universe with the companywide-crossover storyline "Crisis on Infinite Earths". Writer John Byrne rewrote the Superman mythos, again reducing Superman's powers, which writers had slowly re-strengthened, and revised many supporting characters, such as making Lex Luthor a billionaire industrialist rather than a mad scientist, and making Supergirl an artificial shapeshifting organism because DC wanted Superman to be the sole surviving Kryptonian. Carlin was promoted to Executive Editor for the DC Universe books in 1996, a position he held until 2002. K.C. Carlson took his place as editor of the Superman comics. Aesthetic style[edit] In the earlier decades of Superman comics, artists were expected to conform to a certain "house style".[101] Joe Shuster defined the aesthetic style of Superman in the 1940s. After Shuster left National, Wayne Boring succeeded him as the principal artist on Superman comic books.[102] He redrew Superman taller and more detailed.[103] Around 1955, Curt Swan in turn succeeded Boring.[104] The 1980s saw a boom in the diversity of comic book art and now there is no single "house style" in Superman comics.[105] In other media[edit] Main article: Superman (franchise) Radio[edit] The first adaptation of Superman beyond comic books was a radio show, The Adventures of Superman, which ran from 1940 to 1951 for 2,088 episodes, most of which were aimed at children. The episodes were initially 15 minutes long, but after 1949 they were lengthened to 30 minutes. Most episodes were done live.[106] Bud Collyer was the voice actor for Superman in most episodes. The show was produced by Robert Maxwell and Allen Ducovny, who were employees of Superman, Inc. and Detective Comics, Inc. respectively.[107][108] Stage[edit] In 1966 Superman had a Tony-nominated musical play produced on Broadway. It's a Bird... It's a Plane... It's Superman featured music by Charles Strouse, lyrics by Lee Adams and book by David Newman and Robert Benton. Actor Bob Holiday performed as Clark Kent/Superman and actress Patricia Marand performed as Lois Lane. Film[edit] Superman's first cinematic appearance was in animated theatrical shorts first produced by Fleischer Studios. Paramount Pictures released a series of Superman theatrical animated shorts between 1941 and 1943. Seventeen episodes in total were made, each 8–10 minutes long. The first nine episodes were produced by Fleischer Studios and the next eight were produced by Famous Studios. Bud Collyer provided the voice of Superman. The first episode had a production budget of $50,000 with the remaining episodes at $30,000 each[109] (equivalent to $521,000 in 2019), which was exceptionally lavish for the time; $9,000 - $15,000 was more typical for animated shorts.[110] Joe Shuster provided model sheets for the characters, so the visuals resembled the contemporary comic book aesthetic.[111] The first live-action adaptation of Superman was a movie serial released in 1948, targeted at children. Kirk Alyn became the first actor to portray the hero onscreen. The production cost up to $325,000[112] (equivalent to $3,458,000 in 2019). It was the most profitable movie serial in movie history.[113] A sequel serial, Atom Man vs. Superman, was released in 1950. For flying scenes, Superman was hand-drawn in animated form, composited onto live-action footage. The first feature film was Superman and the Mole Men, a 58-minute B-movie released in 1951, produced on an estimated budget of $30,000 (equivalent to $296,000 in 2019).[114] It starred George Reeves as Superman, and was intended to promote the subsequent television series.[115] The first big-budget movie was Superman in 1978, starring Christopher Reeve and produced by Alexander and Ilya Salkind. It was 143 minutes long and was made on a budget of $55 million (equivalent to $216,000,000 in 2019). It is the most successful Superman feature film to date in terms of box office revenue adjusted for inflation.[116] The soundtrack was composed by John Williams and was nominated for an Academy Award; the title theme has become iconic. Superman (1978) was the first big-budget superhero movie, and its success arguably paved the way for later superhero movies like Batman (1989) and Spider-Man (2002).[117][118][119] The 1978 movie spawned four sequels: Superman II (1980), Superman III (1983), Superman IV: The Quest for Peace (1987) and Superman Returns (2006); the last of which replaced Reeve with Brandon Routh. In 2013, Man of Steel was released by Warner Bros. as a reboot of the film series, starring Henry Cavill as Superman. Its sequel, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), featured Superman alongside Batman and Wonder Woman, making it the first theatrical movie in which Superman appeared alongside other superheroes from the DC Universe. Cavill reprised his role in Justice League (2017) and is under contract to play Superman in one more film. Television[edit] Actor George Reeves portraying Superman in Stamp Day for Superman. After appearing in film, he would be the first actor to star as Superman in television. Adventures of Superman, which aired from 1952 to 1958, was the first television series based on a superhero. It starred George Reeves as Superman. Whereas the radio serial was aimed at children, this television show was aimed at a general audience,[120][121] although children made up the majority of viewers. Robert Maxwell, who produced the radio serial, was the producer for the first season. For the second season, Maxwell was replaced with Whitney Ellsworth. Ellsworth toned down the violence of the show to make it more suitable for children, though he still aimed for a general audience. This show was extremely popular in Japan, where it achieved an audience share rating of 74.2% in 1958.[122] His first animated television series was The New Adventures of Superman, which aired from 1966 to 1970. The show also feature a seven-minute part focused on Superboy named The Adventures of Superboy Starting in 1974, Superman was one of the leading characters in Hanna-Barbera produced an animated series called Super Friends and all its sequels until 1986. To celebrate his 50th anniversary, Ruby-Spears produced an animated series partially based on Superman (1978) and post-Crisis Superman comics created by John Byrne. The model sheets for Superman (1988) were drawn by legendary comics artist Gil Kane and most of the episodes were written by comics writer Marv Wolfman. Superboy aired from 1988 to 1992. It was produced by Alexander and Ilya Salkind, the same men who had produced the Superman movies starring Christopher Reeve. Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman aired from 1993 to 1997. This show was aimed at adults and focused on the relationship between Clark Kent and Lois Lane as much as Superman's heroics.[115] Dean Cain played Superman, and Teri Hatcher played Lois. Smallville aired from 2001 to 2011. The show was targeted at young adults.[123][124] Played by Tom Welling, the series covered Clark Kent's life prior to becoming Superman, spanning ten years from his high school years in Smallville to his early life in Metropolis. Although Clark engages in heroics, he doesn't wear a costume, nor does he call himself Superboy. Rather, he relies on misdirection and his blinding speed to avoid being recognized. Later seasons find him becoming a public hero called the Red-Blue Blur, eventually shortened to the Blur, in a proto-Justice League before taking on the mantle of Superman. Superman: The Animated Series (with the voice of Tim Daly on the main character) aired from 1996 to 2000. After the show's cancellation, this version of Superman appeared in the sequel shows Batman Beyond (voiced by Christopher McDonald) aired from 1999 to 2001 and Justice League and Justice League Unlimited (voiced by George Newbern), which ran from 2001 to 2006. All of these shows were produced by Bruce Timm. This was the most successful and longest-running animated version of Superman.[115] Superman has appeared in a series of direct-to-video animated movies produced by Warner Bros. Animation called DC Universe Animated Original Movies, beginning with Superman: Doomsday in 2007. Many of these movies are adaptations of popular comic book stories. Superman, played by Tyler Hoechlin, appears as a guest star in several television series on The CW that are part of the Arrowverse shared universe: Supergirl, The Flash, Arrow and Legends of Tomorrow. A Supergirl spin-off, Superman & Lois, premiered on February 23, 2021. Video games[edit] Main article: List of Superman video games The first electronic game was simply titled Superman, and released in 1979 for the Atari 2600. The last game centered on Superman was Superman Returns (adapted from the movie) in 2006. Superman has appeared in later games in a co-starring role, such as Injustice 2 (2017). Merchandising[edit] DC Comics trademarked the Superman chest logo in August 1938.[125] Jack Liebowitz established Superman, Inc. in October 1939 to develop the franchise beyond the comic books.[51] Superman, Inc. merged with DC Comics in October 1946.[126] After DC Comics merged with Warner Communications in 1967, licensing for Superman was handled by the Licensing Corporation of America.[127] The Licensing Letter (an American market research firm) estimated that Superman licensed merchandise made $634 million in sales globally in 2018 (43.3% of this revenue came from the North American market). For comparison, in the same year, Spider-Man merchandise made $1.075 billion and Star Wars merchandise made $1.923 billion globally.[128] The earliest paraphernalia appeared in 1939: a button proclaiming membership in the Supermen of America club. The first toy was a wooden doll in 1939 made by the Ideal Novelty and Toy Company.[129] Superman #5 (May 1940) carried an advertisement for a "Krypto-Raygun", which was a gun-shaped device that could project images on a wall.[130] The majority of Superman merchandise is targeted at children, but since the 1970s, adults have been increasingly targeted because the comic book readership has gotten older.[131] During World War II, Superman was used to support the war effort. Action Comics and Superman carried messages urging readers to buy war bonds and participate in scrap drives.[132] Copyright issues[edit] Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster[edit] Main article: Copyright lawsuits by Superman's creators In a contract dated 1 March 1938, Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster gave away the copyright to Superman to their employer, DC Comics (then known as Detective Comics, Inc.[b]) prior to Superman's first publication in April. Contrary to popular perception, the $130 that DC Comics paid them was for their first Superman story, not the copyright to the character — that, they gave away for free. This was normal practice in the comic magazine industry and they had done the same with their previous published works (Slam Bradley, Doctor Occult, etc.),[50] but Superman became far more popular and valuable than they anticipated and they much regretted giving him away.[133] DC Comics retained Siegel and Shuster, and they were paid well because they were popular with the readers.[134] Between 1938 and 1947, DC Comics paid them together over $400,000 (equivalent to $6,140,000 in 2019).[135][136] Siegel wrote most of the magazine and daily newspaper stories until he was conscripted into the army in 1943, whereupon the task was passed to ghostwriters.[137][138] While Siegel was serving in Hawaii, DC Comics published a story featuring a child version of Superman called "Superboy", which was based on a script Siegel had submitted several years before. Siegel was furious because DC Comics did this without having bought the character.[139] After Siegel's discharge from the Army, he and Shuster sued DC Comics in 1947 for the rights to Superman and Superboy. The judge ruled that Superman belonged to DC Comics, but that Superboy was a separate entity that belonged to Siegel. Siegel and Shuster settled out-of-court with DC Comics, which paid the pair $94,013.16 (equivalent to $1,000,420 in 2019) in exchange for the full rights to both Superman and Superboy.[140] DC Comics then fired Siegel and Shuster.[141] DC Comics rehired Jerry Siegel as a writer in 1957. In 1965, Siegel and Shuster attempted to regain rights to Superman using the renewal option in the Copyright Act of 1909, but the court ruled Siegel and Shuster had transferred the renewal rights to DC Comics in 1938. Siegel and Shuster appealed, but the appeals court upheld this decision. DC Comics fired Siegel when he filed this second lawsuit. In 1975, Siegel and a number of other comic book writers and artists launched a public campaign for better compensation and treatment of comic creators. Warner Brothers agreed to give Siegel and Shuster a yearly stipend, full medical benefits, and credit their names in all future Superman productions in exchange for never contesting ownership of Superman. Siegel and Shuster upheld this bargain.[3] Shuster died in 1992. DC Comics offered Shuster's heirs a stipend in exchange for never challenging ownership of Superman, which they accepted for some years.[140] Siegel died in 1996. His heirs attempted to take the rights to Superman using the termination provision of the Copyright Act of 1976. DC Comics negotiated an agreement wherein it would pay the Siegel heirs several million dollars and a yearly stipend of $500,000 in exchange for permanently granting DC the rights to Superman. DC Comics also agreed to insert the line "By Special Arrangement with the Jerry Siegel Family" in all future Superman productions.[142] The Siegels accepted DC's offer in an October 2001 letter.[140] Copyright lawyer and movie producer Marc Toberoff then struck a deal with the heirs of both Siegel and Shuster to help them get the rights to Superman in exchange for signing the rights over to his production company, Pacific Pictures. Both groups accepted. The Siegel heirs called off their deal with DC Comics and in 2004 sued DC for the rights to Superman and Superboy. In 2008, the judge ruled in favor of the Siegels. DC Comics appealed the decision, and the appeals court ruled in favor of DC, arguing that the October 2001 letter was binding. In 2003, the Shuster heirs served a termination notice for Shuster's grant of his half of the copyright to Superman. DC Comics sued the Shuster heirs in 2010, and the court ruled in DC's favor on the grounds that the 1992 agreement with the Shuster heirs barred them from terminating the grant.[140] Under current US copyright law, Superman is due to enter the public domain in 2033.[143][c] However, this would only apply to the character as he is depicted in Action Comics #1 (1938). Versions of him with later developments, such as his power of "heat vision" (introduced in 1949), may persist under copyright until the works they were introduced in enter the public domain themselves.[144] Supporting characters such as Jimmy Olsen and Supergirl will also lapse into the public domain later, as these characters did not appear in the earliest Superman publications. Captain Marvel[edit] See also: National Comics Publications v. Fawcett Publications Superman's success immediately begat a wave of imitations. The most successful of these at this early age was Captain Marvel, first published by Fawcett Comics in December 1939. Captain Marvel had many similarities to Superman: Herculean strength, invulnerability, the ability to fly, a cape, a secret identity, and a job as a journalist. DC Comics filed a lawsuit against Fawcett Comics for copyright infringement. The trial began in March 1948 after seven years of discovery. The judge ruled that Fawcett had indeed infringed on Superman. However, the judge also found that the copyright notices that appeared with the Superman newspaper strips did not meet the technical standards of the Copyright Act of 1909 and were therefore invalid. Furthermore, since the newspaper strips carried stories adapted from Action Comics, the judge ruled that DC Comics had effectively abandoned the copyright to the Action Comics stories. The judge ruled that DC Comics had effectively abandoned the copyright to Superman and therefore forfeited its right to sue Fawcett for copyright infringement.[140] DC Comics appealed this decision. The appeals court ruled that unintentional mistakes in the copyright notices of the newspaper strips did not invalidate the copyrights. Furthermore, Fawcett knew that DC Comics never intended to abandon the copyrights, and therefore Fawcett's infringement was not an innocent misunderstanding, and therefore Fawcett owed damages to DC Comics.[d] The appeals court remanded the case back to the lower court to determine how much Fawcett owed in damages.[140] At that point, Fawcett Comics decided to settle out of court with DC Comics. Fawcett paid DC Comics $400,000 (equivalent to $3,822,388 in 2019) and agreed to stop publishing Captain Marvel. The last Captain Marvel story from Fawcett Comics was published in September 1953.[145] DC licensed in 1972, and eventually acquired by 1991, the intellectual property rights to Captain Marvel, today marketed under the title Shazam![146] Character overview[edit] This section details the most consistent elements of the Superman narrative in the myriad stories published since 1938. "Faster than a speeding bullet! More powerful than a locomotive! Able to leap tall buildings at a single bound!" "Look! Up in the sky!" "It's a bird!" "It's a plane!" "It's Superman!" "Yes, it's Superman – strange visitor from another planet who came to Earth with powers and abilities far beyond those of mortal men. Superman – defender of law and order, champion of equal rights, valiant, courageous fighter against the forces of hate and prejudice who, disguised as Clark Kent, mild-mannered reporter for a great metropolitan newspaper, fights a never-ending battle for truth, justice and the American way." – Superman on Radio & Audio [147] Superman himself[edit] In Action Comics #1 (1938), Superman is born on an alien world to a technologically advanced species that resembles humans. Shortly after he is born, his planet is destroyed in a natural cataclysm, but Superman's scientist father foresaw the calamity and saves his baby son by sending him to Earth in a small spaceship. The ship, sadly, is too small to carry anyone else, so Superman's parents stay behind and die. The earliest newspaper strips name the planet "Krypton", the baby "Kal-L", and his biological parents "Jor-L" and "Lora";[148] their names were changed to "Jor-el", and "Lara" in a 1942 spinoff novel by George Lowther.[149] The ship lands in the American countryside, where the baby is discovered by the Kents, a farming couple. The Kents name the boy Clark and raise him in a farming community. A 1947 episode of the radio serial places this unnamed community in Iowa.[150] It is named Smallville in Superboy #2 (June 1949). The 1978 Superman movie placed it in Kansas, as have most Superman stories since.[151] New Adventures of Superboy #22 (Oct. 1981) places it in Maryland. In Action Comics #1 and most stories before 1986, Superman's powers begin developing in infancy. From 1944 to 1986, DC Comics regularly published stories of Superman's childhood and adolescent adventures, when he called himself "Superboy". From 1986 on (beginning with Man of Steel #1), Superman's powers emerged more slowly and he began his superhero career as an adult. The Kents teach Clark he must conceal his otherworldly origins and use his fantastic powers to do good. Clark creates the costumed identity of Superman so as to protect his personal privacy and the safety of his loved ones. As Clark Kent, he wears eyeglasses to disguise his face and wears his Superman costume underneath his clothes so that he can change at a moment's notice. To complete this disguise, Clark avoids violent confrontation, preferring to slip away and change into Superman when danger arises, and he suffers occasional ridicule for his apparent cowardice. In Superboy #78 (1960), Superboy makes his costume out of the indestructible blankets found in the ship he came to Earth in. In Man of Steel #1 (1986), Martha Kent makes the costume from human-manufactured cloth, and it is rendered indestructible by an "aura" that Superman projects. The "S" on Superman's chest at first was simply an initial for "Superman". When writing the script for the 1978 movie, Tom Mankiewicz made it Superman's Kryptonian family crest.[152] This was carried over into some comic book stories and later movies, such as Man of Steel. In the comic story Superman: Birthright, the crest is described as an old Kryptonian symbol for hope. Clark works as a newspaper journalist. In the earliest stories, he worked for The Daily Star, but the second episode of the radio serial changed this to the Daily Planet. In comics from the early 1970s, Clark worked as a television journalist (an attempt to modernize the character). However, for the 1978 movie, the producers chose to make Clark a newspaper journalist again because that was how most of the public thought of him.[153] The first story in which Superman dies was published in Superman #149 (1961), in which he is murdered by Lex Luthor by means of kryptonite. This story was "imaginary" and thus was ignored in subsequent books. In Superman #188 (April 1966), Superman is killed by kryptonite radiation but is revived in the same issue by one of his android doppelgangers. In the 1990s The Death and Return of Superman story arc, after a deadly battle with Doomsday, Superman died in Superman #75 (Jan. 1993). He was later revived by the Eradicator using Kryptonian technology. In Superman #52 (May 2016) Superman is killed by kryptonite poisoning, and this time he is not resurrected, but replaced by the Superman of an alternate timeline. Superman maintains a secret hideout called the "Fortress of Solitude", which is located somewhere in the Arctic. Here, Superman keeps a collection of mementos and a laboratory for science experiments. In Action Comics #241, the Fortress of Solitude is a cave in a mountain, sealed with a very heavy door that is opened with a gigantic key too heavy for anyone but Superman to use. In the 1978 movie, the Fortress of Solitude is a structure made out of ice. The movie Man of Steel portrays the Fortress as a Kryptonian exploratory craft buried deep beneath rock and ice. Clark Kent[edit] Superman's secret identity is Clark Joseph Kent, a reporter for the Daily Planet. Although his name and history were taken from his early life with his adoptive Earth parents, everything about Clark was staged for the benefit of his alternate identity: as a reporter for the Daily Planet, he receives late-breaking news before the general public, has a plausible reason to be present at crime scenes, and need not strictly account for his whereabouts as long as he makes his story deadlines. He sees his job as a journalist as an extension of his Superman responsibilities—bringing truth to the forefront and fighting for the little guy. He believes that everybody has the right to know what is going on in the world, regardless of who is involved.[154] To deflect suspicion that he is Superman, Clark Kent adopted a largely passive and introverted personality with conservative mannerisms, a higher-pitched voice, and a slight slouch. This personality is typically described as "mild-mannered", perhaps most famously by the opening narration of Max Fleischer's Superman animated theatrical shorts. These traits extended into Clark's wardrobe, which typically consists of a bland-colored business suit, a red necktie, black-rimmed glasses, combed-back hair, and occasionally a fedora. Clark wears his Superman costume underneath his street clothes, allowing easy changes between the two personae and the dramatic gesture of ripping open his shirt to reveal the familiar "S" emblem when called into action. His hair will also change with the costume change, with Superman sporting a small curl or spit curl on his forehead. Superman usually stores his Clark Kent clothing compressed in a secret pouch within his cape,[155] though some stories have shown him leaving his clothes in some covert location (such as the Daily Planet storeroom[156]) for later retrieval. As Superman's alter ego, the personality, concept, and name of Clark Kent have become ingrained in popular culture as well, becoming synonymous with secret identities and innocuous fronts for ulterior motives and activities. In 1992, Superman co-creator Joe Shuster told the Toronto Star that the name derived from 1930s cinematic leading men Clark Gable and Kent Taylor, but the persona from bespectacled silent film comic Harold Lloyd and himself.[157] Clark's middle name is given variously as either Joseph, Jerome, or Jonathan, all being allusions to creators Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster. Personality[edit] In the original Siegel and Shuster stories, Superman's personality is rough and aggressive. He often uses excessive force and terror against criminals, on some occasions even killing them. This came to an end in late 1940 when new editor Whitney Ellsworth instituted a code of conduct for his characters to follow, banning Superman from ever killing.[158] The character was softened and given a sense of humanitarianism. Ellsworth's code, however, is not to be confused with "the Comics Code", which was created in 1954 by the Comics Code Authority and ultimately abandoned by every major comic book publisher by the early 21st century.[159] In his first appearances, Superman was considered a vigilante by the authorities, being fired upon by the National Guard as he razed a slum so that the government would create better housing conditions for the poor. By 1942, however, Superman was working side-by-side with the police.[160][161] Today, Superman is commonly seen as a brave and kind-hearted hero with a strong sense of justice, morality, and righteousness. He adheres to an unwavering moral code instilled in him by his adoptive parents.[162] His commitment to operating within the law has been an example to many citizens and other heroes, but has stirred resentment and criticism among others, who refer to him as the "big blue boy scout". Superman can be rather rigid in this trait, causing tensions in the superhero community.[163] This was most notable with Wonder Woman, one of his closest friends, after she killed Maxwell Lord.[163] Booster Gold had an initial icy relationship with the Man of Steel, but grew to respect him.[164] Having lost his home world of Krypton, Superman is very protective of Earth,[165] and especially of Clark Kent's family and friends. This same loss, combined with the pressure of using his powers responsibly, has caused Superman to feel lonely on Earth, despite having his friends and parents. Previous encounters with people he thought to be fellow Kryptonians, Power Girl[166] (who is, in fact from the Krypton of the Earth-Two universe) and Mon-El,[167] have led to disappointment. The arrival of Supergirl, who has been confirmed to be not only from Krypton, but also his cousin, has relieved this loneliness somewhat.[168] Superman's Fortress of Solitude acts as a place of solace for him in times of loneliness and despair.[169] Powers, abilities, and weaknesses[edit] The catalog of Superman's abilities and his strength has varied considerably over the vast body of Superman fiction released since 1938. Since Action Comics #1 (1938), Superman has superhuman strength. The cover of Action Comics #1 shows him effortlessly lifting a car over his head. Another classic feat of strength on Superman's part is breaking steel chains. In some stories, he is strong enough to shift the orbits of planets[170] and crush coal into diamond with his hands. Since Action Comics #1 (1938), Superman has a highly durable body, invulnerable for most practical purposes. At the very least, bullets bounce harmlessly off his body. In some stories, such as Kingdom Come, not even a nuclear bomb can harm him. In some stories, Superman is said to project an aura that renders invulnerable any tight-fitting clothes he wears, and hence his costume is as durable as he is despite being made of common cloth. This concept was first introduced in Man of Steel #1 (1986). In earlier stories, Superman's costume is made out of exotic materials that are as tough as he is. In Action Comics #1, Superman could not fly. He traveled by running and leaping, which he could do to a prodigious degree thanks to his strength. Superman gained the ability to fly in the second episode of the radio serial in 1940.[171] Superman can fly at great speeds. He can break the sound barrier, and in some stories, he can even fly faster than light to travel to distant galaxies. Superman can project and perceive X-rays via his eyes, which allows him to see through objects. He first uses this power in Action Comics #11 (1939). Certain materials such as lead can block his X-ray vision. Superman can project beams of heat from his eyes which are hot enough to melt steel. He first used this power in Superman #59 (1949) by applying his X-ray vision at its highest intensity. In later stories, this ability is simply called "heat vision". Superman can hear sounds that are too faint for a human to hear, and at frequencies outside the human hearing range. This ability was introduced in Action Comics #11 (1939). Since Action Comics #20 (1940), Superman possesses superhuman breath, which enables him to inhale or blow huge amounts of air, as well as holding his breath indefinitely to remain underwater or space without adverse effects. He has a significant focus of his breath's intensity to the point of freezing targets by blowing on them. The "freezing breath" was first demonstrated in Superman #129 (1959). Action Comics #1 (1938) explained that Superman's strength was common to all Kryptonians because they were a species "millions of years advanced of our own". In the first newspaper strips, Jor-El is shown running and leaping like Superman, and his wife survives a building collapsing on her. Later stories explained they evolved superhuman strength simply because of Krypton's higher gravity. Superman #146 (1961) established that Superman's abilities other than strength (flight, durability, etc.) are activated by the light of Earth's yellow sun. In Action Comics #300 (1963), all of his powers including strength are activated by yellow sunlight and can be deactivated by red sunlight similar to that of Krypton's sun. Exposure to green kryptonite radiation nullifies Superman's powers and incapacitates him with pain and nausea; prolonged exposure will eventually kill him. Although green kryptonite is the most commonly seen form, writers have introduced other forms over the years: such as red, gold, blue, white, and black, each with its own effect.[172] Gold kryptonite, for instance, permanently nullifies Superman's powers but otherwise does not harm him. Kryptonite first appeared in a 1943 episode of the radio serial.[173] It first appeared in comics in Superman #61 (Dec. 1949).[174] Superman is also vulnerable to magic. Enchanted weapons and magical spells affect Superman as easily as they would a normal human. This weakness was established in Superman #171 (1964). Supporting characters[edit] See also: Superman character and cast and List of Superman supporting characters Superman's first and most famous supporting character is Lois Lane, introduced in Action Comics #1. She is a fellow journalist at the Daily Planet. As Jerry Siegel conceived her, Lois considers Clark Kent to be a wimp, but she is infatuated with the bold and mighty Superman, not knowing that Kent and Superman are the same person. Siegel objected to any proposal that Lois discover that Clark is Superman because he felt that, as implausible as Clark's disguise is, the love triangle was too important to the book's appeal.[175] However, Siegel wrote stories in which Lois suspects Clark is Superman and tries to prove it, with Superman always duping her in the end; the first such story was in Superman #17 (July–August 1942).[176][177] This was a common plot in comic book stories prior to the 1970s. In a story in Action Comics #484 (June 1978), Clark Kent admits to Lois that he is Superman, and they marry. This was the first story in which Superman and Lois marry that wasn't an "imaginary tale." Many Superman stories since then have depicted Superman and Lois as a married couple, but about as many depict them in the classic love triangle. Other supporting characters include Jimmy Olsen, a photographer at the Daily Planet, who is friends with both Superman and Clark Kent, though in most stories he doesn't know that Clark is Superman. Jimmy is frequently described as "Superman's pal", and was conceived to give young male readers a relatable character through which they could fantasize being friends with Superman. In the earliest comic book stories, Clark Kent's employer is George Taylor of The Daily Star, but the second episode of the radio serial changed this to Perry White of the Daily Planet.[178] Clark Kent's foster parents are Ma and Pa Kent. In many stories, one or both of them have died by the time Clark becomes Superman. Clark's parents taught him that he should use his abilities for altruistic means, but that he should also find some way to safeguard his private life. Antagonists[edit] Main article: List of Superman enemies The villains Superman faced in the earliest stories were ordinary humans, such as gangsters, corrupt politicians, and violent husbands; but they soon grew more colorful and outlandish so as to avoid offending censors or scaring children. The mad scientist Ultra-Humanite, introduced in Action Comics #13 (June 1939), was Superman's first recurring villain. Superman's best-known nemesis, Lex Luthor, was introduced in Action Comics #23 (April 1940) and has been depicted as either a mad scientist or a wealthy businessman (sometimes both).[179] In 1944, the magical imp Mister Mxyzptlk, Superman's first recurring super-powered adversary, was introduced.[180] Superman's first alien villain, Brainiac, debuted in Action Comics #242 (July 1958). The monstrous Doomsday, introduced in Superman: The Man of Steel #17–18 (Nov.-Dec. 1992), was the first villain to evidently kill Superman in physical combat without exploiting Superman's critical weaknesses such as kryptonite and magic. Alternative depictions[edit] Main article: Alternative versions of Superman See also: Superman (Earth-Two) and Superman (Earth-One) The details Superman's story and supporting cast vary across his large body of fiction released since 1938, but most versions conform to the basic template described above. A few stories feature radically altered versions of Superman. An example is the graphic novel Superman: Red Son, which depicts a communist Superman who rules the Soviet Union. DC Comics has on some occasions published crossover stories where different versions of Superman interact with each other using the plot device of parallel universes. For instance, in the 1960s, the Superman of "Earth-One" would occasionally feature in stories alongside the Superman of "Earth-Two", the latter of whom resembled Superman as he was portrayed in the 1940s. DC Comics has not developed a consistent and universal system to classify all versions of Superman. Cultural impact[edit] The superhero archetype[edit] Superman is often thought of as the first superhero. This point is debated by historians: Ogon Bat, the Phantom, Zorro, and Mandrake the Magician arguably fit the definition of the superhero yet predate Superman. Nevertheless, Superman popularized the archetype and established its conventions: a costume, a codename, extraordinary abilities, and an altruistic mission. The very word "superhero" is derived from "Superman". Superman's success in 1938 begat a wave of imitations, which include Batman, Wonder Woman, Green Lantern, Captain America, and Captain Marvel. This flourishing is today referred to as America's Golden Age of Comic Books, which lasted from 1938 to about 1950. The Golden Age ended when American superhero book sales declined, leading to the cancellation of many characters; but Superman was one of the few superhero franchises that survived this decline, and his sustained popularity into the late 1950s helped the second flourishing in the Silver Age of Comic Books, when characters such as Spider-Man, Iron Man, and The X-Men were created. After World War 2, American superhero fiction entered Japanese culture. Astro Boy, first published in 1952, was inspired by Mighty Mouse, which itself was a parody of Superman.[181] The Superman animated shorts from the 1940s were first broadcast on Japanese television in 1955, and they were followed in 1956 by the TV show Adventures of Superman starring George Reeves. These shows were popular with the Japanese and inspired Japan's own prolific genre of superheroes. The first Japanese superhero movie, Super Giant, was released in 1957. The first Japanese superhero TV show was Moonlight Mask in 1958. Notable characters include Ultraman, Kamen Rider, and Sailor Moon.[182][183][184] Fine Art[edit] Starting with the Pop Art period and on a continuing basis, since the 1960s the character of Superman has been "appropriated" by multiple visual artists and incorporated into contemporary artwork,[185][186] most notably by Andy Warhol,[187][188] Roy Lichtenstein,[189] Mel Ramos,[190] Dulce Pinzon,[191] Mr. Brainwash,[192] Raymond Pettibon,[193] Peter Saul,[194] Giuseppe Veneziano,[195] F. Lennox Campello,[196] and others.[192][197][198] Parodies and homages[edit] Title card of Super-Rabbit. An early parody cartoon featuring Bugs Bunny as Superman Superman depicted as stricken by AIDS, in an awareness campaign Superman is the prototypical superhero and consequently the most frequently parodied.[199] The first popular parody was Mighty Mouse, introduced in "The Mouse of Tomorrow" animated short in 1942.[200] While the character swiftly took on a life of its own, moving beyond parody, other animated characters soon took their turn to parody the character. In 1943, Bugs Bunny was featured in a short, Super-Rabbit, which sees the character gaining powers through eating fortified carrots. This short ends with Bugs stepping into a phone booth to change into a real "Superman" and emerging as a U.S. Marine. In 1956 Daffy Duck assumes the mantle of "Cluck Trent" in the short Stupor Duck, a role later reprised in various issues of the Looney Tunes comic book.[201] In the United Kingdom Monty Python created the character Bicycle Repairman, who fixes bicycles on a world full of Supermen, for a sketch in series of their BBC show.[202] Also on the BBC was the sitcom My Hero, which presented Thermoman as a slightly dense Superman pastiche, attempting to save the world and pursue romantic aspirations.[203] In the United States, Saturday Night Live has often parodied the figure, with Margot Kidder reprising her role as Lois Lane in a 1979 episode. The manga and anime series Dr. Slump featured the character Suppaman; a short, fat, pompous man who changes into a thinly veiled Superman-like alter-ego by eating a sour-tasting umeboshi. Jerry Seinfeld, a noted Superman fan, filled his series Seinfeld with references to the character and in 1997 asked for Superman to co-star with him in a commercial for American Express. The commercial aired during the 1998 NFL Playoffs and Super Bowl, Superman animated in the style of artist Curt Swan, again at the request of Seinfeld.[204] Superman has also been used as a reference point for writers, with Steven T. Seagle's graphic novel Superman: It's a Bird exploring Seagle's feelings on his own mortality as he struggles to develop a story for a Superman tale.[205] Brad Fraser used the character as a reference point for his play Poor Super Man, with The Independent noting the central character, a gay man who has lost many friends to AIDS as someone who "identifies all the more keenly with Superman's alien-amid-deceptive-lookalikes status."[206] Superman's image was also used in an AIDS awareness campaign by French organization AIDES. Superman was depicted as emaciated and breathing from an oxygen tank, demonstrating that no-one is beyond the reach of the disease, and it can destroy the lives of everyone.[207] Musical references[edit] See also: Superman in popular music Superman has also featured as an inspiration for musicians, with songs by numerous artists from several generations celebrating the character. Donovan's Billboard Hot 100 topping single "Sunshine Superman" utilized the character in both the title and the lyric, declaring "Superman and Green Lantern ain't got nothing on me."[208] Folk singer-songwriter Jim Croce sung about the character in a list of warnings in the chorus of his song "You Don't Mess Around with Jim", introducing the phrase "you don't tug on Superman's cape" into popular lexicon.[209] Other tracks to reference the character include Genesis' "Land of Confusion",[210] the video to which featured a Spitting Image puppet of Ronald Reagan dressed as Superman,[211] "(Wish I Could Fly Like) Superman" by The Kinks on their 1979 album Low Budget and "Superman" by The Clique, a track later covered by R.E.M. on its 1986 album Lifes Rich Pageant. This cover is referenced by Grant Morrison in Animal Man, in which Superman meets the character, and the track comes on Animal Man's Walkman immediately after.[212] Crash Test Dummies' "Superman's Song", from the 1991 album The Ghosts That Haunt Me explores the isolation and commitment inherent in Superman's life.[213] Five for Fighting released "Superman (It's Not Easy)" in 2000, which is from Superman's point of view, although Superman is never mentioned by name.[214] From 1988 to 1993, American composer Michael Daugherty composed "Metropolis Symphony", a five-movement orchestral work inspired by Superman comics.[215][216] Literary analysis[edit] Superman has been interpreted and discussed in many forms in the years since his debut, with Umberto Eco noting that "he can be seen as the representative of all his similars".[217] Writing in Time in 1971, Gerald Clarke stated: "Superman's enormous popularity might be looked upon as signaling the beginning of the end for the Horatio Alger myth of the self-made man." Clarke viewed the comics characters as having to continuously update in order to maintain relevance and thus representing the mood of the nation. He regarded Superman's character in the early seventies as a comment on the modern world, which he saw as a place in which "only the man with superpowers can survive and prosper."[218] Andrew Arnold, writing in the early 21st century, has noted Superman's partial role in exploring assimilation, the character's alien status allowing the reader to explore attempts to fit in on a somewhat superficial level. A.C. Grayling, writing in The Spectator, traces Superman's stances through the decades, from his 1930s campaign against crime being relevant to a nation under the influence of Al Capone, through the 1940s and World War II, a period in which Superman helped sell war bonds,[219] and into the 1950s, where Superman explored the new technological threats. Grayling notes the period after the Cold War as being one where "matters become merely personal: the task of pitting his brawn against the brains of Lex Luthor and Brainiac appeared to be independent of bigger questions", and discusses events post 9/11, stating that as a nation "caught between the terrifying George W. Bush and the terrorist Osama bin Laden, America is in earnest need of a Saviour for everything from the minor inconveniences to the major horrors of world catastrophe. And here he is, the down-home clean-cut boy in the blue tights and red cape".[220] An influence on early Superman stories is the context of the Great Depression. Superman took on the role of social activist, fighting crooked businessmen and politicians and demolishing run-down tenements.[221] Comics scholar Roger Sabin sees this as a reflection of "the liberal idealism of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal", with Shuster and Siegel initially portraying Superman as champion to a variety of social causes.[222][223] In later Superman radio programs the character continued to take on such issues, tackling a version of the Ku Klux Klan in a 1946 broadcast, as well as combating anti-semitism and veteran discrimination.[224][225][226] Scott Bukatman has discussed Superman, and the superhero in general, noting the ways in which they humanize large urban areas through their use of the space, especially in Superman's ability to soar over the large skyscrapers of Metropolis. He writes that the character "represented, in 1938, a kind of Corbusierian ideal. Superman has X-ray vision: walls become permeable, transparent. Through his benign, controlled authority, Superman renders the city open, modernist and democratic; he furthers a sense that Le Corbusier described in 1925, namely, that 'Everything is known to us'."[227] The Library of Congress hosting a discussion with Dan Jurgens and Paul Levitz for Superman's 80th anniversary and the 1,000th issue of Action Comics. Jules Feiffer has argued that Superman's real innovation lay in the creation of the Clark Kent persona, noting that what "made Superman extraordinary was his point of origin: Clark Kent." Feiffer develops the theme to establish Superman's popularity in simple wish fulfillment,[228] a point Siegel and Shuster themselves supported, Siegel commenting that "If you're interested in what made Superman what it is, here's one of the keys to what made it universally acceptable. Joe and I had certain inhibitions ... which led to wish-fulfillment which we expressed through our interest in science fiction and our comic strip. That's where the dual-identity concept came from" and Shuster supporting that as being "why so many people could relate to it".[229] Ian Gordon suggests that the many incarnations of Superman across media use nostalgia to link the character to an ideology of the American Way. He defines this ideology as a means of associating individualism, consumerism, and democracy and as something that took shape around WWII and underpinned the war effort. Superman, he notes was very much part of that effort.[230] The superhero archetype[edit] Superman is considered the prototypical superhero. He established the major conventions of the archetype: a selfless, prosocial mission; extraordinary, perhaps superhuman, abilities; a secret identity and codename; and a colorful costume that expresses his nature.[231] Superman's cape and skintight suit are widely recognized as the generic superhero costume.[232] An allegory for immigrants[edit] Superman's immigrant status is a key aspect of his appeal.[233][234][235] Aldo Regalado saw the character as pushing the boundaries of acceptance in America. The extraterrestrial origin was seen by Regalado as challenging the notion that Anglo-Saxon ancestry was the source of all might.[236] Gary Engle saw the "myth of Superman [asserting] with total confidence and a childlike innocence the value of the immigrant in American culture." He argues that Superman allowed the superhero genre to take over from the Western as the expression of immigrant sensibilities. Through the use of a dual identity, Superman allowed immigrants to identify with both of their cultures. Clark Kent represents the assimilated individual, allowing Superman to express the immigrants' cultural heritage for the greater good.[234] David Jenemann has offered a contrasting view. He argues that Superman's early stories portray a threat: "the possibility that the exile would overwhelm the country."[237] David Rooney, a theater critic for The New York Times, in his evaluation of the play, Year Zero, considers Superman to be the "quintessential immigrant story ... (b)orn on an alien planet, he grows stronger on Earth, but maintains a secret identity tied to a homeland that continues to exert a powerful hold on him even as his every contact with those origins does him harm."[238] Religious themes[edit] Some see Judaic themes in Superman. The British rabbi Simcha Weinstein notes that Superman's story has some parallels to that of Moses. For example, Moses as a baby was sent away by his parents in a reed basket to escape death and adopted by a foreign culture. Weinstein also posits that Superman's Kryptonian name, "Kal-El", resembles the Hebrew words קל-אל, which can be taken to mean "voice of God".[239] The historian Larry Tye suggests that this "Voice of God" is an allusion to Moses' role as a prophet.[240] The suffix "el", meaning "(of) God", is also found in the name of angels (e.g. Gabriel, Ariel), who are airborne humanoid agents of good with superhuman powers. The Nazis also thought Superman was a Jew and in 1940 Joseph Goebbels publicly denounced Superman and his creator Jerry Siegel.[241] All that said, historians such as Martin Lund and Les Daniels argue that the evidence for Judaic influence is circumstantial. Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster were not practicing Jews and never acknowledged the influence of Judaism in any memoir or interview.[242][243] Superman stories have occasionally exhibited Christian themes as well. Screenwriter Tom Mankiewicz consciously made Superman an allegory for Christ in the 1978 movie starring Christopher Reeve: baby Kal-El's ship resembles the Star of Bethlehem, and Jor-El gives his son a messianic mission to lead humanity into a brighter future.[244] See also[edit] ‹ The template below (Wikipedia books) is being considered for merging. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › List of DC animated universe characters List of DC Comics characters Comics portal Speculative fiction portal Footnotes[edit] ^ Consolidated Book Publishers was also known as Humor Publishing. Jerry Siegel always referred to this publisher as "Consolidated" in all interviews and memoirs. Humor Publishing was possibly a subsidiary of Consolidated. ^ National Allied Publications was founded in 1934 by Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson. Due to financial difficulties, Wheeler-Nicholson formed a corporation with Harry Donenfeld and Jack Liebowitz called Detective Comics, Inc. In January 1938, Wheeler-Nicholson sold his stake in National Allied Publications and Detective Comics to Donenfeld and Liebowitz as part of a bankruptcy settlement. On September 30, 1946, these two companies merged to become National Comics Publications. In 1961, the company changed its name to National Periodical Publications. In 1967 National Periodical Publications was purchased by Kinney National Company, which later purchased Warner Bros.-Seven Arts and became Warner Communications. In 1976, National Periodical Publications changed its name to DC Comics, which had been its nickname since 1940. Since 1940, the publisher had placed a logo with the initials "DC" on all its magazine covers, and consequently "DC Comics" became an informal name for the publisher. ^ See USC Title 17, Chapter 3, § 304(b). Because the copyright to Action Comics #1 was in its renewal term on October 27, 1998 (the date the Copyright Term Extension Act became effective), its copyright will expire 95 years after first publication. ^ See Copyright Act of 1909 § 20 ^ a b c The copyright date of Action Comics #1 was registered as April 18, 1938. See Catalog of Copyright Entries. New Series, Volume 33, Part 2: Periodicals January-December 1938. United States Library of Congress. 1938. p. 129. ^ a b Dallas et. al (2013), American Comic Book Chronicles: The 1980s, p. 208 ^ a b c d e Ricca (2014), Super Boys ^ Jerry Siegel (under the pseudonym Herbert S. Fine). "The Reign of the Superman". Science Fiction: The Advance Guard of Future Civilization #3. January 1933 Summarized in Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. pp. 70-72. ^ Jerry Siegel, quoted in Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 15: "When we presented different strips to the syndicate editors, they would say, 'Well, this isn't sensational enough.' So I thought, I'm going to come up with something so wild they won't be able to say that." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "...one of the things which spurred me into creating a "Superman" strip was something a syndicate editor said to me after I had been submitting various proposed comic strips to him. "The trouble with your stuff is that it isn't spectacular enough," he said. "You've got to come up with something sensational! Something more terrific than the other adventure strips on the market!"" ^ Tye (2012), Superman, p. 17: "The version he was drafting would again begin with a wild scientist empowering a normal human against his will, but this time the powers would be even more fantastic, and rather than becoming a criminal, the super-being would fight crime “with the fury of an outraged avenger.”" ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: p. 30: "The hero of "THE SUPERMAN" comic book strip was also given super-powers against his will by a scientist. He gained fantastic strength, bullets bounced off him, etc. He fought crime with the fury of an outraged avenger." 50: "What, I thought, could be more sensational than a Superman who could fly through the air, who was impervious to flames, bullets, and a mob of enraged amok adversaries?" ^ Siegel in Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help), p. 10: "Obviously, having him a hero would be infinitely more commercial than having him a villain. I understand that the comic strip Dr. Fu Manchu ran into all sorts of difficulties because the main character was a villain. And with the example before us of Tarzan and other action heroes of fiction who were very successful, mainly because people admired them and looked up to them, it seemed the sensible thing to do to make The Superman a hero. The first piece was a short story, and that's one thing, but creating a successful comic strip with a character you'll hope will continue for many years, it would definitely be going in the wrong direction to make him a villain." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 17: "... usually [Shuster] and Siegel agreed that no special costume was in evidence, and the surviving artwork bears them out." ^ Siegel and Shuster in Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help), p.9-10: "Shuster: [...] It wasn't really Superman: that was before he evolved into a costumed figure. He was simply wearing a T-shirt and pants; he was more like Slam Bradley than anything else — just a man of action. [...] Siegel: In later years - maybe 10 or 15 years ago - I asked Joe what he remembered of this story, and he remembered a scene of a character crouched on the edge of a building, with a cape almost a la Batman. We don't specifically recall if the character had a costume or not. [...] Joe and I - especially Joe - seem to recall that there were some scenes in there in which that character had a bat-like cape." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 17 ^ The copyright date of Detective Dan Secret Operative 48 was registered as May 12, 1933. See Catalog of Copyright Entries. New Series, Volume 30, For the Year 1933, Part 1: Books, Group 2. United States Library of Congress. 1933. p. 351. ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 6: "Detective Dan—Secret Operative 48 was published by the Humor Publishing Company of Chicago. Detective Dan was little more than a Dick Tracy clone, but here, for the first time, in a series of black-and-white illustrations, was a comic magazine with an original character appearing in all-new stories. This was a dramatic departure from other comic magazines, which simply reprinted panels from the Sunday newspaper comic strips." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd): "I do recall, though, that when Mr. Livingston visited Cleveland, Joe and I showed "THE SUPERMAN" comic book pages to Mr. Livingston in his hotel room, and he was favorably impressed." ^ Beerbohm, Robert (1996). "Siegel & Shuster Presents... The Superman". Comic Book Marketplace. No. 36. Gemstone Publishing Inc. pp. 47–50.: "So this early "Superman" cover was done, replete with a "10¢" plug... and was placed on an entire comic book, written, drawn, inked, and shown to the Humor people by Jerry and Joe when they happened to come through Cleveland (trying to shop Detective Dan to the NEA newspaper syndicate)." ^ Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. pp. 97-98 ^ Tye (2012), Superman, p. 17: "Although the first response was encouraging, the second made it clear that the comic book was so unprofitable that its publishers put on hold any future stories." ^ a b Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. 99: "Jerry was convinced, just as he was in those early pulp days, that you had to align yourself with someone famous to be famous yourself. [...] Over the next year, Jerry contacted several major artists, including Mel Graff, J. Allen St. John, and even Bernie Schmittke [...]" ^ Tye (2012), Superman, p. 18: "When I told Joe of this, he unhappily destroyed the drawn-up pages of "THE SUPERMAN" burning them in the furnace of his apartment building. At my request, he gave me as a gift the torn cover. We continued collaborating on other projects." In an interview with Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help), Shuster said he destroyed their 1933 Superman comic as a reaction to Humor Publishing's rejection letter, which contradicts Siegel's account in Siegel's unpublished memoir. Tye (2012) argues that the account from the memoir is the truth and that Shuster lied in the interview to avoid tension. See also Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir by Jerry Siegel, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd). ^ Tye (2012), Superman, p. 18:"Next on the list was Leo O’Mealia, who drew the Fu Manchu comic and soon found in his mailbox Jerry’s more fully developed script for Superman." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "Leo O'Mealia's first letter to me was dated July 17, 1933" ^ Tye (2012), Superman, p. 18 ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "I no longer have a copy of the script of that particular version of "Superman". [...] I never saw [O'Mealia's] Superman drawings. He did not send me a copy of it." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd). Extract filed under Exhibit A (Docket 184) in Laura Siegel Larson v Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., DC Comics, Case no. 13-56243: "In a letter dated June 9, 1934, he wrote back expressing interesting in the possibility of our teaming-up together on a newspaper syndication comic strip. [...] Russell Keaton's letter to me of June 14, 1934, was very enthusiastic. He stated that in his opinion "Superman" was already a tremendous hit and that he would be glad to collaborate with me on "Superman"." ^ Jones (2004) harvp error: no target: CITEREFJones2004 (help). Men of Tomorrow, p. 112-113 ^ Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. 101-102 Excerpts of Siegel and Keaton's collaboration can be found in Exhibit A (Docket 373-3), Exhibit C (Docket 347-2), Exhibit D (Docket 347-2), and Exhibit E (Docket 347-2) in Laura Siegel Larson v Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., DC Comics, Case no. 13-56243. (Compilation available at Dropbox). ^ Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. 102: "Jerry tried to sell this version to the syndicates, but no one was interested, so Keaton gave up." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd). Extract filed under Exhibit A (Docket 184) in Laura Siegel Larson v Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., DC Comics, Case no. 13-56243: "Keaton's next letter to me, sent November 3, 1934, stated "Superman" was in a locker in a bus station, and that he was going to show the feature to Publishers Syndicate, after that weekend. [...] I got a brief note from Russell Keaton. He wrote that he was completely withdrawing from any participation at all in the "Superman" comic strip and that as far as he was concerned: "the book is closed". Unhappily, I destroyed the letter." ^ Interview with Joe Shuster by Bertil Falk in 1975, quoted in Alter Ego #56 (Feb 2006): "SHUSTER: [...] I conceived the character in my mind’s eye to have a very, very colorful costume of a cape and, you know, very, very colorful tights and boots and the letter “S” on his chest. FALK: You did that, not Siegel? SHUSTER: Yes, yes. I did that because that was my concept from what he described, but he did inspire me [...]" ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 18 ^ Over the years, Siegel and Shuster made contradictory statements regarding when they developed Superman's familiar costume. They occasionally claimed to have developed it immediately in 1933. Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help) writes: "... usually [Shuster] and Siegel agreed that no special costume was in evidence [in 1933], and the surviving artwork bears them out." The cover art for their 1933 proposal to Humor Publishing shows a shirtless, cape-less Superman. Siegel's collaboration with Russell Keaton in 1934 contains no description nor illustration of Superman in costume. Tye (2012) writes that Siegel and Shuster developed the costume shortly after they resumed working together in late 1934. ^ Siegel's unpublished memoir, The Story Behind Superman (Archived September 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine), as well as an interview with Thomas Andrae in Nemo #2 (1983), corroborate each other that Clark Kent's timid-journalist persona and Lois Lane were developed in 1934. ^ a b Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help): "I also had classical heroes and strongmen in mind, and this shows in the footwear. In the third version, Superman wore sandals laced halfway up the calf. You can still see this on the cover of Action #1, though they were covered over in red to look like boots when the comic was printed." ^ Wheeler-Nicholson offered Siegel and Shuster work in a letter dated June 6, 1935. See Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. 104 ^ Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. 104. ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd). p. 55: "In addition, I submitted "Superman" for newspaper syndication consideration by Wheeler-Nicholson." ^ Letter from Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson to Siegel and Shuster, dated October 4, 1935, quoted in Ricca (2014), Super Boys, p. 146: "...you would be much better off doing Superman in full page in four colors for one of our publications." ^ Jerome Siegel, in a sworn affidavit signed 1 March 1973, filed in Jerome Siegel & Joseph Shuster vs National Periodical Publications et al, 69 Civ 1429: "In 1935 Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson, a publisher of comic books, expressed interest in Superman and tried to persuade us that the property would be more successful if published in comic book form where it would be seen in color than it would be in a black and white daily strip. Our experience with him had been such that we did not consider him the publisher to entrust with the property and his proposal was rejected." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd). p. 57 "Joe and I were not sold on Wheeler-Nicholson and hoped to place "Superman" with what we hoped would be a more responsible organization. I asked Major Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson to return the "Superman" strips to me. [...] I continued my marketing attempts to place "Superman" with a newspaper syndicate." ^ Tye (2012), Superman, p. 24: "So while they continued to write and draw for him, and to live off what payments they got, they determined not to trust him with their prize possession." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "On January 5, 1938, Liebowitz wrote to me [...] that the Nicholson Publishing Company had been petitioned into bankruptcy by its creditors. [...] On January 10, Vin Sullivan wrote to me that Nicholson Publishing Company was in the hands of receivers [...] and that "Detective Comics" was being published by the firm for which Liebowitz was the manager." ^ J. Addison Young, "Findings of Fact" (April 12, 1948), in Jerome Siegel and Joseph Shuster vs. National Comics Publications Inc. et al. (New York Supreme Court 1947) (Scan available on Scribd): "On December 4, 1937, defendant LIEBOWITZ, representing DETECTIVE COMICS, INC., met plaintiff SIEGEL in New York City." ^ Siegel, Jerry. Unpublished memoir "The Story Behind Superman #1", registered for U.S. copyright in 1978 under later version Creation of a Superhero as noted by Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 309. P. 5. Memoir additionally cited by Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help) in Super Boys, and available online at sites including "The Story Behind Superman #1". Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2015 – via Scribd.com. Note: Archive of p. 1 only. ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "I received a telephone call early in January of 1938 from Gaines of the McClure Syndicate. This was a three-way call between Gaines, Liebowitz and myself. Gaines informed me that the syndicate was unable to use the various strips which I had sent for inclusion in the proposed syndicate newspaper tabloid. He asked my permission to turn these features, including "Superman", over to Detective Comics' publishers for consideration for their proposed new magazine, "Action Comics". I consented." ^ Via editor Vin Sullivan, in a letter to Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, dated 10 January 1948. Quoted in Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys ^ Jerry Siegel. The Life and Times of Jerry Siegel (unpublished memoir, written c.1946; Scans available at Dropbox and Scribd): "Joe and I talked it over, decided we were tired of seeing the strip rejected everywhere, and would at least like to see it in print. And so we pasted our samples of a SUPERMAN daily strip into comic magazine page form, as request, and sent it on." ^ Kobler, John (June 21, 1941). "Up, Up, and Awa-a-ay!: The Rise of Superman, Inc" (PDF). The Saturday Evening Post. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 13, 2016.: "[Siegel and Shuster], who by this time had abandoned hope that Superman would ever amount to much, mulled this over gloomily. Then Siegel shrugged, ‘Well, at least this way we'll see [Superman] in print.’ They signed the form." NOTE: The form mentioned refers to a contract of sale signed on March 1, 1938. ^ J. Addison Young, "Findings of Fact" (April 12, 1948), in Jerome Siegel and Joseph Shuster vs. National Comics Publications Inc. et al. (New York Supreme Court 1947) (Scan available on Scribd): "Defendant THE MC CLURE NEWSPAPER SYNDICATE, then submitted to DETECTIVE COMICS, INC. the SUPERMAN comic strip created by plaintiffs, which strip consisted of a few panels suitable for newspaper syndication [...] DETECTIVE COMICS, INC. examined the old material and returned it to plaintiffs for revision and expansion into a full length thirteen-page comic strip release suitable for magazine publication. [...] Plaintiffs revised and expanded the said SUPERMAN material in compliance with the said request of DETECTIVE COMICS, INC. and on or about February 22, 1938, resubmitted such revised and expanded material to DETECTIVE COMICS, INC. [...] On March 1, 1938 [...] DETECTIVE COMICS, INC. wrote to plaintiff SIEGEL [...] enclosing a check in the sum of $412. which included $130. in payment of the first thirteen-page SUPERMAN release at the agreed rate of $10. per page [...]" ^ a b Jones (2004) harvp error: no target: CITEREFJones2004 (help). Men of Tomorrow, p. 125: "They signed a release surrendering all rights to the publisher. They knew that was how the business worked - that's how they'd sold every creation from Henri Duval to Slam Bradley." ^ a b Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman ^ J. Addison Young, "Findings of Fact" (April 12, 1948), in Jerome Siegel and Joseph Shuster vs. National Comics Publications Inc. et al. (New York Supreme Court 1947) (Scan available on Scribd): "The first thirteen pages of SUPERMAN material were published on April 18, 1938, in the June 1938 issue of "Action Comics"magazine." ^ Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help): "...when I did the version in 1934, (which years later, in 1938, was published, in revised form, in Action Comics #1) the John Carter stories did influence me. Carter was able to leap great distances because the planet Mars was smaller that [sic] the planet Earth; and he had great strength. I visualized the planet Krypton as a huge planet, much larger than Earth; so whoever came to Earth from that planet would be able to leap great distances and lift great weights." ^ The History Behind Superman's Ever-Changing Superpowers Archived March 26, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978;Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "I had read and enjoyed Philip Wylie's book "The Gladiator". It influenced me, too." ^ Feeley, Gregory (March 2005). "When World-views Collide: Philip Wylie in the Twenty-first Century". Science Fiction Studies. 32 (95). ISSN 0091-7729. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved December 6, 2006. ^ Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help): "... I was inspired by the movies. In the silent films, my hero was Douglas Fairbanks Senior, who was very agile and athletic. So I think he might have been an inspiration to us, even in his attitude. He had a stance which I often used in drawing Superman. You'll see in many of his roles—including Robin Hood—that he always stood with his hands on his hips and his feet spread apart, laughing—taking nothing seriously." ^ a b c d Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help) ^ Jerry Siegel, quoted in Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help): "I loved The Mark of Zorro, and I'm sure that had some influence on me. I did also see The Scarlet Pimpernel but didn't care much for it." ^ Jerry Siegel. Creation of a Superhero (unpublished memoir, written c.1978; Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd).: "In movies, I had seen "The Scarlet Pimpernel", "The Mark of Zorro" and Rudolph Valentino in "The Eagle", and I thought that a mighty hero, who in another identity pretended to be an ineffectual weakling, made for great dramatic contrast. In addition, it would, in a comic strip, permit some humorous characterization." ^ Siegel: "We especially loved some of those movies in which Harold Lloyd would start off as a sort of momma's boy being pushed around, kicked around, thrown around, and then suddenly would turn into a fighting whirlwind." Shuster: "I was kind of mild-manned and wore glasses so I really identified with it" Anthony Wall (1981). Superman – The Comic Strip Hero (Television production). BBC. Event occurs at 00:04:50. Archived from the original on December 28, 2015. ^ Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help): Siegel: "As a high school student, I thought that someday I might become a reporter, and I had crushes on several attractive girls who either didn't know I existed or didn't care I existed. [...] It occurred to me: What if I was real terrific? What if I had something special going for me, like jumping over buildings or throwing cars around or something like that? Then maybe they would notice me." ^ Shuster in Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help) "I tried to build up my body. I was so skinny; I went in for weight-lifting and athletics. I used to get all the body-building magazines from the second-hand stores — and read them...." ^ Andrae (1983) harvp error: no target: CITEREFAndrae1983 (help): "It was inspired by the costume pictures that Fairbanks did: they greatly influenced us." ^ Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys, p. 124: "The overall physical look of Superman himself is from Johnny Weissmuller, whose face Joe swiped from movie magazines and news articles. ... Joe just squinted the eyes like his idol Roy Crane [did with his characters] and added a Dick Tracy smile." Ricca cites Beerbohm, Robert L. (August 1997). "The Big Bang Theory of Comic Book History". Comic Book Marketplace. 2 (50). Coronado, California: Gemstone Publishing. ^ Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys, p. 129: "What the boys did read were the magazines and papers where "superman" was a common word. Its usage was almost always preceded by "a." Most times the word was used to refer to an athlete or a politician." ^ Flagg, Francis (November 11, 1931). "The Superman of Dr. Jukes". Wonder Stories. Gernsback. ^ Jacobson, Howard (March 5, 2005). "Up, Up and Oy Vey!". The Times. UK. p. 5.: "If Siegel and Shuster knew of Nietzsche's Ubermensch, they didn't say..." ^ "Comic with first Superman story sells for $1.5m". The Independent. March 30, 2010. Archived from the original on April 2, 2010. Retrieved March 30, 2010. ^ Action Comics Archived February 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database. ^ Superman Archived February 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (1939–1986 series) and Adventures of Superman Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (1987 continuation of series) at the Grand Comics Database. ^ "Superman"-titled comics Archived March 5, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database. ^ "Best-selling comic books of all time worldwide as of February 2015 (in million copies)". Statista. Retrieved 2018-07-30. ^ Tilley, Carol (Mar 1, 2016). "Unbalanced Production: The Comics Business in the 1940s". The Beat. Retrieved 2018-07-30. ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 163: "It did work. In 1960, the first year in which sales data was made public, Superman was selling more comic books than any other title or character, and he stayed on top through much of the decade. ^ Comichron. Comic Book Sales By Year Archived July 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Thesp trio eyes 'Nurse'; 'Superman' may fly". Variety.com. Sep 29, 1998. ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 245: "Journalists, along with most of their readers and viewers, didn’t understand that heroes regularly perished in the comics and almost never stayed dead." ^ "2018 Comic Book Sales to Comic Book Shops". Comichron. Retrieved July 8, 2018. ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 294: "The remaining audience [by 2011] was dedicated to the point of fanaticism, a trend that was self-reinforcing. No longer did casual readers pick up a comic at the drugstore or grocery, both because the books increasingly required an insider’s knowledge to follow the action and because they simply weren’t being sold anymore at markets, pharmacies, or even the few newsstands that were left. [...] Comic books had gone from being a cultural emblem to a countercultural refuge." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 212: "So Jenette [Kahn] and her business-savvy sidekick, Paul Levitz, started viewing comics as creative engines rather than cash cows, able to spin off profitable enterprises in other media." ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 166: "Whereas in the 1950s, the average comic book reader was 12 years old, by the 1990s, the average comic book reader was 20. A mere decade later, in 2001, the average age of comic book readers was 25." ^ Gordon (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFGordon2017 (help). Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon p. 164 ^ Tumey, Paul (April 14, 2014). "Reviews: Superman: The Golden Age Sundays 1943–1946". The Comics Journal. Archived from the original on May 29, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2016. ...Jerry Siegel had his hands — and typewriter — full, turning out stories for the comic books and the daily newspaper strips (which had completely separate continuities from the Sundays). ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 74 ^ Cole, Neil A. (ed.). "Wayne Boring (1905–1987)". SupermanSuperSite.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. ^ Cole, Neil A. (ed.). "Win Mortimer (1919–1998)". SupermanSuperSite.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2016. ^ Younis, Steven (ed.). "Superman Newspaper Strips". SupermanHomepage.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved February 28, 2016. ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 49: "Initially Harry [Donenfeld], Jack [Liebowitz], and the managers they hired to oversee their growing editorial empire had let Jerry [Siegel] do as he wished with the character..." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 41: "Neither Harry [Donenfeld] nor Jack [Liebowitz] had planned for a separate Superman comic book, or for that to be ongoing. Having Superman's story play out across different venues presented a challenge for Jerry [Siegel] and the writers who came after him: Each installment needed to seem original yet part of a whole, stylistically and narratively. Their solution, at the beginning, was to wing it..." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 42: "...the publisher was anxious to avoid any repetition of the censorship problems associated with his early pulp magazines (such as the lurid Spicy Detective)." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 49: "Once Superman became big business, however, plots had to be sent to New York for vetting. Not only did editors tell Jerry to cut out the guns and knives and cut back on social crusading, they started calling the shots on minute details of script and drawing." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 42: "It was left to Ellsworth to impose tight editorial controls on Jerry Siegel. Henceforth, Superman would be forbidden to use his powers to kill anyone, even a villain." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 47: "No hint of sex. No alienating parents or teachers. Evil geniuses like the Ultra-Humanite were too otherworldly to give kids nightmares... The Prankster, the Toyman, the Puzzler, and J. Wilbur Wolngham, a W. C. Fields lookalike, used tricks and gags instead of a bow and arrows in their bids to conquer Superman. For editors wary of controversy, 1940s villains like those were a way to avoid the sharp edges of the real world." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 162: "Before Mort came along, Superman’s world was ad hoc and seat-of-the-pants, with Jerry and other writers adding elements as they went along without any planning or anyone worrying whether it all hung together. That worked fine when all the books centered around Superman and all the writing was done by a small stable. Now the pool of writers had grown and there were eight different comic books with hundreds of Superman stories a year to worry about." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 173: "But Weisinger’s innovations were taking a quiet toll on the story. Superman’s world had become so complicated that readers needed a map or even an encyclopedia to keep track of everyone and everything. (There would eventually be encyclopedias, two in fact, but the first did not appear until 1978.) All the plot complications were beguiling to devoted readers, who loved the challenge of keeping current, but to more casual fans they could be exhausting." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 165: "Weisinger stories steered clear of the Vietnam War, the sexual revolution, the black power movement, and other issues that red the 1960s. There was none of what Mort would have called "touchy-feely" either, much as readers might have liked to know how Clark felt about his split personality, or whether Superman and Lois engaged in the battles between the sexes that were a hallmark of the era. Mort wanted his comics to be a haven for young readers, and he knew his right-leaning politics wouldn’t sit well with his leftist writers and many of his Superman fans." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 102}}: "One of the ways the editor kept in touch with his young audience was through a letters column, "Metropolis Mailbag," introduced in 1958." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 168: "He admitted later he was losing touch with a new generation of kids and their notions about heroes and villains." ^ Julius Schwartz, quoted in Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help): "I said, 'I want to get rid of all the kryptonite. I want to get rid of all the robots that are used to get him out of situations. And I'm sick and tired of that stupid suit Clark Kent wears all the time. I want to give him more up-to-date clothes. And maybe the most important thing I want to do is take him out of the Daily Planet and put him into television.' I said 'Our readers are not that familiar with newspapers. Most of them get their news on television, and I think it's high time after all these years.'" ^ Harvey (1996), p. 144 harvp error: no target: CITEREFHarvey1996 (help): "Artistic expressiveness of a highly individualistic sort had never been particularly welcomed by traditional comic book publishers. The corporate mind, ever focused on the bottom line of the balance sheet, favored bland "house styles" of rendering..." ^ Eury, Adams & Swan (2006) harvp error: no target: CITEREFEuryAdamsSwan2006 (help). The Krypton Companion, p. 18: "In 1948 Boring succeeded Shuster as the principal superman artist, his art style epitomizing the Man of Steel's comics and merchandising look throughout the 1950s." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 74: "...Superman was drawn in a more detailed, realistic style of illustration. He also looked bigger and stronger. "Until then Superman had always seemed squat," Boring said. "He was six heads high, a bit shorter than normal. I made him taller–nine heads high–but kept his massive chest." ^ Curt Swan (1987). Drawing Superman. Essay reprinted in Eury (2006), pp. 58 harvp error: no target: CITEREFEury2006 (help): "For 30 years or so, from around 1955 until a couple of years ago when I more or less retired, I was the principal artists of the Superman comic for DC Comics." ^ Wandtke (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFWandtke2012 (help) ^ Hayde (2009) harvp error: no target: CITEREFHayde2009 (help). Flights of Fantasy ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 88: "[Harry Donenfeld] drafted Maxwell into Superman, Inc., first to oversee the licensing of toys and other products, then to bring the superhero into the world of broadcast." ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 16: "Superman was brought to radio by Allen Ducovny, a press agent with Detective Comics, and Robert Maxwell (the pen name of Robert Joffe), a former pulp fiction author who was in charge of licensing the subsidiary rights of the company's comic book characters." ^ Pointer (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFPointer2017 (help): "...the budget for each short – an astonishing $30,000..." ^ Dave Fleischer, quoted in Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help) Superman: The Complete History, p. 58: "The average short cost nine or ten thousand dollars, some ran up to fifteen; they varied." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 94: "Max and Dave [Fleischer's] composers knew what Superman, Lois, and the others should look like, thanks to model sheets provided by Joe Shuster." ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 37: "The challenges of the production had more than doubled its budget; the final cost was variously reported as anywhere from $250,000 to $325,000." ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 37: "With all the hype, Superman quickly became the most profitable serial in film history." ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 49: "According to Variety, the feature film and an additional twenty-four half-hour episodes were to come in for $400,000, or roughly $15,000 each." ^ a b c Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway ^ "Superman Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2016. ^ Bob Chipman (2016). Really That Good: SUPERMAN (1978) (YouTube). Moviebob Central. ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway, p. 90 ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 197 ^ Bernard Luber, quoted in Flights of Fantasy (Hayde 2009) harv error: no target: CITEREFHayde2009 (help): "The show wasn’t strictly for youngsters. We offered the dream of every man - to fly, to be super." ^ Scivally (2007), p. 52 harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help): "...Robert Maxwell hoped for an adult time slot, so he made Superman an adult show, with death scenes and rough violence." ^ Clements, Jonathan; Tamamuro, Motoko (2003). The Dorama Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese TV Drama Since 1953. Stone Bridge Press. p. 200. ISBN 9781880656815. ^ Beeler, Stan (2011). "From Comic Book To Bildungsroman: Smallville, Narrative, And The Education Of A Young Hero". In Geraghty, Lincoln (ed.). The Smallville Chronicles: Critical Essays on the Television Series. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810881303. ^ Aurthur, Kate (May 20, 2006). "Young Male Viewers Lift Ratings for 'Smallville'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 26, 2020. ^ Gordon (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFGordon2017 (help) ^ J. Addison Young, "Findings of Fact" (April 12, 1948), in Jerome Siegel and Joseph Shuster vs. National Comics Publications Inc. et al. (New York Supreme Court 1947) (Scan available on Scribd) ^ Gordon (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFGordon2017 (help). Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon p. 162 ^ "Retail Sales of Licensed Merchandise Based on $100 Million+ Entertainment/Character Properties". The Licensing Letter. 2018-07-23. Retrieved 2018-08-07. ^ Anthony, Ian (Nov 2003). "Superb Manifestations: Five Anniversaries Converge In 2003 For Superman". Superman Homepage. Retrieved 2018-08-07. ^ Gordon (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFGordon2017 (help). Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon p. 146}} ^ Gordon (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFGordon2017 (help). Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon p. 162-165}} ^ Gordon (2017) harvp error: no target: CITEREFGordon2017 (help). Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon, p. 155 ^ Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys, p. 150: "It was then Donenfeld who not only now owned the property, but received the lion's share of the profits; whatever Jerry and Joe got was parsed out by him." ^ Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys, p. 155: "[Harry Donenfeld] knew readers had become accustomed to Siegel and Shuster’s work, and he didn't want to risk upsetting a secret formula that he still didn't completely understand, especially when it was selling so well." ^ Tye (2012) harvp error: no target: CITEREFTye2012 (help). Superman, p. 119: "In the ten years from 1938, when the first Action was published, to the filing of the suit in 1947, Jerry and Joe were paid [...] a total of $401,194.85." ^ Exhibit Q (Docket 353-3) in Laura Siegel Larson v Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., DC Comics, Case no. 13-56243 (Scans available from Dropbox and Scribd). Originally submitted as an exhibit in Jerome Siegel and Joseph Shuster vs. National Comics Publications Inc. et al. (New York Supreme Court 1947) ^ Jerry Siegel. The Life and Times of Jerry Siegel (unpublished memoir, written c.1946; Scans available at Dropbox and Scribd): "While I was in service, the majority of SUPERMAN's adventures were ghost-written by writers employed by DETECTIVE COMICS, Inc. ^ Jerry Siegel, in a 1975 interview with Phil Yeh for Cobblestone magazine. Quoted in Siegel and Shuster's Funnyman by Tom Andrae and Mel Gordon on page 49.: "While I was in the service they started ghosting the Superman scripts, because obviously I couldn't write them while I was away in the service." ^ Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys, p. 223: "Jerry felt angry and instantly very isolated: Harry had gone ahead and okayed the title without telling him—or paying for it?" ^ a b c d e f Sergi (2015) harvp error: no target: CITEREFSergi2015 (help). The Law for Comic Book Creators ^ Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help). Super Boys, p. 226: "Jerry and Joe got a final check—and were promptly shown the door by National." ^ Exhibit 2 (Docket 722-1) in Laura Siegel Larson vs Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., DC Comics, case no 13-56243. ^ Sergi (2015), p. 214 harvp error: no target: CITEREFSergi2015 (help) ^ Scott Niswander (July 22, 2015). Why Isn't SUPERMAN a PUBLIC DOMAIN Superhero?? (YouTube video). NerdSync Productions. Event occurs at 3:03~3:33. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2016. ^ The Marvel Family #89. Copyright date registered as 25 September 1953. See Catalog of Copyright Entries, Third Series, Volume 7, Part 2, Number 1: Periodicals, Jan-Jun 1953. United States Library of Congress. 1954. p. 268. ^ Thomas, Roy; Ordway, Jerry (July 2001). "Not Your Father's Captain Marvel! An Artist-by-Artist Account of a Doomed Quest for a 1980s Shazam! Series". Alter Ego. Raleigh, North Carolina: Two Morrows Publishing. 3 (9): 9–17. ^ https://www.supermanhomepage.com/radio/radio.php?topic=r-radio ^ Superman comic strip, January 16, 1939 Archived October 8, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, reprinted at "Episode 1: Superman Comes to Earth". TheSpeedingBullet.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016. ^ Lowther, George (1942). The Adventures of Superman. Per Ricca (2014), p. 204 harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help): "The book is also the first time that Superman's parents are named "Jor-el" and "Lara"—a slight spelling change that would stick." ^ The Secret Rocket per Lantz, James. "Superman Radio Series – Story Reviews". SupermanHomepage.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2016. ^ Jackson, Matthew (December 17, 2012). "The campaign to make a real Kansas town into Superman's Smallville". Blastr.com (Syfy). Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016. Decades of comic book mythology and a hit TV series have made Superman's hometown of Smallville, Kan., one of the most famous places in America. ^ Mankiewicz & Crane (2012), p. 203 harvp error: no target: CITEREFMankiewiczCrane2012 (help) ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History ^ "The New Batman/Superman Adventures". Warner Bros. Archived from the original on February 2, 2007. ^ John Sikela (p). "The Origin of Superboy's Costume!" Superboy 78 (January 1960), New York, NY: DC Comics ^ Seagle, Steven T. (w), McDaniel, Scott (p), Owens, Andy (i). "Truth" Superman: The 10¢ Adventure 1 (March 2003), New York, NY: DC Comics ^ Schutz, David (April 26, 1992). "When Superman Worked at The Star". The Adventures of Superman. Archived from the original on July 17, 2010. Retrieved December 25, 2010. ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 42 ^ Lee, Jim. "From the Co-Publishers", "The Source" (column), DC Comics, January 20, 2011. WebCitation archive. ^ Weldon 2013, p. 33 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWeldon2013 (help) ^ Weldon (2013) harvp error: no target: CITEREFWeldon2013 (help). Superman the Unauthorized Biography, p. 55 ^ "The religion of Superman (Clark Kent / Kal-El)". Adherents.com. August 14, 2007. Archived from the original on August 28, 2012. ^ a b Rucka, Greg (w), Lopez, David (p). "Affirmative Defense" Wonder Woman v2, 220 (Oct. 2005), DC Comics ^ Action Comics #594 (1987) ^ Evans, Woody (2014). "Why They Won't Save Us: Political Dispositions in the Conflicts of Superheroes". ^ Johns, Geoff (w), Conner, Amanda (p), Palmiotti, Jimmy (i). "Power Trip" JSA: Classified 1 (September 2005), DC Comics ^ Johns, Geoff Donner, Richard (w), Wight, Eric (p), Wight, Eric (i). "Who is Clark Kent's Big Brother?" Action Comics Annual 10 (March 2007), DC Comics ^ Buskiek, Kurt, Nicieza, Fabian, Johns, Geoff (w), Guedes, Renato (p), Magalhaes, Jose Wilson (i). "Superman: Family" Action Comics 850 (July 2007), DC Comics ^ Wallace, Dan (2008). "Alternate Earths". In Dougall, Alastair (ed.). The DC Comics Encyclopedia. London: Dorling Kindersley. pp. 20–21. ISBN 978-0-7566-4119-1. ^ Example: DC Comics Presents #3 (1978) ^ "Clark Kent, Reporter". The Adventures of Superman. Episode 2. February 14, 1940. WOR.: -Look! Look! There, in the sky! It's a man! -Why, he's flying! -It can't be! It's not possible! ^ Daniels (1998), pp. 106–107. ^ The Meteor From Krypton (June 1943). Per Hayde (2009) harvp error: no target: CITEREFHayde2009 (help): "Only one arc in 1943 managed to transcend its era: "The Meteor from Krypton." Debuting on June 3, it marked the debut of kryptonite..." ^ Superman #61 Archived April 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database. "Indexer notes ... Green Kryptonite introduced in this story." ^ "If Lois should ACTUALLY learn Clark's secret, the strip would lose about 75% of its appeal—the human interest angle. I know that a formula can possibly prove monotonous through repetition but I fear that if this element is removed from the story formula that makes up SUPERMAN, that this strip will lose a great part of its effectiveness." Siegel, in his script notes, quoted in Ricca (2014) harvp error: no target: CITEREFRicca2014 (help) (Super Boys). ^ Superman #17 Archived April 15, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database. ^ Cronin, Brian (June 28, 2011). "When We First Met". (column #30) ComicBookResources.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2016. ^ Scivally (2007) harvp error: no target: CITEREFScivally2007 (help). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway: "The episode also introduced Julian Noa as Clark Kent's boss, whose name had evolved from Paris White to Perry White. White's newspaper changed from The Daily Flash to the Daily Planet. Soon after the radio show appeared, the comic books also changed their Daily Star editor George Taylor to Daily Planet editor Perry White..." ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 160 ^ Though created to appear in Superman #30 (Sept. 1944), publishing lag time resulted in the character first appearing in the Superman daily comic strip that year, per Superman #30 Archived March 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database. ^ Schodt, Frederik L. (2007). The Astro Boy Essays: Osamu Tezuka, Mighty Atom, and the Manga/Anime Revolution. Stone Bridge Press. p. 45. ISBN 9781933330549. ^ Craig, Timothy (2015). Japan Pop: Inside the World of Japanese Popular Culture. Routledge. ISBN 9781317467212. ^ Katsuno, Hirofumi (2018). "The Grotesque Hero: Depictions of Justice in Tokusatsu Superhero Television Programs". In Freedman, Alisa; Slade, Toby (eds.). Introducing Japanese Popular Culture. Routledge. ISBN 9781317528937. ^ Clements, Jonathan; Tamamuro, Motoko (2003). The Dorama Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese TV Drama Since 1953. Stone Bridge Press. ISBN 9781880656815. ^ Martin, Deborah (2019-06-19). "Crystal Bridges exhibit 'Men of Steel, Women of Wonder' lands in San Antonio". ExpressNews.com. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ "Men of Steel, Women of Wonder Debuts at San Antonio Museum of Art". San Antonio Magazine. 2019-06-20. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Gural, Natasha. "Quickly To The Whitney, And Back Again To San Francisco, Chicago For Andy Warhol Beyond Superstardom". Forbes. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Sante, Luc (2020-05-03). "Andy Warhol, Superstar". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Cohen, Alina (2018-10-01). "How Roy Lichtenstein Unwittingly Invented Pop Art". Artsy. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Genzlinger, Neil (2018-10-31). "Mel Ramos, Painter of Female Nudes and Comic Heroes, Dies at 83". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Jesus, Carlos Suarez De (2008-01-31). "Immigrants Are Superheroes". Miami New Times. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ a b "Mr. Brainwash will convert a Richard Meier-designed building into a Beverly Hills art museum". The Architect’s Newspaper. 2020-02-18. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Storr, Robert (2017-06-02). "Pettibon's World". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Schjeldahl, Peter. "The In-Your-Face Paintings of Peter Saul". The New Yorker. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ "Giuseppe Veneziano | artnet". www.artnet.com. Retrieved 2020-07-14. ^ "F. Lennox Campello | Superman Naked | Artsy". Artsy. Retrieved 2020-07-14. ^ SCHKLOVEN, EMMA. "Traveling superhero-themed exhibit comes to Lynchburg College". NewsAdvance.com. Retrieved 2020-07-07. ^ Trostle, Adora (2019-01-30). "Results from the Miami Art Fairs a few Months Ago". NY UNDRESSED. Retrieved 2020-07-14. ^ Brownie, Barbara; Graydon, Danny (2015). The Superhero Costume: Identity and Disguise in Fact and FictionDress, Body, Culture. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781472595928. ^ Turner, Robin (August 8, 2006). "Deputy Dawg". Western Mail. p. 21. ^ "Looney Tunes # 97". Big Comicbook Database. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved January 16, 2007. ^ Clarke, Mel (August 1, 2004). "The Pitch". The Sunday Times. p. 34. ^ Kinnes, Sally (January 30, 2000). "The One To Watch". The Sunday Times. p. 58. ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman: The Complete History, p. 185 ^ "Steven Seagle Talks It's a Bird". ugo.com. Archived from the original on December 13, 2006. Retrieved January 16, 2007. the semi-autobiographical tale of Steven being given the chance to write a Superman comic, but stumbling when he can't figure out how to relate to the character. Through the course of the story, Seagle finds his way into Superman by looking at it through the lens of his own mortality. ^ Taylor, Paul (September 21, 1994). "Theatre". The Independent. UK. ^ DiPaolo, Marc (2011). War, Politics and Superheroes: Ethics and Propaganda In Comics and Film. McFarland & Company. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-7864-8579-6. ^ Donovan. "Sunshine Superman". Sunshine Superman. Epic, 1966. ^ Jim Croce. "You Don't Mess Around with Jim". You Don't Mess Around with Jim. ABC/Vertigo, 1972. ^ Genesis. "Land of Confusion". Invisible Touch. Atlantic Records, 1986. "Ooh Superman where are you now, When everything's gone wrong somehow". ^ Lloyd, John & Yukich, Jim (Directors) (1986). "Land of Confusion" (Music video). Atlantic Records. ^ Morrison (writer), Grant; Truog, Chas; Hazlewood, Doug; Grummet, Tom (artists) (2002) [1991]. "2: Life In The Concrete Jungle". In Michael Charles Hill (ed.). Animal Man. John Costanza (letterer) & Tatjana Wood (colorist) (1st ed.). New York, NY: DC Comics. p. 45. ISBN 1-56389-005-4. R.E.M. starts singing "Superman." My arm aches and I've got déjà vu. Funny how everything comes together. ^ Lyrics to "Superman's Song". ^ "Five For Fighting: Inside Track". VH1. Archived from the original on July 19, 2008. Retrieved June 17, 2010. ^ Classical Music News Desk. "The Ann Arbor Symphony Orchestra Presents MADE IN THE USA Tonight". Wisdom Digital Media. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved October 27, 2014. ^ "Metropolis Symphony". Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. ^ Eco, Umberto (2004) [1962]. "The Myth of Superman". In Heer, Jeet Heer; Worcesterm Kent (eds.). Arguing Comics. University Press of Mississippi. p. 162. ISBN 1-57806-687-5. ^ Clarke, Gerald (December 13, 1971). "The Comics On The Couch". Time: 1–4. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved January 29, 2007. ^ Daniels (1995) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1995 (help). DC Comics: Sixty Years of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes, p. 64 ^ Grayling, A C (July 8, 2006). "The Philosophy of Superman: A Short Course". The Spectator. UK. ISSN 0038-6952. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved January 29, 2007. ^ Daniels (1995) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1995 (help). DC Comics: Sixty Years of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes , pp. 22–23 ^ The Mythology of Superman (DVD). Warner Bros. 2006. ^ Sabin, Roger (1996). Comics, Comix & Graphic Novels (4th paperback ed.). Phaidon. ISBN 0-7148-3993-0. ^ von Busack, Richard (July 2–8, 1998). "Superman Versus the KKK". Metro Silicon Valley. San Jose, California. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved January 28, 2007. ^ Dubner, Stephen J; Levitt, Steven D (January 8, 2006). "Hoodwinked?". The New York Times Magazine. p. F26. Archived from the original on April 7, 2012. Retrieved January 28, 2007. ^ Weldon (2013) harvp error: no target: CITEREFWeldon2013 (help). Superman the Unauthorized Biography, p. 83 ^ Bukatman, Scott (2003). Matters of Gravity: Special Effects and Supermen in the 20th century. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3132-2. ^ Jules Feiffer The Great Comic Book Heroes, (2003). Fantagraphics. ISBN 1-56097-501-6 ^ Andrae (1983), p.10. ^ Ian Gordon "Nostalgia, Myth, and Ideology: Visions of Superman at the End of the 'American Century"in Michael Ryan, ' 'Cultural Studies: An Anthology' '(2007). Blackwell ISBN 978-1-4051-4577-0 [1]. ^ Coogan, Peter (2013). "The Hero Defines the Genre, the Genre Defines the Hero". In Robin S. Rosenberg; Peter MacFarland (eds.). What is a Superhero?. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199795277. ^ Brownie, Graydon, pp.23–25. ^ Fingeroth, Danny Superman on the Couch (2004). Continuum International Publishing Group p53. ISBN 0-8264-1539-3 ^ a b Engle, Gary "What Makes Superman So Darned American?" reprinted in Popular Culture (1992) Popular Press p 331–343. ISBN 0-87972-572-9 ^ Wallace, Daniel; Bryan Singer (2006). The Art of Superman Returns. Chronicle Books. p. 92. ISBN 0-8118-5344-6. ^ Aldo, Regalado (2005). "Modernity, Race, and the American Superhero". In McLaughlin, Jeff (ed.). Comics as Philosophy. University of Mississippi Press. p. 92. ISBN 1-57806-794-4. ^ Jenemann, David (2007). Adorno in America. U of Minnesota Press. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-8166-4809-2. ^ Rooney, David (June 3, 2010). "Finding America, Searching for Identity". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2010. Retrieved June 11, 2010. ^ Weinstein, Simcha (2006). Up, Up, and Oy Vey! (1st ed.). Leviathan Press. ISBN 978-1-881927-32-7. ^ Tye, Larry (2012). Superman: The High-Flying History of America's Most Enduring Hero. Random House Digital. pp. 65–67. ISBN 978-1-4000-6866-1. Like Moses. Much as the baby prophet was floated in a reed basket by a mother desperate to spare him from an Egyptian Pharaoh's death warrant, so Kal-El's doomed… ^ Goebbels, Paul Joseph (April 25, 1940). "Jerry Siegel Attacks!". Das schwarze Korps. p. 8. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. ^ Lund (2016) harvp error: no target: CITEREFLund2016 (help) ^ Daniels (1998) harvp error: no target: CITEREFDaniels1998 (help). Superman, p. 19: "There are parallel stories in many cultures, but what is significant is that Siegel, working in the generally patronized medium of the comics, had created a secular American messiah. Nothing of the kind was consciously on his mind, apparently: his explanation for dropping Superman down from the sky was that "it just happened that way."And Shuster echoed him: "We just thought it was a good idea."" ^ Dickholtz, Daniel (1998). "Steel Dreams". Starlog Yearbook. Starlog Group, Inc. p. 77. Bibliography[edit] Andrae, Thomas (August 1983). "Of Supermen and Kids with Dreams". Nemo: The Classic Comics Library (2). Fantagraphics. pp. 6–19. Reprinted in Comics Values Monthly Superman Memorial Issue (1992) and Best, Daniel, ed. (August 3, 2012). "'Jerry and I did a comic book together...' Jerry Siegel & Joe Shuster Interviewed". 20th Century Danny Boy. Archived from the original on December 4, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015. Beerbohm, Robert (1996). "Siegel & Shuster Presents... The Superman". Comic Book Marketplace. No. 36. Gemstone Publishing Inc. pp. 47–50. Cronin, Brian (2009). Was Superman a Spy?. Penguin. ISBN 9781101046562. Daniels, Les (1995). DC Comics: Sixty Years of the World's Favorite Comic Book Heroes (First ed.). Bulfinch Press. ISBN 978-0821220764. Daniels, Les (1998). Superman: The Complete History (1st ed.). Titan Books. ISBN 1-85286-988-7. Dean, Michael (October 14, 2004). "An Extraordinarily Marketable Man: The Ongoing Struggle for Ownership of Superman and Superboy". The Comics Journal (263): 13–17. Archived from the original on December 1, 2006. Retrieved December 22, 2006. Eury, Michael; Adams, Neal; Swan, Curt; Anderson, Murphy (2006). The Krypton Companion. Raleigh, NC: TwoMorrows Publishing. ISBN 978-1-893905-61-0. Gordon, Ian (2017). Superman: The Persistence of an American Icon. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 9780813587530. Harvey, Robert C. (1996). The Art of the Comic Book: An Aesthetic History. Univ. Press of Mississippi. ISBN 9780878057580. Hatfield, Charles (2005). Alternative Comics: An Emerging Literature. Univ. Press of Mississippi. ISBN 9781604735871. Hayde, Michael J. (2009). Flights of Fantasy: The Unauthorized but True Story of Radio & TV's Adventures of Superman. BearManor Media. ISBN 9781593933449. Jones, Gerard (2004). Men of Tomorrow: Geeks, Gangsters, and the Birth of the Comic Book. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-03656-2. Kobler, John (June 21, 1941). "Up, Up, and Awa-a-ay!: The Rise of Superman, Inc" (PDF). The Saturday Evening Post. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 13, 2016. Lund, Martin (2016). Re-Constructing the Man of Steel: Superman 1938–1941, Jewish American History, and the Invention of the Jewish–Comics Connection. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-3-319-42959-5. Mankiewicz, Tom; Crane, Robert (2012). My Life as a Mankiewicz: An Insider's Journey through Hollywood. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 9780813140575. Pointer, Ray (2017). The Art and Inventions of Max Fleischer: American Animation Pioneer. McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-6367-8. Ricca, Brad (2014). Super Boys: The Amazing Adventures of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster – the Creators of Superman. St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 978-1250049681. Rossen, Jake (2008). Superman Vs. Hollywood: How Fiendish Producers, Devious Directors, and Warring Writers Grounded an American Icon. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 9781569765012. Scivally, Bruce (2007). Superman on Film, Television, Radio and Broadway. McFarland. ISBN 9780786431663. Sergi, Joe (2015). The Law for Comic Book Creators: Essential Concepts and Applications. McFarland. ISBN 978-0786473601. Steranko, Jim (1970). The Steranko History of Comics vol. 1. Supergraphics. ISBN 9780517501887. Tye, Larry (2012). Superman: The High-Flying History of America's Most Enduring Hero. Random House New York. ISBN 978-1-58836-918-5. Weldon, Glen (2013). Superman: The Unauthorized Biography. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-1-118-34184-1. Keith Dallas; Jason Sacks; Jim Beard; Dave Dykema; Paul Brian McCoy (2013). American Comic Book Chronicles: The 1980s. TwoMorrows Publishing. ISBN 9781605490465. Further reading[edit] De Haven, Tom (2009). Our Hero: Superman on Earth. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11817-9. OCLC 320132317. External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata No URL found. Please specify a URL here or add one to Wikidata. Golden Age, Silver Age and Modern Age Superman at the Comic book database Superman on DC Database, an external wiki, a DC Comics wiki Superman on IMDb v t e Superman Jerry Siegel Joe Shuster Other writers and artists Characters Superman Lois Lane Lex Luthor Jimmy Olsen Perry White List of Superman supporting characters List of Superman enemies Locations Fortress of Solitude Kandor Krypton Metropolis Daily Planet LexCorp Suicide Slum Other areas, landmarks, institutions and businesses Phantom Zone Smallville History and themes Character and cast Dynasty Kryptonian Origin Publication history Action Comics #1 Action Comics #1000 Superman and Lois Lane Symbol Superboy (Kal-El) Ongoing publications Action Comics Batman/Superman Supergirl Superman In other media In film Related Alternative versions of Superman Metropolis, Illinois Superman (gene) Joanne Siegel Category v t e Justice League characters Founding members Aquaman Batman Flash/Barry Allen Green Lantern/Hal Jordan Martian Manhunter Superman Wonder Woman Recurring members Amazing-Man Animal Man Atom Ray Palmer Ryan Choi Batgirl Big Barda Black Canary Black Lightning Booster Gold Blue Beetle Captain Atom Captain Marvel/Shazam Catwoman Cyborg Detective Chimp Dr Fate Dr Light/Kimiyo Hoshi Elongated Man Fire Firestorm Flash Jay Garrick Wally West Geo-Force Green Arrow Green Lantern Guy Gardner Jade John Stewart Kyle Rayner Simon Baz Jessica Cruz Harley Quinn Hawkman Carter Hall Katar Hol Hawkgirl and Hawkwoman Shiera Sanders Hall Shayera Hol Kendra Saunders Huntress Ice Lobo Mera Metamorpho Mister Miracle Orion Plastic Man Red Arrow Red Tornado Robin/Nightwing Steel Supergirl Triumph Vixen Zatanna Other characters Supporting characters Alfred Pennyworth Arella A.R.G.U.S. Carol Ferris Highfather Iris West James Gordon Jimmy Olsen Lois Lane Lucius Fox Perry White Queen Hippolyta Allies Amazonians Atlanteans Birds of Prey Doom Patrol GCPD Justice League Dark John Constantine Deadman Detective Chimp Etrigan the Demon Swamp Thing Zatanna Justice Society of America Lantern Corps Guardians of the Universe Zamarons Blue Lantern Corps Green Lantern Corps Indigo Tribe Star Sapphire Corps White Lantern Corps Legion of Super-Heroes Marvel/Shazam Family New Gods Outsiders S.T.A.R. Labs Suicide Squad Teen Titans Robin Starfire Beast Boy Cyborg Raven Young Justice Enemies Villains Amanda Waller Amazo Amos Fortune Anti-Monitor Black Adam Black Hand Black Manta Blockbuster Brainiac Brain Storm Captain Cold Cheetah Circe Darkseid David Graves Despero Doctor Destiny Doctor Light Doctor Polaris Doctor Sivana Doomsday Eclipso Epoch Felix Faust Funky Flashman Gamemnae General Gentleman Ghost Gog Gorilla Grodd Hector Hammond Hyathis Imperiex Joker Kanjar Ro Key King Kull Klarion the Witch Boy Lex Luthor Libra Ma'alefa'ak Magog Manchester Black Manga Khan Manhunter Matter Master Maxwell Lord Merlyn Mongul Morgaine le Fey Nebula Man Nekron Neron OMAC Paragon Per Degaton Professor Ivo Prometheus Queen Bee Queen of Fables Ra's al Ghul Rama Khan Red King Reverse-Flash Shaggy Man Sinestro Siren Solaris Solomon Grundy Sonar Starbreaker Starro Steppenwolf T. O. Morrow Trigon Ultra-Humanite Vandal Savage Weapons Master Wizard Organizations Aryan Brigade Axis Amerika Brotherhood of Evil Cadre Crime Syndicate of America Fearsome Five Female Furies Kobra League of Assassins Legion of Doom Manhunters Parademons Phantom Zone Villains Red Lantern Corps Rogues Royal Flush Gang Secret Six Secret Society of Super Villains Sinestro Corps White Martians Alternative versions Alternate versions of the Justice League Extreme Justice Just'a Lotta Animals Justice Guild of America Justice League 3000 Justice League Dark Justice League Elite Justice League Europe Justice League International Justice League Task Force Justice League United Justice Legion Alpha Super Buddies Super Jrs. Young Justice Others Superman Wonder Woman In other media DC Extended Universe Superman Batman Wonder Woman Flash Aquaman Cyborg Category Articles and topics related to Superman v t e Superman characters Superman family By code name Superman Superboy Supergirl Superwoman Mon-El Nightwing Flamebird Eradicator Steel Krypto By public identity Clark Kent Kal-El Kon-El Jon Kent Kara Zor-El Matrix Linda Danvers Chris Kent/Lor-Zod Thara Ak-Var Dr. David Connor John Henry Irons Natasha Irons Kong Kenan Supporting characters Lois Lane Jimmy Olsen Jor-El Lara Jonathan and Martha Kent Perry White Inspector Henderson Lana Lang Lucy Lane Lori Lemaris Zor-El Alura Dubbilex Sam Lane Lyla Lerrol Pete Ross Professor Potter Lena Luthor Maxima Morgan Edge Dan Turpin Steve Lombard Cat Grant Professor Hamilton Maggie Sawyer Bibbo Bibbowski Ron Troupe Strange Visitor Associated characters Justice Society of America Guardian Newsboy Legion Project Cadmus Legion of Super-Heroes Cosmic Boy Saturn Girl Lightning Lad Chameleon Boy Colossal Boy Invisible Kid Star Boy Phantom Girl Triplicate Girl Shrinking Violet Bouncing Boy Sun Boy Brainiac 5 Ultra Boy Element Lad Matter-Eater Lad Lightning Lass Dream Girl Timber Wolf Princess Projectra Ferro Lad Karate Kid White Witch Shadow Lass Chemical King Wildfire Tyroc Dawnstar Laurel Gand Justice League Atom Aquaman Batman Black Canary Blue Beetle Cyborg Flash Green Arrow Green Lantern John Stewart Martian Manhunter Robin/Nightwing Orion Captain Marvel Wonder Woman Legion of Super-Pets Legion of Super-Villains Cosmic King Lightning Lord Saturn Queen Legion of Substitute Heroes World's Finest Team Lobo Maxima Silent Knight Super-Chief Enemies Central rogues gallery Bizarro Brainiac Bruno Mannheim Cyborg Superman Hank Henshaw Darkseid Doomsday General Zod Lex Luthor Livewire Mercy Graves Metallo Mister Mxyzptlk Mongul Parasite Silver Banshee Toyman Ultra-Humanite Recurring adversaries Anti-Monitor Atlas Atomic Skull Blaze and Satanus Bloodsport Chemo Composite Superman Conduit Dev-Em Equus Faora Funky Flashman Gog Hellgramite Imperiex Jax-Ur Joker Kalibak Kryptonite Man Magpie Mammoth Manchester Black Morgan Edge Neutron Non Prankster Professor Hamilton Quarmer Quex-Ul Rampage Riot Solomon Grundy Terra-Man Titano Ultraman Ursa Vyndktvx Organizations Black Zero Fearsome Five Intergang Masters of Disaster Royal Flush Gang Secret Society of Super Villains Suicide Squad Superman Revenge Squad Alternative versions Superman Earth-One version Ultraman Earth-Two version Superboy-Prime Kingdom Come version Supergirl Power Girl In other media 1978–87 film series Superman Lois Lane Lex Luthor General Zod Supergirl DC Extended Universe Clark Kent Lois Lane Smallville Clark Kent Lex Luthor Lana Lang Chloe Sullivan Lionel Luthor Lois Lane Justice League Related Superman and Lois Lane Daily Planet Category v t e Superman publications and storylines History Current series Action Comics Superman Supergirl Former series Adventure Comics Batman/Superman DC Comics Presents Superboy Superboy and the Ravers Superman (vol. 2) Superman/Batman Superman Confidential The Superman Family Superman: The Man of Steel Superman: The Man of Tomorrow Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen Superman/Wonder Woman Trinity World's Finest Comics Limited series and one-shots Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Green Lantern/Superman: Legend of the Green Flame The Kents Lex Luthor: Man of Steel Lex Luthor: The Unauthorized Biography Birthright The Man of Steel Superman and Wonder Woman: The Hidden Killer Superman for All Seasons Superman/Shazam: First Thunder Superman Unchained Superman vs. Muhammad Ali Superman: Last Stand of New Krypton Superman: Secret Origin Superman: World of New Krypton Superman: The Wedding Album Superman: War of the Supermen Superman: Lois and Clark World of Krypton Outside continuity All-Star Superman "The K-Metal from Krypton" "The Sandman Saga" Son of Superman Superboy: The Comic Book Superboy's Legion Superman Adventures Superman: At Earth's End Superman: Earth One Superman: The Last Family of Krypton Superman: The Feral Man of Steel Superman: Last Son of Earth Superman: Last Stand on Krypton Superman's Metropolis The Superman Monster Superman: Red Son Superman: Secret Identity Superman: Speeding Bullets Superman: The Dark Side Superman: True Brit Superman: War of the Worlds Superman & Batman: Generations Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow? Whom Gods Destroy Crossovers Superman/Aliens Superman & Bugs Bunny Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Superman vs. The Amazing Spider-Man Superman and Spider-Man Superman/Fantastic Four Superman vs. Predator Superman/Tarzan: Sons of the Jungle Superman vs. The Terminator: Death to the Future Storylines "For the Man Who Has Everything" "The Greatest Hero of Them All" "The Death of Superman" "Worlds Collide" "The Trial of Superman!" "Superman Red/Superman Blue" "What's So Funny About Truth, Justice & the American Way?" "For Tomorrow" "Up, Up and Away!" "Last Son" "Kryptonite" "Superman and the Legion of Super-Heroes" "The Third Kryptonian" "The Coming of Atlas" "Brainiac" "New Krypton" "World of New Krypton" "World Without Superman" "Last Stand of New Krypton" War of the Supermen "Grounded" "Reign of Doomsday" "H'El on Earth" "Superman: Doomed" Superman Reborn (comics) "Super Sons of Tomorrow" Other Superman (comic strip) Superman: The Complete Comic Strips 1939-1966 Action Comics #1 Action Comics #1000 v t e Superman franchise media Comic strips Superman (1939–1966) The World's Greatest Superheroes (1978–1985) Superman: The Complete Comic Strips 1939-1966 (2013-present) - Reprint book collection Radio The Adventures of Superman (US, 1940–1951) The Adventures of Superman (UK, 1988) Live-action films Serials Superman Atom Man vs. Superman 1951 film series Superman and the Mole Men Stamp Day for Superman (short film) 1978 film series Superman Superman II The Richard Donner Cut Superman III Supergirl Superman IV: The Quest for Peace Superman Returns DC Extended Universe Man of Steel Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Justice League Zack Snyder's Justice League Animated films Superman animated shorts (1941–1943) Brainiac Attacks Doomsday All-Star Superman Unbound The Death of Superman Reign of the Supermen Superman/Batman: Public Enemies Superman/Batman: Apocalypse Superman/Shazam!: The Return of Black Adam vs. The Elite Red Son Man of Tomorrow Television Live-action Adventures of Superman The Adventures of Superboy (pilot) Superboy Lois & Clark Smallville Supergirl Krypton Superman & Lois Animation The New Adventures of Superman The Adventures of Superboy Superman The Animated Series Krypto the Superdog Legion of Super Heroes Novels The Adventures of Superman (1942) Last Son of Krypton Miracle Monday Doomsday & Beyond Lois & Clark: A Superman Novel It's Superman! Returns Enemies & Allies Video games Superman (1979) Superman: The Game (1985) Superman (1987) Superman (1988) The Man of Steel (1989) Superman (1992) The Death and Return of Superman (1994) The New Superman Adventures (1999) Shadow of Apokolips (2002) The Man of Steel (2002) Countdown to Apokolips (2003) Returns (2006) Returns: Fortress of Solitude (2006) Music Superman III (soundtrack) Superman Returns (soundtrack) "Save Me" (Remy Zero song) Man of Steel (soundtrack) Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (soundtrack) Justice League (soundtrack) Metropolis Symphony Documentaries Look, Up in the Sky: The Amazing Story of Superman The Death of "Superman Lives": What Happened? Stage It's a Bird... It's a Plane... It's Superman Toys Lego Superman Advertisement The Adventures of Seinfeld & Superman (2004) Related characters Lois Lane in other media Lex Luthor in other media Supergirl in other media Related Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation Hollywoodland "Lucy and Superman" (I Love Lucy episode, 1957) "Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex" National Comics Publications, Inc. v. Fawcett Publications, Inc. Sunman (1992 video game) Superman curse Superman ice cream "Superman and Paula Brown's New Snowsuit" "The Reign of the Superman" Superman and Lois Lane v t e Superman in amusement parks Bizarro (Six Flags Great Adventure) Justice League: Alien Invasion 3D Justice League: Battle for Metropolis Lex Luthor: Drop of Doom Superman el Último Escape Superman Escape Superman – Ride of Steel Superman: Escape from Krypton Superman: Krypton Coaster (Six Flags Fiesta Texas) Superman: Krypton Coaster (Six Flags Mexico) Superman: La Atracción de Acero Superman The Ride Superman: Tower of Power Superman: Ultimate Escape Superman: Ultimate Flight Superman: Ultimate Flight (Six Flags Discovery Kingdom) v t e Superman / Batman crossover media Comic books World's Finest Comics Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity Superman/Batman Superman and Batman versus Aliens and Predator Television The Batman/Superman Hour The Superman/Batman Adventures The New Batman/Superman Adventures Books Enemies & Allies Film Superman/Batman: Public Enemies Superman/Batman: Apocalypse Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice Fan works World's Finest How It Should Have Ended Miscellaneaous Composite Superman Hiro Okamura DC Extended Universe v t e Justice League International Keith Giffen J. M. DeMatteis Initial members Pre-Flashpoint Batman Black Canary/Dinah Laurel Lance Blue Beetle/Ted Kord Booster Gold Captain Marvel Doctor Fate Kent Nelson Linda Stauss Doctor Light/Kimiyo Hoshi Green Lantern/Guy Gardner Martian Manhunter Mister Miracle The New 52 August General in Iron Booster Gold Fire Godiva Green Lantern/Guy Gardner Ice Rocket Red/Gavril Ivanovich Vixen Supporting characters L-Ron Catherine Cobert Maxwell Lord Oberon Superman Enemies Antagonists Anti-Monitor Black Hand Darkseid Despero Doomsday Kite Man Lobo Magog Major Disaster Manga Khan Maxwell Lord Neron Queen Bee Signal Men Sinestro Starbreaker Weapons Master Weather Wizard Wizard Organizations Cadre Extremists Injustice League Royal Flush Gang Suicide Squad Publications and storylines Legends Formerly Known as the Justice League Justice League: Generation Lost Spinoff teams Extreme Justice Justice League America Justice League Europe Justice League Task Force v t e Legion of Super-Heroes Original continuity/Post-Infinite Crisis Post-Zero Hour Threeboot Post-Infinite Crisis Creators Otto Binder Al Plastino Mort Weisinger Jim Shooter Founding members Cosmic Boy Lightning Lad Saturn Girl Notable members Blok Bouncing Boy Brainiac 5 Chameleon Boy Chameleon Girl Chemical Kid/Chemical King Colossal Boy Comet Queen Computo (Danielle Foccart) Dawnstar Dream Girl Earth-Man Element Lad Ferro Lad Laurel Gand Gates Invisible Kid (Lyle Norg and Jacques Foccart) Karate Kid (Val Armorr) Karate Kid (Myg) Jon Kent Khundian Legionnaires Kid Quantum Kinetix Kono Lightning Lass/Light Lass Magno Matter-Eater Lad Mon-El Night Girl Devlin O'Ryan Phantom Girl Polar Boy Princess Projectra/Sensor Girl Sensor Shadow Lass Shrinking Violet Spider Girl/Wave Star Boy/Starman Sun Boy Timber Wolf Triplicate Girl/Duo Damsel/Duplicate Damsel Tyroc Ultra Boy White Witch Wildfire XS Special members Elastic Lad (Jimmy Olsen) Insect Queen (Lana Lang) Pete Ross Superboy (Kal-El) Superboy (Kon-El) Supergirl (Kara Zor-El) Superman Supporting characters R. J. Brande Controllers Shvaughn Erin Inferno Laurel Kent Legion Academy Legion of Substitute Heroes Lori Morning Antagonists Anti-Monitor Brainiac Composite Superman Computo Dark Circle Darkseid Dominators Fatal Five Emerald Empress Mano Persuader Tharok Validus Justice League of Earth Khunds Legion of Super-Villains Leland McCauley Mordru Nemesis Kid Ol-Vir Omega Ra's al Ghul Roxxas Sklarian Raiders Starfinger Superboy-Prime Universo Vandal Savage Planets Colu Daxam Storylines "One of Us Is a Traitor" "The Death of Ferro Lad" "The Adult Legion" "Mordru the Merciless" Karate Kid "Earthwar" "The Exaggerated Death of Ultra Boy" "The Great Darkness Saga" "Who Is Sensor Girl?" Legionnaires 3 Cosmic Boy "The Universo Project" "The Greatest Hero of Them All" "The Terra Mosaic" Valor "End of an Era" Legion Lost (vol. 1) "Superboy and the Legion" "The Lightning Saga" "Superman and the Legion of Super-Heroes" Final Crisis: Legion of 3 Worlds Alternate continuities Legion of Galactic Guardians 2099 Superboy's Legion Legion of Super Heroes in the 31st Century In other media Legion of Super Heroes Smallville (season 8) "New Kids in Town" (Superman: The Animated Series) "Far from Home" (Justice League Unlimited) JLA Adventures: Trapped in Time Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: Justice League – Cosmic Clash Supergirl (season 3) Related articles Adventure Comics Iris West Allen Atmos Dev-Em The Final Night Heroes of Lallor Imperiex Impulse/Kid Flash Interlac Invasion! Justice Legion L Kwai L.E.G.I.O.N. Legion of Super-Pets Miracle Machine R.E.B.E.L.S. Reflecto Science Police Sodam Yat Superboy (comic book) Time Bubble Tornado Twins United Planets Wanderers Workforce Zero Hour: Crisis in Time See also List of Legion of Super-Heroes items List of Legion of Super-Heroes members List of Legion of Super-Heroes publications v t e Lex Luthor Jerry Siegel Joe Shuster Supporting Bizarro Eve Teschmacher Injustice League Intergang Joker Legion of Doom Lena Luthor LexCorp Lionel Luthor Mercy Graves Metallo Secret Six The Society Antagonists Aquaman Batman Captain Marvel Cyborg Darkseid Doomsday Flash Green Arrow Green Lantern Justice League Martian Manhunter Steel Superboy Supergirl Superman Wonder Woman Storylines Lex Luthor: Man of Steel Lex Luthor: The Unauthorized Biography Related Lex Luthor in other media LexCorp Lex Luthor: Drop of Doom Lex Luthor (1978 film series character) Lex Luthor (Smallville) v t e Steel Creators: Louise Simonson Jon Bogdanove Supporting characters Natasha Irons Justice League Metal Men Doom Patrol Superman Batman Wonder Woman Martian Manhunter Icon Hardware Enemies Blockbuster Doctor Polaris Doomsday Metallo Parasite Locations Metropolis S.T.A.R. Labs Other media Steel (1997 film) Category v t e Suicide Squad Creators: Robert Kanigher Ross Andru John Ostrander Current members Director Amanda Waller Field Leader Katana Operatives Captain Boomerang Deadshot Harley Quinn Killer Croc Notable former members Atom Smasher Bane Black Manta Black Spider Bloodsport Bronze Tiger Captain Cold Cheetah Chemo Copperhead Count Vertigo Deathstroke Doctor Light (Arthur Light) El Diablo Enchantress KGBeast Killer Frost Joker's Daughter King Faraday King Shark Lashina Lobo Nemesis Nightshade Oracle Parasite Peacemaker Penguin Plasmus Plastique Poison Ivy Polka-Dot Man Power Girl Punch and Jewelee Ravan Reactron Rick Flag Roy Harper Savant Slipknot Solomon Grundy Thinker Unknown Soldier Vixen Weasel Antagonists Brainiac Darkseid Eclipso Enchantress Force of July General Wade Eiling Imperiex Joker Kobra Manhunters Maxwell Lord Onslaught Reverse-Flash / Professor Zoom Vandal Savage Film Animated Batman: Assault on Arkham Suicide Squad: Hell to Pay Live-action Suicide Squad accolades soundtrack The Suicide Squad Video game Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League Related articles Checkmate Janus Directive Category v t e Superboy Jerry Siegel Joe Shuster Superboys Kal-El Superboy-Prime Kon-El Jon Lane Kent Jon Kent Supporting characters Beppo Chief Parker Dubbilex Knockout Krypto Lana Lang Lar Gand Legion of Super-Heroes Lori Lemaris Ma and Pa Kent Pete Ross Professor Potter Robin Supergirl Superman Tana Moon Enemies Bizarro Black Zero Brainiac Cyborg Superman Darkseid Dev-Em Doomsday General Zod Hank Henshaw Insect Queen Kryptonite Kid King Shark Lex Luthor Match Metallo Toyman Publications Adventure Comics Superboy Superboy and the Ravers In other media The Adventures of Superboy (pilot) The Adventures of Superboy Superboy Superman & Lois Category v t e Supergirl Otto Binder Al Plastino Curt Swan Supergirls Kara Zor-El Matrix Linda Danvers Cir-El Laurel Gand Power Girl Ariella Kent Supporting Alura Batgirl Cat Grant Comet Justice League Lana Lang Lena Luthor Lucy Lane Mary Marvel Maxima Streaky the Supercat Superman Zor-El Enemies Anti-Monitor Atomic Skull Brainiac Chemo Cyborg Superman Darkseid Decay Female Furies Granny Goodness Insect Queen Lex Luthor Livewire Professor Ivo Psi Reactron Satan Girl Shrapnel Silver Banshee Titles Adventure Comics Supergirl Supergirl and the Legion of Super-Heroes Superman Family Elseworld's Finest: Supergirl & Batgirl Other media Supergirl (film) Supergirl (character) Supergirl (TV series) characters episodes season 1 2 3 4 5 6 Category v t e Batman characters Batman family By cryptonym Batman Robin Catwoman Batwoman Batgirl Huntress Nightwing Flamebird Red Robin Red Hood Batwing By public identity Bruce Wayne Dick Grayson Selina Kyle Kathy Kane Bette Kane Barbara Gordon Jason Todd Helena Bertinelli Tim Drake Stephanie Brown Cassandra Cain Kate Kane Damian Wayne Harper Row Duke Thomas Luke Fox Michael Washington Lane Jean-Paul Valley Pets Ace the Bat-Hound Core teams Batman Incorporated Batmen of All Nations Birds of Prey World's Finest Team Supporting characters Main supporting Alfred Pennyworth Julie Madison Martha Wayne Thomas Wayne Vicki Vale Knight Squire Dark Ranger Leslie Thompkins Silver St. Cloud Lucius Fox Orpheus Nightrunner Holly Robinson Legs Manhunter Sasha Bordeaux Misfit Onyx Professor Carter Nichols Ragman Simon Dark Victoria October Andrea Beaumont Police contacts James W. "Jim" Gordon Harvey Bullock Sarah Essen Maggie Sawyer Renee Montoya Crispus Allen Jason Bard Slam Bradley Superhero allies Aquaman Black Canary Cyborg Deadman Flash Green Arrow Green Lantern Hawkgirl Hawkman John Stewart Justice League Justice Society of America Martian Manhunter Metamorpho Plastic Man Power Girl Question Rorschach (Reggie Long) Shazam Spectre Superman Teen Titans Vixen Wally West Wonder Woman Zatanna Neutral characters Amanda Waller Arnold John Flass Azrael Bat-Mite Bronze Tiger Catwoman Creeper Gillian B. Loeb Hamilton Hill Harley Quinn Lady Shiva Lobo Nora Fries Nyssa Raatko Richard Dragon Poison Ivy Suicide Squad Talia al Ghul Vigilante (Dorian Chase) Antagonists Central rogues gallery Bane Black Mask Clayface Deadshot Deathstroke Firefly Hugo Strange Hush Joker Killer Croc Killer Moth Mad Hatter Man-Bat Mr. Freeze Penguin Ra's al Ghul Riddler Scarecrow Two-Face Ventriloquist Victor Zsasz Mobsters Alberto Falcone / Holiday Joe Chill Lew Moxon Carmine Falcone Mario Falcone Sofia Falcone Gigante Sal Maroni Squid Rupert Thorne Tobias Whale Johnny Witts Tony Zucco Recurring antagonists Amanda Waller Amygdala Anarky Black Spider Blockbuster Calendar Man Catman Cavalier Clock King Cluemaster Composite Superman Copperhead Cornelius Stirk Crazy Quilt Crime Doctor David Cain Deacon Blackfire Doctor Death Doctor Double X Doctor Phosphorus Dollmaker Electrocutioner Firebug Flamingo Gearhead Great White Shark Humpty Dumpty Jane Doe Joker's Daughter Key KGBeast King Snake Kite Man Kobra Lex Luthor Maxie Zeus Magpie Mirror Man Night-Slayer Nocturna Onomatopoeia Orca Outsider Owlman Phosphorus Rex Planet Master Polka-Dot Man Professor Milo Professor Pyg Prometheus Rag Doll Ratcatcher Reaper Sensei Signalman Simon Hurt Simon Stagg Solomon Grundy Snowman Spellbinder Swagman Tally Man Ten-Eyed Man Tiger Shark Tweedledum and Tweedledee Wrath Zebra-Man Organizations Circus of Strange Court of Owls League of Assassins Leviathan LexCorp Mutants Terrible Trio Alternative versions Batman Earth-Two Tlano Owlman The Batman Who Laughs Batzarro Thomas Wayne (Flashpoint version) Robin Earth-Two Carrie Kelley Helena Wayne Others Joker Other media 1966 Batman TV series Egghead King Tut 1989–1997 film series Bruce Wayne Joker Vicki Vale Catwoman Penguin Two-Face Riddler Dick Grayson Mr. Freeze Poison Ivy Chase Meridian DC Animated Universe Andrea Beaumont Harley Quinn Batman Beyond Terry McGinnis The Dark Knight Trilogy Bruce Wayne Rachel Dawes Joker DC Extended Universe Bruce Wayne Harley Quinn Joker Arkhamverse Arkham Knight Gotham Bruce Wayne James Gordon Selina Kyle Fish Mooney Oswald Cobblepot Jerome and Jeremiah Valeska Antagonists Music Meister Category v t e Wonder Woman William Moulton Marston Elizabeth Holloway Marston H. G. Peter Other contributors Characters Wonder Women Diana Prince Orana Artemis of Bana-Mighdall Hippolyta Donna Troy Supporting characters Antiope Drusilla Etta Candy Fury Hephaestus Heracles/Hercules Hermes I Ching Julia and Vanessa Kapatelis Justice League Mala Nemesis (Thomas Tresser) Nubia The Olympian Paula von Gunther Philippus Poseidon Queen Desira Helena Sandsmark Sarge Steel Steve Trevor Wonder Girl (Cassie Sandsmark / Donna Troy) Zeus Zola Enemies Ares/Mars Baron Blitzkrieg Baroness Paula von Gunther Blue Snowman Veronica Cale Cheetah Circe Dark Angel Decay Doctor Cyber Doctor Poison Doctor Psycho Duke of Deception Egg Fu/Chang Tzu Eviless First Born Genocide Giganta Hades Hypnota Kung Mask Maxwell Lord Medusa Minister Blizzard Osira Queen Clea Silver Swan Superwoman Tezcatlipoca Zara Factions Amazons of Themyscira Amazons of Bana-Mighdall Children of Ares Godwatch Olympian Gods Secret Society of Super Villains Titans of Myth Villainy Inc. Locations Aeaea Themyscira (The Paradise Islands) Publications All Star Comics Wonder Woman Amazonia Batman/Superman/Wonder Woman: Trinity The Blue Amazon Comic Cavalcade The Legend of Wonder Woman Sensation Comics Superman and Wonder Woman: The Hidden Killer Superman/Wonder Woman Wonder Woman '77 The Wonder Woman Chronicles Wonder Woman: Earth One The World's Greatest Superheroes Storylines “Introducing Wonder Woman” (1941) Gods and Mortals (1987) Challenge of the Gods (1987–88) War of the Gods (1991) The Contest (1994) The Challenge of Artemis (1995) Paradise Island Lost (2001) Our Worlds at War (2001) The Hiketeia (2002) Down to Earth (2003–04) Who Is Wonder Woman? (2006–07) Amazons Attack! (2007) The Circle (2008) Ends of the Earth (2008) Rise of the Olympian (2009) Flashpoint (2011) The Lies (2016) Year One (2016) The Truth (2017) Godwatch (2017) Technology Golden Girdle of Gaea Invisible plane Lasso of Truth Mental radio Wonder Woman's bracelets In other media 1974 film TV series episodes 2009 film 2011 TV pilot 2017 film Wonder Woman: Bloodlines Wonder Woman 1984 soundtrack Miscellaneous Alternative versions DCEU Earth-Two Bizarra Superwoman Olive Byrne Cultural impact Professor Marston and the Wonder Women Literature Wonder Women! The Untold Story of American Superheroines Category v t e Golden Age of Comic Books Ace Comics Captain Courageous Doctor Nemesis The Flag Lash Lightning The Raven Unknown Soldier Vulcan All-American Publications The Atom Al Pratt Black Canary Dinah Drake Doctor Mid-Nite Charles McNider Doiby Dickles The Flash Jay Garrick The Gay Ghost Green Lantern Alan Scott Hawkgirl Shiera Sanders Hall Hawkman Carter Hall Hop Harrigan Johnny Thunder Jumpa Justice Society of America The King Mister Terrific Terry Sloane Neptune Perkins Red Tornado Sargon the Sorcerer The Terrific Whatzit Thunderbolt Ultra-Man The Whip Wildcat Ted Grant Wonder Woman Diana Prince Centaur Comics Airman Amazing-Man The Arrow The Clock The Eye Fantom of the Fair Magician from Mars The Masked Marvel Minimidget Charlton Comics Atomic Mouse Captain Atom Nightshade Mr. Muscles Nature Boy Space Adventures Yellowjacket Zaza the Mystic Dell Comics Doctor Hormone Flash Gordon The Owl Supermind's Son Zorro Fawcett Comics Bulletgirl Bulletman Captain Marvel Captain Marvel Jr. Captain Midnight Dan Dare Hoppy the Marvel Bunny Ibis the Invincible Lieutenant Marvels Marvel Family Mary Marvel Master Man Minute-Man Mr. Scarlet Nyoka the Jungle Girl Phantom Eagle Pinky the Whiz Kid Scoop Smith Spy Smasher Squadron of Justice Sweethearts Uncle Marvel Fox Comics Black Fury Blue Beetle Dan Garret The Bouncer Bronze Man Dynamo The Flame Green Mask The Moth Samson Stardust the Super Wizard U.S. Jones V-Man Wonder Man Harvey Comics Black Cat Captain 3-D Captain Freedom Green Hornet Invisible Scarlet O'Neil Kato Shock Gibson Spirit of '76 Lev Gleason Publications Captain Battle Crimebuster Daredevil Little Wise Guys Silver Streak MLJ Comics The Black Hood Bob Phantom Captain Flag The Comet The Firefly The Fox The Hangman The Shield Super Duck The Web The Wizard National Allied Publications Ace the Bat-Hound Air Wave Aquaman Batman Batwoman Black Pirate Boy Commandos Captain Comet Chris KL-99 Congo Bill Crimson Avenger Lee Travis Dan the Dyna-Mite Dark Ranger Detective Chimp Doctor Fate Kent Nelson Doctor Occult Genius Jones Gimmick Girl Green Arrow Guardian Hourman Rex Tyler Johnny Quick Johnny Chambers King Faraday The Knight Krypto Liberty Belle Manhunter Paul Kirk Martian Manhunter Miss X Mr. America Newsboy Legion Phantom Stranger Rex the Wonder Dog Robin Dick Grayson Robotman Rose Psychic Sandman Wesley Dodds Sandy the Golden Boy Seven Soldiers of Victory Shining Knight Sir Justin Slam Bradley The Spectre Jim Corrigan Speedy Roy Harper Squire Star-Spangled Kid Sylvester Pemberton Starman Ted Knight Stripesy Stuff the Chinatown Kid Superboy Kal-El Superman Superwoman Lois Lane Tarantula TNT Tommy Tomorrow Vigilante Greg Saunders Wing Wonder Woman Zatara Nedor Comics American Crusader American Eagle Black Terror Captain Future Doc Strange Fighting Yank The Ghost Grim Reaper Judy of the Jungle Kara the Jungle Princess Lance Lewis, Space Detective Liberator The Magnet Miss Masque Princess Pantha Pyroman The Scarab The Woman in Red Novelty Press Blue Bolt Dick Cole The Target The Targeteers The Twister Prize Publications Atomic-Man Black Owl Fighting American Green Lama Yank & Doodle Quality Comics #711 The Black Condor Blackhawk Blue Tracer Bozo the Iron Man Captain Triumph Doll Girl Doll Man Firebrand The Human Bomb Invisible Hood The Jester Kid Eternity Lady Luck Madame Fatal Magno Manhunter Merlin the Magician Midnight Miss America Miss Fear Mouthpiece Neon the Unknown Phantom Lady Plastic Man Quicksilver The Ray Red Bee Red Torpedo The Spider Spider Widow Uncle Sam Wildfire Wonder Boy Woozy Winks Timely Comics All-Winners Squad American Ace The Angel Black Marvel Black Widow Claire Voyant Blazing Skull Blonde Phantom Blue Blade Blue Diamond Breeze Barton Bucky Bucky Barnes Captain America Captain Wonder The Challenger Citizen V The Destroyer Dynamic Man Father Time The Ferret Fiery Mask The Fin Golden Girl The Human Torch Jack Frost Laughing Mask Marvel Boy Mercury Miss America Miss Fury Mister E Namor Namora The Patriot Phantom Reporter Red Raven Rockman Silver Scorpion Sun Girl Super Rabbit Thin Man Thunderer Tim Mulrooney Toro Venus The Vision The Whizzer Robert Frank The Witness Young Allies Misc. American Comics Group Superkatt Anglo-American Publishing Commander Steel Atlas Publications Captain Atom Bell Features The Brain Johnny Canuck Nelvana of the Northern Lights Cardal Publishing Streamline Columbia Comics The Face Skyman David McKay Publications Mandrake the Magician The Phantom DC Thomson The Amazing Mr X Jack Flash Dynamic Publications Dynamic Man Yankee Girl Eastern Color Printing Buck Rogers Hydroman Phantom Magician EC Comics Moon Girl Superduperman Elliot Publishing Company Kismet, Man of Fate Fiction House Fantomah Hillman Periodicals Airboy The Heap Holyoke Publishing Cat-Man Kitten Miss Victory L. Miller & Son, Ltd. Kid Marvelman Marvelman Young Marvelman Magazine Enterprises Funnyman Maple Leaf Publishing Brok Windsor Iron Man Rural Home Publications Green Turtle Street & Smith The Avenger Doc Savage The Shadow Supersnipe Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125