Part of a series on Surrealism Surrealist Manifesto Surrealist cinema Surrealist music Surreal humour Surrealist techniques Birmingham Surrealists Women Surrealists v t e Surrealist cinema is a modernist approach to film theory, criticism, and production with origins in Paris in the 1920s. The movement used shocking, irrational, or absurd imagery and Freudian dream symbolism to challenge the traditional function of art to represent reality. Related to Dada cinema, Surrealist cinema is characterized by juxtapositions, the rejection of dramatic psychology, and a frequent use of shocking imagery. Philippe Soupault and André Breton’s 1920 book collaboration Les Champs Magnétiques[1] is often considered to be the first Surrealist work,[2] but it was only once Breton had completed his Surrealist Manifesto in 1924 that ‘Surrealism drafted itself an official birth certificate.’[3] Surrealist films of the twenties include Rene Clair's Entr'acte (1924), Fernand Leger's Ballet Mechanique (1924), Jean Renoir's La Fille de L'eau (1924), Marcel Duchamp's Anemic Cinema (1926), Jean Epstein's Fall of the House of Usher (1928) (with Luis Buñuel assisting), Watson and Webber's Fall of the House of Usher (1928)[4] and Germaine Dulac's The Seashell and the Clergyman (1928) (from a screenplay by Antonin Artaud). Other films include Un Chien Andalou and L'Age d'Or by Buñuel and Salvador Dalí; Buñuel went on to direct many more films, never denying his surrealist roots.[5] Ingmar Bergman said "Buñuel nearly always made Buñuel films".[6] Contents 1 Theory 2 History 3 Surrealist films and filmmakers 3.1 Films of the Parisian Surrealist Group 3.2 Later films 4 See also 5 References Theory[edit] In his 2006 book Surrealism and Cinema, Michael Richardson argues that surrealist works cannot be defined by style or form, but rather as results of the practice of surrealism. Richardson writes: "Within popular conceptions, surrealism is misunderstood in many different ways, some of which contradict others, but all of these misunderstandings are founded in the fact that they seek to reduce surrealism to a style or a thing in itself rather than being prepared to see it as an activity with broadening horizons. Many critics fail to recognize the distinctive qualities that make up the surrealist attitude. They seek something – a theme, a particular type of imagery, certain concepts – they can identify as 'surrealist' in order to provide a criterion of judgement by which a film or artwork can be appraised. The problem is that this goes against the very essence of surrealism, which refuses to be here but is always elsewhere. It is not a thing but a relation between things and therefore needs to be treated as a whole.[7] Surrealists are not concerned with conjuring up some magic world that can be defined as 'surreal'. Their interest is almost exclusively in exploring the conjunctions, the points of contact, between different realms of existence. Surrealism is always about departures rather than arrivals."[7] Rather than a fixed aesthetic, Richardson defines surrealism as "a shifting point of magnetism around which the collective activity of the surrealists revolves."[7] Surrealism draws upon irrational imagery and the subconscious mind. Surrealists should not, however, be mistaken as whimsical or incapable of logical thought;[8] rather, most Surrealists promote themselves as revolutionaries.[8] History[edit] Surrealism was the first literary and artistic movement to become seriously associated with cinema,[9] though it has also been a movement largely neglected by film critics and historians.[10] However, shortlived though its popularity was, it became known for its dream-like quality, juxtaposition of everyday people and objects in irrational forms, and the abstraction of real life, places, and things. Highly influenced by Freudian psychology, surrealism sought to bring the unconscious mind to visual life. "Balanced between symbolism and realism, surrealist cinema commentated on themes of life, death, modernity, politics, religion, and art itself."[11] The foundations of the movement began in France and coincided with the birth of motion pictures. France served as the birthplace of surrealist cinema because of a fortunate combination of easy access to film equipment, film financing, and a plethora of interested artists and audiences.[11] The Surrealists who participated in the movement were among the first generation to have grown up with film as a part of daily life.[9] Breton himself, even before the launching of the movement, possessed an avid interest in film: while serving in the First World War, he was stationed in Nantes and, during his spare time, would frequent the movie houses with a superior named Jacques Vaché.[8][12] According to Breton, he and Vaché ignored movie titles and times, preferring to drop in at any given moment and view the films without any foreknowledge.[8][12] When they grew bored, they left and visited the next theater.[8] Breton's movie-going habits supplied him with a stream of images with no constructed order about them. He could juxtapose the images of one film with those of another, and from the experience craft his own interpretation.[8] Referring to his experiences with Vaché, he once remarked, "I think what we [valued] most in it, to the point of taking no interest in anything else, was its power to disorient."[8] Breton believed that film could help one abstract himself from "real life" whenever he felt like it.[8] Serials, which often contained cliffhanger effects and hints of "other worldliness," were attractive to early Surrealists.[9] Examples include Houdini's daredevil deeds and the escapades of Musidora and Pearl White in detective stories.[9] What endeared Surrealists most to the genre was its ability to evoke and sustain a sense of mystery and suspense in viewers.[9] The Surrealists saw in film a medium which nullified reality's boundaries.[13] Film critic René Gardies wrote in 1968, "Now the cinema is, quite naturally, the privileged instrument for derealising (sic) the world. Its technical resources... allied with its photo-magic, provide the alchemical tools for transforming reality."[12] Surrealist artists were interested in cinema as a medium for expression.[10] As cinema continued to develop in the 1920s, many Surrealists saw in it an opportunity to portray the ridiculous as rational.[10][14] "Surrealist artists realized that the film camera could capture the real world in a dreamlike way that their pens and paintbrushes could not: superimpositions, overexposures, fast-motion, slow-motion, reverse-motion, stop-motion, lens flares, large depth of field, shallow depth of field, and more bizarre camera tricks could transform the original image in front of the lens into something new once exposed on the film plate. For surrealists, film gave them the ability to challenge and mold the boundaries between fantasy and reality, especially with space and time. Like the dreams they wished to bring to life, film had no limits or rules."[11] Cinema provided more convincing illusions than its closest rival, theatre,[10] and the tendency for Surrealists to express themselves through film was a sign of their confidence in the adaptability of cinema to Surrealism's goals and requirements.[8] They were the first to take seriously the resemblance between film's imaginary images and those of dreams and the unconscious.[12][14] Luis Buñuel said, "The film seems to be the involuntary imitation of the dream."[12] Surrealist filmmakers sought to re-define human awareness of reality by illustrating that the "real" was little more than what was perceived as real; that reality was subject to no limits beyond those mankind imposed upon it.[8] Breton once compared the experience of Surrealist literature to "the point at which the waking state joins sleep."[8] His analogy helps to explain the advantage of cinema over books in facilitating the kind of release Surrealists sought from their daily pressures.[8] The modernity of film was appealing to as well.[12] Critics have debated whether "Surrealist film" constitutes a distinct genre. Recognition of a cinematographic genre involves the ability to cite many works which share thematic, formal, and stylistic traits.[15] To refer to Surrealism as a genre is to imply that there is repetition of elements and a recognizable, "generic formula" which describes their makeup.[13] Several critics have argued that, due to Surrealism's use of the irrational and on non-sequitur, it is impossible for Surrealist films to constitute a genre.[15] While there are numerous films which are true expressions of the movement, many other films which have been classified as Surrealist simply contain Surrealist fragments. Rather than "Surrealist film" the more accurate term for such works may be "Surrealism in film."[15] Surrealist films and filmmakers[edit] Films of the Parisian Surrealist Group[edit] Entr'acte: a 22-minute, silent French film, written by René Clair and Francis Picabia, and directed by Clair, released December 4, 1924.[14] The Seashell and the Clergyman: a 31-minute, silent film, written by Antonin Artaud, and directed by Germaine Dulac, released in February 1928. L'Étoile de Mer: a 15-minute silent French film written and directed by Man Ray, released in 1928. Un Chien Andalou: a 21-minute, silent French film, written by Salvador Dalí and Luis Buñuel, and directed by Buñuel, released in 1929.[14] Les Mystères du Château de Dé: a 27 minute silent French film written and directed by Man Ray, released in 1929. L'Age d'Or: a 60-minute French film with sound, written by Dalí and Buñuel, and directed by Buñuel, released in 1930.[14] Later films[edit] Joseph Cornell produced surrealist films in the United States in the later 1930s (such as Rose Hobart in 1936). Antonin Artaud, Philippe Soupault, and Robert Desnos wrote screenplays for later films. Salvador Dalí designed a dream sequence for Alfred Hitchcock's film Spellbound (1945). It was one of the first American films to use psychoanalysis as a major element of the story. Hitchcock wanted to capture the vividness of dreams as never before and felt that Dalí was the person to help him do so. Given the importance of the dream sequence, the director gave the artist free rein to bring to the screen an innovative vision of the way dreams could be represented.[16] Maya Deren made numerous silent short films, among them the renowned Meshes of the Afternoon replete with surreal, dreamlike scenes and encounters.[17][circular reference] A significant influence on subsequent surreal cinema. Jan Švankmajer, a member of the still-active Czech Surrealist Group, continues to direct films.[18] In 1946, Dalí and Walt Disney began work on a film called Destino; the project was finally finished in 2003.[19] Some of the films of David Lynch, such as Eraserhead (1977),[20] Lost Highway (1997),[21] Mulholland Drive (2001) and Inland Empire (2006), have been considered surrealist.[22][23] Other directors whose films have been considered surrealist include: Spanish writer, playwright, director and member of Breton's Surrealist Group, Fernando Arrabal (I Will Walk Like a Crazy Horse); Chilean writer and director Alejandro Jodorowsky (El Topo,[24] The Holy Mountain[25]); and director Stephen Sayadian (Dr. Caligari).[26] Another filmmaker and writer known to create surrealistic films is Charlie Kaufman. Most of his movies are considered rather experimental including Being John Malkovich (1999), Synecdoche, New York (2008), Anomalisa (2015) and most recently I'm Thinking of Ending Things (2020)[27][28] See also[edit] Filmmaking technique of Luis Buñuel Oneiric (film theory) Non-narrative film Theatre of Cruelty References[edit] ^ André Breton, Complètes, T. I, ed. Marguerite Bonnet (Œuvres Paris: Gallimard, 1988), 51-105. ^ Breton, André; Parinaud, André (1993). Conversations: The Autobiography of Surrealism. Translated by Polizzotti, Mark. Paragon House. p. 43. ISBN 978-1-55778-423-0. ^ As agreed by interviewer and interviewee. Breton and Parinaud, 71 ^ Em Gee Film Library, Catalog 83 (no date) Murray Glass,Editorial assistant Rhoda Friedman ^ Buñuel, Luis (2003). My Last Sigh. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-4387-5. ^ "Commentary: Bergman on Filmmakers". Bergmanorama. Archived from the original on 2012-11-02. ^ a b c Richardson, Michael (March 2006). Surrealism and Cinema. Berg Publishers. ISBN 978-1-84520-226-2. ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Matthews, John Herbert (1971). Surrealism and Film. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-608-16941-5. ^ a b c d e Kovács, Steven (1980). From Enchantment to Rage: The Story of Surrealist Cinema. Fairleigh Dickinson. ISBN 978-0-8386-2140-0. ^ a b c d Matthews, John Herbert (1971). "Preface". Surrealism and Film. University of Michigan Press. pp. vii–ix. ISBN 978-0-608-16941-5. ^ a b c Ezzone, Gina Marie (July 21, 2014). "Surrealist Cinema and the Avant-Garde". Facets Features Blog. Facets Features. ^ a b c d e f Short, Robert (2003). The Age of Gold: Surrealist Cinema. Creation Books. ISBN 978-1-84068-059-1. ^ a b Gould, Michael (1976). Surrealism and the cinema: (open-eyed screening). A. S. Barnes. ISBN 978-0-498-01498-7. ^ a b c d e Williams, Linda (1981). Figures of desire: a theory and analysis of surrealist film. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-00878-8. ^ a b c Moine, Raphaëlle; Taminiaux, Pierre (2006). "Surrealist Cinema to Surrealism in Cinema: Does a Surrealist Genre Exist in Film?". Yale French Studies (109): 98–114. JSTOR 4149288. ^ "Spellbound". Salvador Dali Foundation. Archived from the original on 20 July 2016. Retrieved 25 May 2019.CS1 maint: unfit URL (link), Fundació Gala-Salvador Dalí, VEGAP, 2014 ^ Meshes of the Afternoon ^ https://variety.com/2016/film/news/jan-svankmajer-indiegogo-insects-1201783031/ ^ Eggener, Keith L (1993). "'An Amusing Lack of Logic': Surrealism and Popular Entertainment". American Art. 7 (4): 31–45. doi:10.1086/424200. JSTOR 3109152. ^ Sobczynski, Peter (11 Apr 2016). "Defying Explanation: The Brilliance of David Lynch's "Eraserhead"". Roger Ebert Demanders Archive. ^ https://www.thefourohfive.com/film/article/a-sexy-sleek-as-a-stiletto-surrealist-moral-homily-lost-highway-1997-at-20-years-149 ^ Connelly, Thomas (March 2011). "Twin Peaks: Surrealism, Fandom, Usenet and X-ray Television" (PDF). Culture Critique. Claremont, California: Claremont Graduate University. 2 (1): Preface, 1–28. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2012. ^ Ebert, Roger (June 2001). "Mulholland Drive". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 2 October 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. ^ "El Topo". BFI Film & TV Database. London: British Film Institute. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2012. ^ http://www.tasteofcinema.com/2017/10-reasons-why-the-holy-mountain-is-the-best-surreal-movie-ever/ ^ Cavett Binion (2016). "Dr. Caligari". Movies & TV Dept. The New York Times. Baseline & All Movie Guide. Archived from the original on 2016-03-05. ^ Daily, Max Michalsky For the. "Artist spotlight: The touching surrealism of Charlie Kaufman". The Michigan Daily. Retrieved 2020-12-09. ^ magazine, HERO. "Charlie Kaufman: exploring existential concepts through mindfuck surrealism". HERO magazine. Retrieved 2020-12-09. v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie v t e Surrealism Artists Eileen Agar Jean Arp Eugène Atget Hans Bellmer Jacques-André Boiffard Bill Brandt Victor Brauner Fanny Brennan Emmy Bridgwater Luis Buñuel Claude Cahun Leonora Carrington Ithell Colquhoun Gala Dalí Salvador Dalí Jean Dallaire Paul Delvaux Óscar Domínguez Christian Dotremont Marcel Duchamp Marcel Duhamel Curt Echtermeyer Max Ernst Leonor Fini Gordon Onslow Ford Esteban Francés Alberto Giacometti Julio González Jane Graverol Jacques Hérold Valentine Hugo Frida Kahlo Wifredo Lam Jacqueline Lamba Dora Maar Conroy Maddox René Magritte Georges Malkine Marcel Mariën André Masson Roberto Matta Mikuláš Medek Oscar Mellor John Melville E. L. T. Mesens Lee Miller Desmond Morris Joan Miró Méret Oppenheim Wolfgang Paalen Benjamín Palencia Roland Penrose Man Ray Toni del Renzio Kay Sage Kurt Seligmann André Souris Martin Stejskal Jindřich Štyrský Maurice Tabard Yves Tanguy Dorothea Tanning Karel Teige Kristians Tonny Toyen Albert Valentin Remedios Varo James F. Walker Unica Zürn Writers and Theorists Maxime Moses Alexandre Guillaume Apollinaire Louis Aragon Antonin Artaud Jacques Baron Georges Bataille André Breton Roger Caillois Nicolas Calas René Crevel René Daumal Robert Desnos Vratislav Effenberger Paul Éluard Renée Gauthier Roger Gilbert-Lecomte Yvan Goll Julien Gracq Irène Hamoir Georges Hugnet Alfred Jarry Nelly Kaplan Petr Král Jacques Lacan Philip Lamantia Comte de Lautréamont Marcel Lecomte Michel Leiris Georges Limbour Léo Malet Joyce Mansour Robert Melville René Ménil Max Morise Pierre Naville Vítězslav Nezval Paul Nougé Paul Păun Benjamin Péret Francis Ponge Jacques Prévert Raymond Queneau Herbert Read Pierre Reverdy Marko Ristić Georges Sadoul Louis Scutenaire Philippe Soupault André Thirion Dylan Thomas Tristan Tzara Jacques Vaché Marianne Van Hirtum Roger Vitrac Groups Acéphale Les Automatistes Birmingham Surrealists British Surrealist Group Bureau of Surrealist Research Chicago Imagists Chicago Surrealist Group Dau al Set Fighting Cock Society The Firesign Theatre The Goons Grup d'Elx La Mandrágora Monty Python Refus Global The Surrealist Group in Stockholm Related Surrealist Manifesto Surrealist automatism Surrealist cinema Surrealist music Surrealist techniques Surreal humour Exposition Internationale du Surréalisme London International Surrealist Exhibition Women surrealists Dada Abstract expressionism Paranoiac-critical method