Wikimedia list article This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (February 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may contain indiscriminate, excessive, or irrelevant examples. Please improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further suggestions. (February 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A swamp monster (also variously called a swamp creature, swamp man, swamp thing, or muck monster)[1] is a fictional creature often imagined to lurk in a swamp. Contents 1 Description 2 Swamp monsters in folklore, legends, and mythology 3 Examples in comics 4 Examples in other media 5 See also 6 References Description[edit] Legends of swamp creatures, passed on from generation to generation, are usually bound to a specific swamp.[citation needed] Some swamp monsters resemble aquatic creatures while other swamp monsters resemble aquatic plants and moss. Below is a list of the known swamp monsters in folklore and different media appearances. Swamp monsters in folklore, legends, and mythology[edit] The Will-o'-the-wisp appears in swamps, and in some areas there are legends of it being an evil spirit.[2] The Bunyip are a creature from Aboriginal mythology that lurk in swamps, billabongs, creeks, riverbeds, and waterholes.[3] The Grootslang are huge elephant-like creature with a serpent's tail which according to legend live in caves, swamps, freshwater in South Africa.[4] The Lernaean Hydra in Greek and Roman mythology, was the creature Heracles killed in the swamp near Lake Lerna.[5] The Honey Island Swamp monster in Louisiana.[6][7] Mokele-mbembe, a legendary water-dwelling creature of Congo River basin folklore that resembles a Brontosaurus.[8] The skunk ape is a horrible smelling large ape creature said to live in swamps.[9] The Lizard Man of Scape Ore Swamp.[10] In Beowulf, Grendel lived in a marsh near King Hrothgar's mead hall, as did Grendel's mother. Examples in comics[edit] The Heap in mortal combat with the "Man of the Moonlight" on the cover of Airboy Comics, vol. 9 #5 (June 1952). Artwork by Ernest Schroeder. From the 1940s to the present many swamp monsters have been used in comics, an early example being Hillman Publications' the Heap. Afterwards, both DC Comics and Marvel created similar characters: DC has the Swamp Thing, created by Len Wein and Berni Wrightson. Marvel has the Man-Thing, sasquatch created by Stan Lee, Gray Morrow, Roy Thomas, and Gerry Conway. The debuts of the two characters were so close that it is impossible to say which came first.[11] Alan Moore, who worked on Swamp Thing for a period, later described the character's original incarnation as "a regurgitation of Hillman Comics' The Heap", adding that "When I took over that character at Len Wein's suggestion, I did my best to make it an original character that didn't owe a huge debt to previously existing swamp monsters."[12] Other swamp monsters in comics include: Solomon Grundy, a swamp zombie created by Alfred Bester and Paul Reinman for DC Comics The Glob, created by Roy Thomas and Herb Trimpe for Marvel Comics Swamp Beast from Monster in My Pocket by Dwayne McDuffie and Gil Kane for Harvey Comics. Bog Swamp Demon, a fictional character appearing in Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles comic books. Danny Dunn and the Swamp Monster by Raymond Abrashkin and Jay Williams. In the anime and manga Princess Resurrection, the characters are attacked by a tribe of monsters resembling the creature while vacationing by a lagoon, who desire Hime's blood to make them immortal and keep their kind from dying out. In a possible reference to the novel version of the movie, one of the creatures is roughly 30 feet tall.[volume & issue needed] In the anime and manga One Piece, the Straw Hat Pirates are attacked by Caribou who has eaten the Swamp Swamp Fruit (a Logia-type Devil Fruit that lets its consumer generate, control, and turn into a "swamp").[13] Examples in other media[edit] The title creature in Theodore Sturgeon's 1940 short story "It!" is the earliest example of a plant-based swamp monster. The Gill-man from the 1954 film Creature from the Black Lagoon appears as a fish-like humanoid.[14] A creature, credited as the Gill-man, also appears in the non-Universal release The Monster Squad (1987) along with Count Dracula, Frankenstein's Monster, the mummy, and the Wolf Man. He was performed by Tom Woodruff, Jr. An episode of Kolchak: The Night Stalker entitled "The Spanish Moss Murders" (December 6, 1974) features a young man, subject of a study in sleep research, whose nightmares of a Spanish moss-covered swamp-dwelling monster called Pèremalfait from stories heard in his youth in the Louisiana Bayou come to life. (The creature in this case was played by Richard Kiel.) The DC comics character "Swamp Thing" mentioned above was the subject of a 1982 film and a 1990 live-action television series. In the 1986 novel It by Stephen King, It takes the form of a swamp monster to kill Eddie Corcoran. The 1996 Goosebumps book "How to Kill a Monster" featured a Swamp Monster. It was depicted as a green-furred monster with the head of an alligator and a gorilla-like body with claws on its fingers. The Swamp Monster makes an appearance in the 2015 Goosebumps movie performed by Nate Andrade (who was credited as "Monster #1"). He is one of Slappy the Dummy's monster and villain henchmen and is referred to as the "Bog Monster" during the 2014 Comic Con appearance. Its appearance is different where it looks like a large creature made of moss. The TV series Family Guy featured some swamp monsters. In the episode "I Never Met the Dead Man" (April 11, 1999), the Griffin family catches a creature strongly resembling a "Swamp Monster" while fishing. In the episode "Business Guy" (December 13, 2009), Carter Pewterschmidt and Lois Griffin trick Peter Griffin into surrendering Pewterschmidt Industries by scaring him into believing a local swamp monster will eat him if he does not. A seemingly real swamp monster scares Peter out of the office and then chases Lois and a disguised Carter before being trapped and unmasked to be Gregory House. Victor Crowley is a deformed killer and main character in Adam Green's 2006 film Hatchet. David Winning's 2008 film Swamp Devil stars Bruce Dern as a retired sheriff trying to prove the existence of a swamp monster. In Animal Planet's Lost Tapes, the episode "Swamp Creature" (January 26, 2009) is about the Louisiana Swamp Monster, which is said to be an abandoned Native American child who was raised by alligators.[6] While criticizing a movie featuring a swamp monster, one of the hosts of the 2010 series This Movie Sucks! (Ron Sparks) tells the legend of Lake Erie Pete about a man who becomes a crime-fighting swamp monster after his parents are killed by one. In the video game Infamous 2, the Swamp Monsters are the least mutated type of the Corrupted that have scythes instead of forearms and are the more common of the Corrupted. In season two of Scream Queens, the Green Meanie is described to be a swamp monster that lives in a toxic swamp near the C.U.R.E. Institute Hospital.[15] See also[edit] Lists of legendary creatures List of reported lake monsters List of Scottish loch-monsters References[edit] ^ Jon B. Cooke and George Khoury, Swampmen: Muck-Monsters and their Makers (2015), p. 6, ISBN 1605490571. ^ Observations on Popular Antiquities: Including the Whole of Mr. Bourne's Antiquitates Vulgares (1777). ^ "Expedia produces map of the world's mythical creatures and, yes, drop bears made the cut". pickle.nine.com.au. ^ Giants, Monsters & Dragons: An Encyclopedia of Folklore, Legend, and Myth By Carol Rose ^ H. David Brumble, Classical Myths and Legends in the Middle Ages and Renaissance: A Dictionary of Allegorical Meanings (1998), p. 156. ^ a b "Swamp Creature". 13 August 2012. ^ Theresa Bane, Encyclopedia of Beasts and Monsters in Myth, Legend and Folklore (2016), p. 211. ^ Coleman, Loren (2003). The Field Guide to Lake Monsters, Sea Serpents, and Other Mystery Denizens of the Deep. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher. ISBN 978-1-58542-252-4.CS1 maint: ref duplicates default (link) ^ "BBC News - Americas - The abominable swampman". news.bbc.co.uk. ^ The Washington Post (1988-08-14) "'Lizard Man' Claims a Casualty", The Washington Post ^ Cotter, Robert Michael "Bobb" (2008). The Great Monster Magazines: A Critical Study of the Black and White Publications of the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-7864-3389-6. ^ "Interview with Alan Moore Page 5 of 8". Seraphemera. February 19, 2013. ^ One Piece Vol. 61 Chapter 603 ^ "Take a Look Inside UVA Employee Matthew Gatto's 'Parlor of Horrors'". 24 October 2017. ^ Walsh, Megan. "These 'Scream Queens' Killer Theories Prove The Green Meanie Could Be Anyone". v t e Stock characters By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Supersoldier Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Harlequin Zanni Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Social Darwinist Dark Lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer toy Skeleton Swamp monster Vampires Zombies Other Alazon Archenemy Igor Masked Mystery Villain Miser By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Magical Negro Young Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Himbo Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Moleman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent cliques Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Pop icon Redshirt Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Village idiot White savior