Science fiction and fantasy term for magical abilities that affect, or are gained through, the use of technology This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (June 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) In science fiction and fantasy, technomancy, also called technomagic, is a category of magical abilities that affect technology or magical powers that are gained through the use of technology. Contents 1 The word "technomancy" 2 Theme 2.1 Examples 3 Non-mystical technomancy 4 Non-scientific technology 5 See also 6 References 7 External links The word "technomancy"[edit] Technomancy is a portmanteau of technology and -mancy, a suffix used in magical sciences to refer to specific types of specialization or divination (-mancy is derived from the Greek manteia, meaning divination). Technomancy is also associated with the daily usage of computers, followed by the passage: "The future of computing is not in Data Processing, or Programming, or Information Systems, or Computer Science. It's in Technomancy."[1] An early appearance of the term can be found in Steve Martindale's 1990 short story "Technomancy" in the magazine Aboriginal Science Fiction.[2] Theme[edit] Technomancy is a common theme in certain subgenres of both science fiction and modern-day fantasy fiction, particularly fiction that crosses the sci-fi and fantasy genres, as well as role playing games that take place in similar settings. Strictly speaking, though, it belongs fully to the realm of fantasy since it can be magic that is used on technology that presently exists. It most commonly appears in science fantasy. The term technomancy has seen increased usage on webcomics on the internet, although it is used in a vague sense. It is also distinct from what is sometimes called "magitech" (technology that uses magic). Magitech considers magic and science to be two parts of one force, while technomancy has magic affecting science, notwithstanding. Examples[edit] In the Urban Arcana campaign setting of the d20 Modern role-playing game, there are two character classes that use technomancy, Techno Mage and Shadowjack. In the Dragonstar campaign setting, compatible with the d20 system, there are many examples of technomancy spells, items, as well as character classes. In the role-playing game Mage: The Ascension, several orders of Mages (Iteration X, the New World Order, Progenitors, Sons of Ether, the Syndicate, Virtual Adepts, and Void Engineers) practice magic with a scientific theme. In the TV series Angel, a character used magic symbols on himself that caused him to be undetected by magic or physical security measures. In the episode, "Supersymmetry," a villain attempts to trap Fred in a hell dimension by sending her a text message. When she views it on her phone, a portal opens next to her to suck her in. In the TV series Buffy the Vampire Slayer, the character Willow sees magic as a way of hacking the universe, and an extension of her computer hacking skills. She is also seen to use magic on computers to help her access information more quickly, or view the information (including pictures) inside her mind. Also another character, Jenny Calendar is a techno-pagan who uses the Internet as a place to gather with her circle and from which they cast their spells. In the TV series Babylon 5 and spin-off Crusade, technomages were created among individuals across various sentient races, which were then implanted with advanced technology and nanites throughout their bodies, using this advanced technology to simulate the illusion of magic. Kelly McCullough's popular books, Webmage, Cybermancy and Codespell deal with ancient Greek deities and their descendants who have moved magic into the modern world through the creation of the so-called "mWeb". In one webcomic, Argos, Technomancy was used frequently in history. This eventually led to revolt and, some characters believe, destruction of the entire continent. In the browser-based role playing game, DragonFable, Dr. Voltabolt is a mad scientist/dentist that is also a technomancer. The Race of Gnomes in the town of Popsprocket are all very familiar with Technomancy. Players can even learn Technomancy and obtain the Technomancer class armor once they're at least level 30. In the book series Worldweavers, by Alma Alexander, technomancy is a critical element to the story. Several characters in the Little Witch Academia franchise, notably Constanze Amalie von Braunschbank Albrechtsberger and Professor Croix Meridies, make use of a blending of technology and magic. In the RPG Mutant Chronicles the technicians and medics of the Dark Apostle Algeroth are called Technomancers. They normally wear Grimy Cowls, are short and are normally bald. Non-mystical technomancy[edit] In some settings, technomancy may be totally scientific in nature in accordance with Arthur C Clarke's third law of prediction: Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. Examples of users of this type of technomancy are the Technomages of the Babylon 5 universe;[3] and in Ilium/Olympos, where the supernatural powers of wizards and gods come from an advanced technology. In the Mass Effect video game series, many characters gain magic-like powers through technology. The 4th Edition of the Shadowrun role-playing game has characters who can interact with the Matrix (the Internet of that setting) without using technology and are referred to as "Technomancers", but their abilities stem from a mutation rather than magic. Shadowrun Technomancers are specifically unable to use magic.[4] The term Technomancy can be descriptive of the skill of an engineer whose expertise allows him or her to diagnose mechanical problems by observing the machine behavior, in essence listening to the machine to let it tell him what is wrong. In Overwatch the character Sombra can instantly "hack" and control any piece of technology within seconds. She summons up a holographic keyboard that she types on that can "hack" health packs, other characters ultimates, or even their basic abilities. In the animated short Blizzard created introducing her, she can also be seen gaining control of a giant robotic arm. In both the game and the short she can render herself invisible or teleport. The DC Comics supervillain Abra Kadabra is from the 64th century, at a time when science is considered magic by 21st century standards. His "powers" come from his usage of futuristic technology to simulate magic. Non-scientific technology[edit] Another form of technomancy, sometimes called 'industrial magic', has magical devices operating similarly to technological devices. The Harry Potter setting has owl familiars serving as a postal system, animated newspapers and fireplace embers serving as video screens, phantom quills and parchments as speech-recognition software, even flying brooms and orbs as athletic equipment, those embers can also be used like teleportation, and so on. The Eberron setting of Dungeons & Dragons has bound elemental spirits powering transportation vehicles. In Atlantis: The Lost Empire for example, the crystal is a supernatural being, but his power was used like a computer program. In Dave the Barbarian, crystal balls and magic cauldrons were used like telephones, televisions and computers. See also[edit] Speculative fiction portal Magitech Technopaganism Technopathy References[edit] ^ "Your Computer is Made Out of Magic". james.hamsterrepublic.com. Retrieved 2020-06-16. ^ Aboriginal Science Fiction volume 4 (2), 1990 Source ^ The A to Z of Babylon 5, by David Bassom, Boxtree Books 1996 ^ WizKids, Inc., Shadowrun 4th Edition, 2005 External links[edit] Look up technomancy or technomagic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. v t e Methods of divination Theriomancy Ailuromancy Alectryomancy Augury Myomancy Myrmomancy Ornithomancy Bibliomancy Bible Homer I Ching Rhapsodomancy Virgil Scrying Aspidomancy Catoptromancy Crystal gazing Hydromancy Oculomancy Cleromancy Astragalomancy Belomancy Cartomancy Cowrie-shell divination Favomancy Kumalak Mengdu Molybdomancy Obi divination Opele Opon Ifá Rhabdomancy Runic magic Sortes Tarot card reading Tasseography Necromancy Gastromancy Taghairm Somatomancy Anthropomancy Cephalonomancy Haruspex Omphalomancy Oracle bone Palmistry Podomancy Rumpology Scapulimancy Other Apophenia Astrology Fortune-telling Geomancy Ifá Omen Oracle Prophecy Technomancy v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category