This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (March 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Teen film is a film genre targeted at teenagers and young adults by the plot being based on their special interests, such as coming of age, attempting to fit in, bullying, peer pressure, first love, teen rebellion, conflict with parents, and teen angst or alienation.[1] Often these normally serious subject matters are presented in a glossy, stereotyped or trivialized way. Many teenage characters are portrayed by young adult actors between the ages of 20 and 30. Some teen films appeal to young males, while others appeal to young females. Films in this genre are often set in high schools and colleges, or contain characters who are of high school or college age. Contents 1 Types 1.1 Beach films 2 Codes and conventions 3 Common archetypes 4 Notable writers and directors 4.1 Herman Raucher 4.2 George Lucas 4.3 John Hughes 4.4 Gregg Araki 4.5 Éric Rohmer 5 Noteworthy actors 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Types[edit] The classic teen film is often similar to a romantic comedy. Hybrid genres include: Teen sci-fi Teen horror Teen drama Teen comedy Teen sex comedy Teen musicals Teen action Teen thriller Additional types of teen films can be divided again into sub-categories. These can be found at list of teen films. Beach films[edit] Early examples of the genre in the United States include the "beach party films" of the 1950s and 1960s, such as the Gidget series.[2] Codes and conventions[edit] Codes and conventions of teen films vary depending on the cultural context of the film, but they can include proms, alcohol, illegal substances, high school, parties, virginity, teen pregnancy, social groups and cliques, interpersonal conflict with peers and/or the older generations, fitting in, peer pressure, and popular culture.[3] The classic codes and conventions of teen film come from American films. One of the most widely used conventions is an emphasis on stereotypes and social groups. The stereotypes most commonly used include: The Jock / Cheerleader School Diva (Alternately The It Girl) The Geek / Nerd The Rebel The Misfit / Outcast The Boy/Girl next door The New Girl / Boy The Loner The Band Geek Class Hottie Class Clown The Stoner The Athlete The Queen Bee The Foreign Exchange Student Apart from the characters, there are many other codes and conventions of teen film. These films are often set in or around high schools and places frequented by teens, such as shopping malls and themed restaurants. This technique allows for many different social cliques to be shown. These settings are typical for the classic romantic comedy teen film. Common archetypes[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A good example of the use of archetypes in teen film was displayed in the 1985 film, The Breakfast Club. These archetypes have since become a larger part of the culture. The jock, cheerleader, and social outcast, among others, become a familiar and pleasurable feature for the audience. However, genres are dynamic; they change and develop to meet the expectations of their target audience. Notable writers and directors[edit] This list of "famous" or "notable" persons has no clear inclusion or exclusion criteria. Please help to define clear inclusion criteria and edit the list to contain only subjects that fit those criteria. (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Herman Raucher[edit] Herman Raucher, along with Robert Mulligan, popularized the genre with Summer of '42 (1971), and Raucher continued the trend by writing Class of '44 (1973). George Lucas[edit] George Lucas has been credited for perfecting the genre by writing and directing American Graffiti (1973). John Hughes[edit] The genre gained more credibility during the 1980s with the works of writer and director John Hughes. His legacy of teen films, including The Breakfast Club, Ferris Bueller's Day Off, Sixteen Candles, and many more, proved to be popular not only with audiences but also with critics.[2] Gregg Araki[edit] Gregg Araki filmed independent films in the 1990s. His films, particularly the Teen Apocalypse Trilogy (consisting of Totally Fucked Up, The Doom Generation, and Nowhere), are notable for capturing the disaffected attitudes of suburban teenagers of Generation X. Éric Rohmer[edit] Éric Rohmer, a pioneering director of the French New Wave, was notable for focusing on young adults or youth and their complications with love in a number of his films. Some of these works are La Collectionneuse, Claire's Knee, Pauline at the Beach, My Girlfriend's Boyfriend, and A Summer's Tale. Noteworthy actors[edit] Images of several American teen genre actors, attached to Hoa Hoc Tro Magazine (Vietnam), include Britney Spears and Hilary Duff Popular actors in teen films have included Annette Funicello, Hayley Mills, and Sal Mineo in the 1960s and 1970s; Molly Ringwald, Anthony Michael Hall, Brendan Fraser, Luke Perry, Johnny Depp, Christina Applegate, Winona Ryder, John Cusack, Michael J. Fox, Robert Downey Jr., Matthew Broderick and members of the Brat Pack in the 1980s and early 1990s; and Sarah Michelle Gellar, Neve Campbell, Chris Evans, Rose McGowan, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Heath Ledger, Britney Spears, Kirsten Dunst, Shannon Elizabeth, Gina Ravera, Seth Green, Tobey Maguire, Alicia Silverstone, Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen, Frankie Muniz, Hilary Duff, Lindsay Lohan, Rachael Leigh Cook, Drew Barrymore, Freddie Prinze Jr., Amanda Bynes, Leonardo DiCaprio, and Hayden Panettiere in the mid-to-late-1990s and throughout the 2000s. Many of these actors were either pre-teens or teens themselves when the movies were made. Notable teen genre actors in the 2010s include Leighton Meester, Blake Lively, KJ Apa, Noah Centineo, Timothée Chalamet, Zac Efron, Lucy Hale, Lucas Hedges, Tom Holland, Anna Kendrick, Katherine Langford, Keiynan Lonsdale, Ezra Miller, Evan Peters, Nick Robinson, Cole Sprouse, Amandla Stenberg, Emma Stone, Ashley Tisdale, Emma Watson, Charlie Heaton, Justice Smith, Hailee Steinfeld, Odeya Rush, Madison Iseman, Dylan Minnette, Storm Reid, Asher Angel, Jack Dylan Grazer, Charlie Plummer, Sophia Lillis, and Finn Wolfhard. See also[edit] List of teen films List of film genres Teen drama (List of teen dramas) Teen sitcom (List of teen sitcoms) Teen pop Teen magazine (List of teen magazines) Brat Pack Cringe comedy Gross-out film References[edit] ^ Driscoll, Catherine (June 2011). Teen Film: A Critical Introduction. ISBN 9781847888440. ^ a b Kaveney, Roz (2006-07-11). Teen Dreams: Reading Teen Film and Television from 'Heathers' to 'Veronica Mars'. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 9781845111847. ^ Driscoll, Catherine (2011-06-15). Teen Film: A Critical Introduction. Berg. ISBN 9781847886866. Further reading[edit] Bernstein, J. 1997. Pretty in Pink: The Golden Age of Teenage Movies. St. Martin's Press. Driscoll, Catherine. 2011. Teen Film: A Critical Introduction. Berg. ISBN 9781847886866. Shary, Timothy. 2005. Teen Movies: American Youth on Screen. Wallflower Press. External links[edit] Entertainment Weekly's 50 Best High School Movies High School Reunion Collection Like the 80s - the 90s Teen Movie Site v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie v t e Lists of films by genre and themes Action Martial arts Mixed martial arts List of ninja films Vigilante Adventure Pirate Swashbuckler Animation Avant-garde Biographical Blaxploitation Children's Christian Comedy Parody Slapstick Crime Heist Disaster Documentary Drama Economics Historical Slavery Erotic Fantasy Sword and Sorcery Horror Cannibal Clowns Comedy horror Disaster Eco Ghosts Holiday Mummy Natural Satanic Toys Vampire Zombie LGBT Mockumentary Monster Kaiju Giant-monster Musical Mystery Noir Neo-noir Religious Romance Romantic comedy Satire Science fiction apocalyptic Body Swap Dystopia Extraterrestrials Sci-fi action Sci-fi comedy Sci-fi horror Superhero Time travel Spy Sports Teen Thriller Legal Erotic War anti-war Submarine Western Spaghetti Northern Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125