The WikiProject banner below should be moved to this article's talk page. If this is a demonstration of the template, please set the parameter |category=no to prevent this page being miscategorised. Note: When merging or renaming banners, categories, projects or taskforces, you may need to update WP:AALERTS/LIST for Article Alerts to work correctly (ask for help at WT:AALERTS). WikiProject Novels / Fantasy   Novels portal v t eThis article is within the scope of WikiProject Novels, an attempt to build a comprehensive and detailed guide to novels, novellas, novelettes and short stories on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate, you can edit one of the articles mentioned below, or visit the project page, where you can join the project and contribute to the general Project discussion to talk over new ideas and suggestions.NovelsWikipedia:WikiProject NovelsTemplate:WikiProject Novelsnovel articles  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's quality scale.  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's importance scale. This article is supported by Fantasy task force.   The WikiProject banner below should be moved to this article's talk page. If this is a demonstration of the template, please set the parameter |category=no to prevent this page being miscategorised. Note: When merging or renaming banners, categories, projects or taskforces, you may need to update WP:AALERTS/LIST for Article Alerts to work correctly (ask for help at WT:AALERTS). WikiProject Literature   Literature portal v t eThis article is within the scope of WikiProject Literature, a collaborative effort to improve the coverage of Literature on Wikipedia. If you would like to participate, please visit the project page, where you can join the discussion and see a list of open tasks.LiteratureWikipedia:WikiProject LiteratureTemplate:WikiProject LiteratureLiterature articles  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's quality scale.  ???  This article has not yet received a rating on the project's importance scale.   Contents 1 Spaceship 2 Dragon 3 Revamp 4 Excluded articles 5 Picture of the One Ring 6 Suggest removal of all the legends/myths? 7 Twilight? 8 Magus 9 Major Works? 10 Wikipedia:WikiProject Fantasy Spaceship[edit] Why is there a spaceship picture on the template? That is surely more sci-fi than fantasy. Alan16 (talk) 02:42, 12 August 2009 (UTC) Dragon[edit] Why does the template have a random drawing of a anthropomorphic dragon? It's not even very good.--May Cause Dizziness (talk) 00:57, 24 July 2010 (UTC) I'm removing it. If you have a problem with that, comment here.--May Cause Dizziness (talk) 03:03, 4 October 2010 (UTC) Revamp[edit] Im about to revamp this template, as i did with Template:Science fiction. similar sections, some overlap of contents. Its not my template, of course, so criticism or redaction will be welcome. main point is to remove from this template categories, stubs, or otherwise much less notable articles, in favor of the major fantasy articles we have. a link to tolkien fandom without a direct link to tolkien is not correct. He is much more important than his fans,obviously, as are his books. the template can, and i think should, link directly to major authors and works, and not just lists or articles on the culture of fantasy fans. i just have to do some resorting, and ill post it here (and rename it). I will list all the articles i did NOT include, which may help if people feel i left something out that warrants inclusion. (the work is based on my own knowledge (somewhat biased of course) and the strength of the arguments of the articles for how important their subject is to the fantasy field.Mercurywoodrose (talk) 20:30, 15 November 2011 (UTC) Excluded articles[edit] garcia marquez (magic realism not fantasy) calvino kubla khan alfred lord tennyson Fantastic The Last Unicorn Mythago Wood Little, Big eta hoffman Kipling Charles williams thomas malory shelley john milton paradise lost keats Robert Graves/Seven Days in New Crete william blake The World's Desire H. Rider Haggard wicca The Haunting of Hill House List of fairy tales conventions werewolf Count Dracula vampire jason golden fleece (in as argonautica) golem dark fantasy? Dystopia List of dystopian literature hans christian andersen Amadis de Gaula erewhon gene wolfe (series is in) Mervyn Peake The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant books‎ The Faerie Queene? pinocchio Tokusatsu arthur King Kong Outline of Middle-earth paranormal (related) a wrinkle in time clive barker? Reception of J. R. R. Tolkien Fantasy world Richard Adams Middle-Earth List of Middle-earth writings Fantasy comics comics roald dahl Ursula K. Le Guin Prydain Dante Alighieri trilogy by him Darkover/bradley Tove Jansson Moomin Brothers Hildebrandt Alan Lee (illustrator) Ian Miller (illustrator) Michael Hague ovid/meta hesiod mythology, sp norse, greek virgil Bangsian fantasy Role-playing game hal foster and his comic strip william morris Guillermo del Toro Tarzan arthur conan doyle dandelion wine Filk music Phantastische Bibliothek Wetzlar List of fantasy anime Magical girl Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (manga) The Moon Pool Fantasy comics Argosy Fantasy television Category:Fantasy book publishers List of Arthurian characters World Fantasy Convention List of fictional animals List of religious ideas in fantasy fiction Science fiction studies Invisibility in fiction Fantasy tropes and conventions List of fantasy worlds Fantasy author Enchanted forest Once upon a time mary stewart Urban fantasy Stephen donaldson? Mythic fiction Picture of the One Ring[edit] I don't think this is an appropriate picture for this template. Firstly, I think the fantasy genre is far wider than Lord of the Rings and it is not right to use a particular image symbolising one particular book. Secondly, I am doubtful about the copyright status of this image - it has Tengwar script that Tolkien created and it hasn't entered the public domain yet. The artist of this image likely also used a font, which may also have additional copyright restrictions.--Anon 22:54, 30 December 2011 (UTC) no question the fantasy genre is larger than tolkien, as you can see by the articles linked to in the template. IF we want an image on this template, this is pretty good, though i did consider images by rackham, and things like fairies, etc. Good questions about the copyright status, maybe take that up at the images page at wikimedia commons. (I may do so myself)Mercurywoodrose (talk) 03:17, 12 January 2012 (UTC) This alternate version of the image [1] brings up the copyright issue of the font, and admits that while probably allowable for free use [[2]], questions remain about invented scripts.Mercurywoodrose (talk) 03:20, 12 January 2012 (UTC) The rings picture does not, and cannot symbolise the entire fantasy genre. It should be removed.--Siddhartha Ghai (talk) 23:47, 27 January 2012 (UTC) Suggest removal of all the legends/myths?[edit] Why does this category include such myths and legends as The Odyssey, Beowulf and Journey to the West, as well as later direct adaptations of or collections derived from folklore (Le Morte d'Arthur and The Ring of the Nibelung)? These are hardly works which could be considered fantasy per se. Otherwise you might as well include Grimms' Fairy Tales or Táin Bó Cúailnge. Yes, they have provided inspiration for modern fantasy writers, but I would suggest them to be better described as myths, legends, (traditional) folk/fairy tales, heroic epics etc. Mojowiha (talk) 19:17, 30 January 2012 (UTC) Twilight?[edit] Isn't this more like Horror? Plus, it's a fad. In 10 years, if people are still reading it, then it can be included. As of today, it hasn't shown staying power like the others on the list. — Preceding unsigned comment added by 159.53.78.140 (talk) 20:25, 28 February 2012 (UTC) Magus[edit] I removed The Magus, which is not generally considered fantasy literature. Goustien (talk) 00:40, 10 July 2012 (UTC) Major Works?[edit] Subjective! Remove it. Also it's very Anlgo-centric. Where are Latin magic realist works? Where are the Japanese fantasys. List could be better, but removing it is better still--Kevlar (talk • contribs) 18:39, 1 October 2012 (UTC) I have given up on this template (as i did with SF), but i want to point out that we are including some publishers and not others, some publications and not others, and the list of genres and subjects is incomplete and biased. Any effort to create an effective navigation box for Fantasy fiction will be subjective. PS, this is the English Wikipedia, thus it has an inevitable Anglo bias. i did include some classics from antiquity. But, as i said, i will no longer edit these templates.Mercurywoodrose (talk) 03:51, 2 October 2012 (UTC) Wikipedia:WikiProject Fantasy[edit] Can anyone please help me build the Wikipedia:WikiProject Fantasy? Thanks. RainbowSilver2ndBackup (talk) 06:50, 24 December 2018 (UTC)