This article is about the pornographic genre. For the geometric phenomenon, see tendril perversion. This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (April 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife, a design by Hokusai of 1814 depicting a woman having sex with two octopuses. Tamatori steals the Dragon King's jewel, woodblock print by Utagawa Kuniyoshi. La Grande danse macabre des vifs by Martin van Maële Tentacle erotica (触手強姦, shokushu goukan, "tentacle violation") or tentacle rape is a type of pornography most commonly found in Japan which integrates traditional pornography with elements of bestiality and a fantasy, horror, or science-fiction theme. It is found in some horror or hentai titles, with tentacled creatures (usually fictional monsters) having sexual intercourse, predominantly with females. Tentacle erotica can be consensual but frequently contains elements of rape. The genre is well known enough in Japan that it is the subject of parody. In the 21st century, Japanese films of this genre have become more common in the United States and Europe, although it still remains a small, fetish-oriented part of the adult film industry. While most tentacle erotica is animated, there are also a few live action movies. Contents 1 History 2 Culture 2.1 Animation 2.2 Manga 2.3 Live action 3 See also 4 References 5 External links History[edit] Creatures with tentacles appeared in Japanese erotica long before animated pornography. Among the most famous of the early instances is an illustration from the 1814 Hokusai Katsushika novel Kinoe no komatsu popularly known as The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife. It is an example of shunga (Japanese erotic woodblock art) and has been reworked by a number of artists.[1] Masami Teraoka brought the image up to date with his 2001 work "Sarah and Octopus/Seventh Heaven", part of his Waves and Plagues collection. A scholarly paper by Danielle Talerico[2] showed that although western audiences often interpret Hokusai's famous design as rape, Japanese audiences of the Edo period would have viewed it as consensual. They would have recognized the print as depicting the legend of the female abalone diver Tamatori. In the story, Tamatori steals a jewel from the Dragon King. During her escape, the Dragon King and his sea-life minions (including octopuses) pursue her. The dialogue in the illustration shows the diver and two octopuses expressing mutual enjoyment. Contemporary censorship in Japan dates to the Meiji period. The influence of European Victorian culture was a catalyst for legislative interest in public sexual mores. Post-WWII, the Allies imposed a number of reforms on the Japanese government including anti-censorship laws. The legal proscriptions against pornography, therefore, derive from the nation's penal code. At present, “obscenity” is still prohibited. How this term is interpreted has not remained constant. While exposed genitalia (and, until recently, pubic hair) are illegal, the diversity of permissible sexual acts is now wide compared with other liberal democracies. Leaders within the tentacle porn industry have stated that much of their work was initially directed at circumventing this policy. The animator Toshio Maeda stated: “At that time pre-Urotsukidōji, it was illegal to create a sensual scene in bed. I thought I should do something to avoid drawing such a normal sensual scene. So I just created a creature. His tentacle is not a penis as a pretext. I could say, as an excuse, this is not a penis; this is just a part of the creature. You know, the creatures, they don't have a gender. A creature is a creature. So it is not obscene – not illegal."[3] Culture[edit] Animation[edit] The earliest animated form of tentacle assault was in the 1985 anime hentai OVA Dream Hunter Rem, though the scene in question was excised when the OVA was re-released in a non-hentai form. The first entirely non-hentai anime production portraying a tentacle assault would be 1986 anime OVA Guyver: Out of Control, where a female Chronos soldier named Valcuria (voiced by Keiko Toda) is enshrouded by the 2nd (damaged) Guyver unit that surrounds her in tentacle form and penetrates all orifices.[citation needed] Numerous animated tentacle erotica films followed the next couple decades, with more popular titles such as 1986's Urotsukidoji, 1992's La Blue Girl and 1995's Demon Beast Resurrection becoming common sights in large video store chains in the United States and elsewhere. The volume of films in this genre has slowed from the peak years in the 1990s but continue to be produced to the present day. Manga[edit] In 1989, Toshio Maeda's manga Demon Beast Invasion created what might be called the modern Japanese paradigm of tentacle porn, in which the elements of sexual assault are emphasized. Maeda explained that he invented the practice to get around strict Japanese censorship regulations, which prohibit the depiction of the penis but apparently do not prohibit showing sexual penetration by a tentacle or similar (often robotic) appendage. Live action[edit] The use of sexualized tentacles in live action films, while much rarer, started in American B-movie horror films and has since migrated to Japan.[citation needed] B-movie producer Roger Corman used the concept of tentacle rape in a brief scene in his 1970 film The Dunwich Horror, a film adaptation of the H. P. Lovecraft short story of the same name. Vice magazine identifies this as "perhaps cinema history's first tentacle-rape scene".[4] A decade later, Corman would again use tentacle rape while producing Galaxy of Terror, released in 1980. Arguably the most notorious example of tentacle rape to date, Corman directed a scene in which actress Taaffe O'Connell, playing an astronaut on a future space mission, is captured, raped, and killed by a giant, tentacled worm. The film borrows the concept of the "id monster" from the 1950s film Forbidden Planet, with the worm being a manifestation of the O'Connell character's fears. The scene was graphic enough that the film's director, B. D. Clark, refused to helm it, and O'Connell refused to do the full nudity required by Corman, so Corman directed the scene himself and used a body double for some of the more graphic shots. Initially given an X-rating by the Motion Picture Association of America, tiny cuts were made to the scene which changed the movie's rating to 'R'. An even more popular film from 1981, Sam Raimi's The Evil Dead, has actress Ellen Sandweiss' character being attacked by the possessed woods she is walking in. The evil spirit inhabiting the woods uses tree limbs and branches to ensnare, strip, and rape her, "entering" (i.e., possessing) her through the sexual act in a way very similar to that in which tentacles are normally depicted.[5] The scene was repeated in a much shorter version in the sequel, Evil Dead II, released in 1987. Another film, this time dealing with the life of artist Katsushika Hokusai, was the Japanese made 1981 film Edo Porn, which featured the far-famed Dream of the Fisherman's Wife painting in a live action depiction. In the film Possession (also from 1981) a woman copulates with a tentacled creature, although the tentacles themselves are never explicitly expressed as penetrating her.[citation needed] The popularity of these films has led to the subsequent production of numerous live action tentacle films in Japan from the 1990s to the present day. The theme has appeared more rarely in adult American cinema and art; one example is American artist Zak Smith, who has painted works featuring octopuses and porn stars in various stages of intercourse.[citation needed] In 2016, Amat Escalante directed an art house movie called The Untamed which depicts a live action scene between the female protagonist and a tentacled space alien.[citation needed] See also[edit] Censorship in Japan Pornography in Japan References[edit] ^ Courage, Katherine Harmon (2013). "Tentacle Erotica". Octopus!: The Most Mysterious Creature in the Sea. Penguin Books. ISBN 9780698137677. ^ Talerico, Danielle. “Interpreting Sexual Imagery in Japanese Prints: A Fresh Approach to Hokusai’s Diver and Two Octopi”, in Impressions, The Journal of the Ukiyo-e Society of America, Vol. 23 (2001). ^ Manga Artist Interview Series (Part 1), 2002 ^ Eil, Philip (August 20, 2015). "The Posthumous Pornification of H. P. Lovecraft". Vice. Retrieved March 10, 2017. ^ Scherer, Agnes (2016). Plant Horror: Approaches to the Monstrous Vegetal in Fiction and Film. Springer Publishing. p. 41. ISBN 9781137570635. External links[edit] Manga Artist Interview Series Part I, Sake-Drenched Postcards—interview with Toshio Maeda. v t e Pornography Pornography Types Amateur Cartoon Hentai Tijuana bible Child Erotica Simulated Deepfake Feminist Hardcore Internet Mobile Phone Revenge Sexting Softcore Genres Alt Bisexual Bondage Casting couch Celebrity Sex tape Clothed female, naked male Clothed male, naked female Convent Ethnic Gang bang Gay Gonzo Incest Lesbian MILF Mormon Queer Rape Reality Tentacle Transgender Women's Related History Film actor Organizations Adult Film Association of America Critics Adult Film Association Fans of X-Rated Entertainment Free Speech Coalition X-Rated Critics Organization List of pornography companies List of pornographic film studios Opposition to pornography Movements Anti-pornography movement in the United Kingdom Anti-pornography movement in the United States Antipornography Civil Rights Ordinance Organizations Churchmen's Committee for Decent Publications Feminists Fighting Pornography Fight the New Drug The Marriage Vow No More Page 3 Stop Bild Sexism Stop Child Trafficking Now Stop Porn Culture Women Against Pornography Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media XXXchurch.com Overuse NoFap Content-control software Accountability software Parental controls Employee monitoring software Views Feminist Religious Sex-positive feminist Media Audio Film Parody Cartoon Magazines List Video games Eroge Newspaper features Page 3 Possible effects Addiction Internet sex addiction Pornography addiction Sex addiction Objectification of women / sexism STDs People Performers by decade British performers Gay male performers Pornographic actors who appeared in mainstream films Mainstream actors who have appeared in pornographic films Film directors Events Adultcon AVN Adult Entertainment Expo Barcelona International Erotic Film Festival Brussels International Festival of Eroticism Exotic Erotic Ball Exxxotica Expo HUMP Porn Sunday Miscellaneous Adult movie theater Blue Movie Golden Age Not safe for work Pornographication Pornotopia R18 certificate Rule 34 Sex shop Sexualization X rating See also Erotica Art Comics Film Literature Photography Sexual activity Ribaldry Right to sexuality Sex-positive movement Sexual repression Sexual revolution Category Erotica and pornography portal Human sexuality portal v t e Animation industry in Japan History of anime Companies/studios Active 3Hz A.C.G.T A.P.P.P. AIC Ajia-do Animation Works Aniplex A-1 Pictures CloverWorks Arvo Animation Asahi Broadcasting Corporation DLE Silver Link Asahi Production Asatsu-DK Eiken Gonzo NAS Ashi Productions Asread AXsiZ Bandai Namco Holdings Bandai Namco Arts Actas Sunrise Bandai Namco Pictures Happinet Bibury Animation Studios Bones Brain's Base Bridge C-Station C2C CoMix Wave Films Creators in Pack CyberAgent Cygames CygamesPictures Dentsu Digital Frontier GEMBA Diomedéa Doga Kobo Egg Firm Eight Bit Emon Ekachi Epilka EMT Squared Encourage Films Ezo'la Feel Felix Film Fuji TV Blue Lynx David Production Frontier Works G&G Direction Gaina Gainax Gallop Gathering Geek Pictures Geek Toys Genco GoHands Graphinica Yumeta Company Grizzly Hoods Entertainment IG Port Production I.G Signal.MD Wit Studio J.C.Staff Kadokawa Corporation Dwango ENGI Khara Kinema Citrus Kyoto Animation Lapin Track Lesprit Magic Bus Maho Film MAPPA Marvelous Millepensee Movic NAZ Nexus Nippon Animation Nippon TV Madhouse Tatsunoko Production Nomad NUT Odessa Entertainment Oh! Production Okuruto Noboru OLM Orange Passione P.A.Works Pierrot Studio Signpost Pine Jam Platinum Vision Polygon Pictures Project No.9 Robot Communications Satelight Science SARU Sega Sammy Holdings TMS Entertainment Marza Animation Planet Seven Shaft Shirogumi Shuka Sola Digital Arts Square Enix Visual Works Studio 4°C Studio A-Cat Studio Bind Studio Chizu Studio Comet Studio Deen Studio Ghibli Studio Gokumi Studio Hibari Larx Entertainment Lerche Studio Nue Studio Ponoc Studio Puyukai Studio VOLN SynergySP Tezuka Productions TNK Tokyo Broadcasting System Seven Arcs Toei Company Toei Animation Troyca TV Asahi Shin-Ei Animation Twin Engine Geno Studio Lay-duce Revoroot Studio Colorido Typhoon Graphics Ufotable Ultra Super Pictures Liden Films Sanzigen Trigger White Fox Yokohama Animation Laboratory Zero-G Zexcs Inactive Artland Bee Train Production Chaos Project Daume Imagin Knack Productions Mook Animation Mushi Production Ordet Remic Defunct Arms Artmic Bandai Visual Connect Group TAC Hal Film Maker J2 Communications Jetlag Productions Kitayama Eiga Seisakujo Kitty Films (Mitaka Studio) Kokusai Eiga-sha Manglobe Palm Studio Production IMS Radix Ace Entertainment Spectrum Animation Studio Fantasia Tear Studio Topcraft Triangle Staff Tsuchida Production Walt Disney Animation Japan Xebec Yaoyorozu Industry associations The Association of Japanese Animations Japanese Animation Creators Association Awards Animation Kobe Awards Animax Anison Grand Prix Anime Grand Prix Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year Japan Media Arts Awards Mainichi Film Award for Best Animation Film Newtype Anime Award Ōfuji Noburō Award Seiyu Awards Sugoi Japan Award Tokyo Anime Award Types Original net animation (ONA) Original video animation (OVA) Television Late night UHF Genres Bara Cooking Ecchi Futanari Girls with guns Harem Hentai Tentacle erotica Isekai Lolicon Kaitō Magical girl Mecha Ryona Shotacon Sports Teens' love Yaoi Yuri Anime programming blocks Animeism Noitamina +Ultra Related topics Animage Animedia Katsudō Shashin Kinema Junpo Manga Newtype Portal v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie