Fictional character appearing in the Terminator Franchise See also: Terminator (character concept) Terminator Terminator character Arnold Schwarzenegger as Terminator in Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) First appearance The Terminator (1984) Last appearance Fortnite Battle Royale (2021) Created by James Cameron Gale Anne Hurd Portrayed by Arnold Schwarzenegger[a] Voiced by Mark Moseley (The Redemption) Chris Cox (Mortal Kombat 11) Body doubles Roland Kickinger (Salvation) Brett Azar (Genisys, Dark Fate)[1] In-universe information Aliases Uncle Bob (Terminator 2: Judgment Day, T2) Guardian, Pops (Terminator Genisys) Carl (Terminator: Dark Fate) Species Cyborg/android (human tissue-grafted robotic endoskeleton) Gender N/A (Male human tissue exterior and pronouns) Occupation Assassin, infiltrator (The Terminator, Salvation, Genisys, and Dark Fate) Bodyguard (T2, T3, Genisys and Dark Fate) Manufacturer Cyberdyne Systems Machine designation Model 101 (The Terminator, Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Terminator Genisys, Terminator Dark Fate) T-101 (Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, T2 trilogy) T-800 (Terminator Salvation, Terminator Genisys, Terminator: Dark Fate) This article is part of a series about Arnold Schwarzenegger Film career Accolades Terminator "Hasta la vista, baby" "I'll be back" See Arnold Run Bodybuilding and business career Chairman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports Arnold Sports Festival Arnold Strongman Classic Planet Hollywood Mr. Olympia Political career Governorship First term Second term Opinion polling LGBT rights Girlie men v t e The Terminator, also known as a Cyberdyne Systems Model 101 or the T-800, is the name of several film characters from the Terminator franchise portrayed by Arnold Schwarzenegger and numerous actor stand-ins digitally overlaid with Schwarzenegger's likeness. The Terminator himself is part of a series of machines created by Skynet for infiltration-based surveillance and assassination missions, and while an android for his appearance, he is usually described as a cyborg consisting of living tissue over a robotic endoskeleton. The first appearance of the Terminator was as the eponymous antagonist in The Terminator, a 1984 film directed and co-written by James Cameron. While the original Terminator was destroyed, other machines with the same appearance are featured in the sequels. In Terminator 2: Judgment Day and Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, Schwarzenegger's Terminator serves as the main protagonist, while in Terminator Genisys and Terminator: Dark Fate, he serves as a supporting protagonist and minor character, respectively, and is pitted against other Terminators sent by Skynet and its successor Legion. In Terminator Salvation and Dark Fate, the character also appears briefly as an antagonist. In the context of the stories, the plot device of having various robots looking the same provides a certain continuity for the human characters by exploiting their emotional familiarity with a particular "human" visage associated with each "model". The "Terminator" title is also used as a generic name for other human-simulating characters in the Terminator franchise, such as the T-1000 antagonist in Judgment Day. Contents 1 Character nomenclature 1.1 Physical appearance 2 Appearances 2.1 The Terminator (1984) 2.2 Judgment Day (1991) 2.3 Rise of the Machines (2003) 2.4 Salvation (2009) 2.5 Genisys (2015) 2.6 Dark Fate (2019) 2.7 Other appearances 3 Concept and characteristics 3.1 Construction 3.2 CPU 3.3 Organic camouflage 3.4 Physical template 4 Reception 5 References Character nomenclature[edit] Commonly known as the Terminator, the character is also given more specific designations, which help distinguish it from other mass-produced Terminators seen in each of the sequels. The end credits of the first three Terminator films list Arnold Schwarzenegger's characters as simply "Terminator", while in Terminator Genisys, he is credited as "Guardian". In Terminator Salvation, the character is credited and referred to as "T-800", while in Terminator: Dark Fate, the character is credited as "T-800 / Carl". In the first two films and Dark Fate, the character is referred to as "Cyberdyne Systems Model 101". In Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines (T3), it is referred to as a "T-101". This name also occurs throughout the T2 novels. The name "T101" was used as early as 1991, in the Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum versions of the Terminator 2 computer game.[2][3] In the T2 Extreme Edition DVD, and the Terminator 2 video game,[clarification needed] he is referred to as an 800 series and a T-800.[4] Trailers and a deleted scene of Terminator 2: Judgment Day identify the Terminator specifically as a "Cyberdyne Systems Series 800 Model 101". The T3 DVD extras refer to him as an "850 series Model 101", a "T-850", and a "T-101".[citation needed] The novelization of the third film also refers to the character as T-850, described as a newer, upgraded version of the T-800.[5] Terminator Salvation has the first on-screen usage of the term T-800, a name that is also used in Terminator Genisys.[6] Additionally, in an early scene in Terminator Genisys, an automated voice at Skynet's facility refers to a younger version of the character as a "Model 101". Most of the merchandising for T2 and T3—both at the time of their releases and retroactively—used the T-800 and T-850 nomenclature, contributing to this designation having arguably the most popular and widely disseminated usage, especially in direct juxtaposition to the explicitly named T-600s and T-1000. Such merchandise included Action Masters miniatures, Cinemaquette statues, Sideshow Collectibles replicas, Hollywood Collectibles statuettes, ArtFX kits, Medicom figures, and products by Hot Toys,[citation needed] and McFarlane Toys.[7] The specific Terminator characters portrayed by Schwarzenegger are also called on-screen by several individual names or nicknames. In Terminator 2: Judgment Day, John Connor introduces the Model 101 to his mother's friends as his "Uncle Bob". In Terminator Genisys, Sarah Connor refers to the T-800 as "Pops". In Terminator: Dark Fate, the character goes by the name "Carl". Physical appearance[edit] In the T2 commentary, Cameron states that the Model 101s all look like Schwarzenegger, with a 102 looking like someone else, leading to speculation that the 101 refers to the physical appearance while the 800 refers to the endoskeleton common to many models. A scene deleted from the theatrical cut, but restored in the Terminator 2 Special Edition, lends the most credence to this explanation: John and Sarah Connor shut down the Terminator for modification according to his instructions. When he reboots, the upper-left of his HUD reads "Cyberdyne Systems Series 800 Model 101 Version 2.4". Additionally, the original Terminator 2 teaser trailer further verifies this on a display monitor during android tissue generation, referencing "Series 800 Model 101".[8] In the T2 novel T2: Infiltrator, a skinless T-800 is known as a T-90, while a T-800 with Schwarzenegger's likeness is stated to be part of the T-101 series, specifically a T-101A. Appearances[edit] A Cyberdyne Systems Model 101 Terminator with living tissue over a metal endoskeleton, played by Schwarzenegger, is the main antagonist of The Terminator, the original Terminator film. Another Model 101, having been reprogrammed by the human resistance in the future, is the protagonist of Terminator 2: Judgment Day. In Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, Schwarzenegger plays a Terminator known as T-101. His character is destroyed at the end of each of these films. The fourth installment, Terminator Salvation, reveals the origin of the character. Roland Kickinger was cast as the principal actor but CGI was used to superimpose Schwarzenegger's face from the original 1984 film. In the fifth installment, Terminator Genisys, Schwarzenegger plays an aging T-800 (reprogrammed by an unknown party) and becomes a mentor and father figure to a young Sarah Connor of an alternate timeline, and Brett Azar portrays the original Terminator from the first film, with Schwarzenegger's then-likeness utilized via CGI. In the sixth film, Terminator: Dark Fate, Schwarzenegger once more plays an aging T-800 that managed to kill John Connor three years after the events of Judgment Day. Due to Skynet's cessation, the T-800 appears to have gained self-awareness and integrated itself into human society, adopting the name "Carl" and developing the equivalent of a remorseful conscience upon discovering how John's death affected Sarah Connor. Azar also returns to his role, portraying Carl at physical prime in the opening sequence (again with Schwarzenegger's then-likeness utilized). The character's catchphrase, used throughout the franchise, is "I'll be back", though at times with variations; in Terminator 3, it says about the T-X, "She'll be back", and later, "I'm back"; and in Terminator: Dark Fate, it tells its family, "I won't be back". Throughout the films, other characters use the phrase, such as John Connor in Salvation (as Schwarzenegger does not appear in the film) and Sarah Connor in Dark Fate (as Schwarzenegger's T-101 is a minor character). The Terminator (1984)[edit] See also: The Terminator The Model 101 is sent back in time to terminate a single target, Sarah Connor (Linda Hamilton), in 1984, to prevent the birth of her son, John, the future leader of the Human Resistance. Lack of surviving records in the future meant that he was limited to only knowing Sarah's name and what city she lived in at this time, with the result that he killed two other Sarah Connors in the same city before he found his target. This allowed Kyle Reese (Michael Biehn), a soldier sent from the future to protect Sarah, to find her before the Terminator does. During several skirmishes the Terminator withstands contemporary gunfire with only superficial damage to his exterior tissue. While he is later caught in a fuel tanker explosion, this only burns away the flesh covering to expose his mechanical nature and causes minor damage to one of his legs, slowing him down. After Kyle sacrifices himself to damage the Terminator with a pipe bomb that destroys his legs, Sarah crushes the remaining endoskeleton in a hydraulic press to shut him down permanently. Judgment Day (1991)[edit] See also: Terminator 2: Judgment Day A Model 101 is captured by the resistance, reprogrammed by the future John Connor (Michael Edwards), and sent back to 1995 to protect young John (Edward Furlong) from a T-1000 (Robert Patrick) dispatched to kill him. While interacting with the Connors as they work to prevent Judgment Day (a scene from the extended version of the film shows the Connors explicitly reprogramming the Terminator to be capable of learning rather than Skynet's default "read-only" programming), this Model 101 is taught how to speak in slang-like terms, such as "Hasta la vista, baby", and encouraged to act more human, to the point that it develops into an almost fatherly role for John. Sarah reflects that the Model 101 is the first male figure John has ever had in his life who can be guaranteed to always be there for him. The T-1000 chases Sarah, John, and the Model 101 into a steel mill and overpowers the latter in hand-to-hand combat, impaling it through the chest and destroying its main power supply. However, the Model 101 activates a backup power source, frees itself, and blasts the T-1000 into a vat of molten steel with a grenade launcher to destroy it. Leading up to these events in the second film, Cyberdyne recovers one forearm and the damaged CPU chip from the Terminator in 1984 and uses those components to radically advance its research and technology, leading eventually to the creation of the machine intelligence entity Skynet. In Terminator 2, John steals the items from Cyberdyne's research lab and later throws them into the vat to destroy them. Because it cannot self-terminate, the Model 101 has Sarah lower it into the steel in order to destroy its CPU as well and thus prevent its technology from being used to create Skynet. Rise of the Machines (2003)[edit] See also: Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines In the third film, a T-101 Terminator portrayed by Schwarzenegger is reprogrammed to protect John Connor (Nick Stahl), as well as his future wife Kate Brewster (Claire Danes), from a T-X (Kristanna Loken). The T-X is also designed to destroy other Terminators. The T-101 is powered by two hydrogen fuel cells, one of which it discards after being damaged by the T-X. This Terminator, unlike the others, is more familiar with human behaviors. The T-101 tells John that his efforts in the second film did not stop Judgment Day, but merely delayed it. Eventually, the T-X uses its nanites to take control of the T-101's autonomous functions, sending it to kill John and Kate. Since the T-101's core consciousness is still intact and it just lacks physical control of its body, John is able to convince the T-101 to shut down by reminding it of the conflict between its current actions and its programmed mission to ensure his and Kate's survival. The T-101 later reboots itself free from the T-X's control. As John and Kate retreat to a bunker to wait out the now-inevitable nuclear war, the Terminator is destroyed when it jams its remaining hydrogen fuel cell into the T-X's mouth, resulting in a massive detonation that destroys them both. This T-101 also is revealed to have played a very important role in John's previous future: it is the one that kills John in 2032 after being chosen due to John's emotional attachment to its model, based on the events of Terminator 2. Despite this, John remains trusting it. Later, the Terminator is captured, reprogrammed and sent to the past to make sure that young-adult John and Kate would survive the start of the war. As a result of John's death in the future, it follows Kate's orders rather than John's, unlike the Terminator in the second film. Salvation (2009)[edit] See also: Terminator Salvation In the fourth film, the T-800 has a small role, though once again as an antagonist. It engages John Connor (Christian Bale) in battle during John's attempt to rescue Kyle Reese (Anton Yelchin) from the Skynet base in San Francisco. John holds his own with his advanced weaponry, but is unable to stop the Terminator until it is drenched in molten metal and then liquid nitrogen, freezing it temporarily. As John begins planting hydrogen fuel cells, cyborg prototype Marcus Wright (Sam Worthington) arrives to stall the T-800, able to match its strength due to his own metal endoskeleton, but due to Marcus harbouring biological organs, specifically his human heart, the T-800 is able to incapacitate him long enough to stab John through the abdomen from behind, wounding him. Marcus retaliates by jamming the same metal bar through the T-800's neck and twisting it until its head rips off, destroying it instantly. The hydrogen fuel cells are set off as John and Marcus escape, destroying the base and taking out unfinished T-800s with it, altering the future for the better. Halfway through the film, the resistance develops a scrambler that is able to briefly disable Terminators when used from a certain proximity, presumably explaining how the resistance will eventually be able to capture and reprogram Terminators. Genisys (2015)[edit] See also: Terminator Genisys InTerminator Genisys, a T-800 was reprogrammed by an unknown party from a point in time further in the future, and sent to 1973 to protect nine-year-old Sarah Connor (Emilia Clarke) from a T-1000 sent to kill her and her parents. After her parents are killed, the T-800 becomes her surrogate father and raises her to prepare for her future destiny. The T-800, which Sarah refers to as "Pops", has developed an unprecedented level of emotional development, to the extent that it keeps her childhood drawings and photographs. In the film, it is speculated that the knowledge of who sent Pops back was deliberately erased from its memory so that Skynet (Matt Smith) could not track them down later. Pops integrates into human society, and at one point obtains a job as a construction worker to build the headquarters for Cyberdyne Systems. Throughout the film, it struggles with its physical limitations due to its increasing age, but it states several times that it is "Old, not obsolete." Like the Terminator in the second film, Pops has been prohibited from killing, but as Sarah says "Pops doesn't kill anyone. Lot of leg wounds though." After Kyle Reese's (Jai Courtney) arrival in 1984, the trio defeat the T-1000 (Lee Byung-hun) together. Later, in 2017, they battle John Connor (Jason Clarke), who has been transformed into a T-3000 tasked to ensure Skynet's rise. After multiple confrontations, Pops attempts to sacrifice itself to destroy the T-3000, telling Kyle Reese to "protect [his] Sarah". However, during the battle, Pops is thrown into a vat of mimetic polyalloy before the T-3000's defeat, and as a result gains shapeshifting abilities similar to the T-1000, as well as repairing earlier damage such as its lost left arm. Pops gives its approval of Sarah and Kyle's relationship. A youthful T-800, looking like the one in the first film, also appears, and is intercepted by the aging T-800 and Sarah Connor after it arrives in the alternate 1984. Despite Sarah killing the younger cyborg with her high-caliber sniper rifle, the T-1000 reactivates and reprograms it to pursue Kyle Reese. Kyle ultimately retrieves Sarah's sniper rifle and blows the young T-800's head off. The young Terminator's endoskeleton is dissolved in hydrochloric acid and its CPU is used to operate Sarah and the older Terminator's time machine. The CPU is destroyed after the time machine's usage. With both the original T-800's and the T-1000's remains destroyed in 1984 and the older Terminator's existence concealed, Cyberdyne Systems lacks the Skynet technology to work with for decades until John Connor is under Miles Dyson's (Courtney B. Vance) employ and assists his son Danny Dyson (Dayo Okeniyi) in the development of the company's Genisys technology. Dark Fate (2019)[edit] See also: Terminator: Dark Fate In Terminator: Dark Fate, an alternate sequel to Judgment Day, Schwarzenegger plays a T-800 called "Carl" as a minor character.[9] Originally one of a series of Terminators sent back by Skynet to kill John Connor prior to its erasure, the Terminator that would become Carl successfully tracked down and killed John Connor in Livingston, Guatemala in 1998, in which it received an identifiable scar on the right side of its face from Sarah during the shootout between them. With its mission complete with no further orders, and with Skynet no longer existing, the T-800 is left purposeless. In time, however, it became self-aware, realized that it is free from Skynet, assumed the name 'Carl', and exhibits behavioral developments similar to humans'. Months after killing John, it made a choice of its own by rescuing a woman, Alicia, and her child, Mateo, from her abusive husband. Carl becomes a father figure to Mateo, although his relationship with Alicia is not physical, implying is emotional. Carl's role as a family man gave it some idea of what it had taken from Sarah when it murdered her son, and the memory of John's death torments Carl to the point of being repentant. At some point, Carl established a drapery business in Laredo, Texas, where the family lives in a cabin. Over twenty years, Carl has aged significantly, having an appearance of a former bodybuilder in his 70s, and its human social skills have also improved, even able to display humor and affection to its adoptive family. Since John's death, Carl used its awareness of "chrono displacements" and sent Sarah text messages with the GPS coordinates of where and when various other time travelers such as Terminators would arrive. Carl's intention was to give Sarah a purpose by allowing her the chance to destroy the other Terminators, which Carl felt would give John's death some form of meaning. It also keeps tracks of Sarah's whereabouts to make sure she survives her hunts. In 2020, Sarah is put in a position to help Daniella 'Dani' Ramos escape the Rev-9, a new class of Terminator sent back in time by a Skynet-analogous A.I. called Legion from the year 2042. When Sarah confronts the Rev-9 as it attacks Dani, she also meets Grace, a cybernetically augmented soldier from the future who was sent back to protect Dani. With the aid of GPS coordinates tattooed onto Grace, and Grace hacking into her phone to decrypt and confirm the co-ordinates are the same, Sarah is led to Carl's home. Carl is then informed of Legion by Grace. Although Sarah hates Carl for the murder of her son, Dani convinces her that they need Carl's help to destroy the Rev-9. Sarah concedes, but she vows to destroy Carl after they stop the Rev-9, and Carl says it understands her intention. After a confrontation in a hydro-electric dam, the Rev-9 is defeated at the cost of Grace and the T-800's lives, Grace sacrificing her power source to use as an EMP against the Rev-9, with Carl giving its own life to set it off. Its last words are "For John" - a message it always included in the texts it sent to Sarah. Other appearances[edit] The T-800 is a guest playable character in the 2019 fighting game Mortal Kombat 11. The character is available through the game's Kombat Pack bundle of downloadable content.[10] Schwarzenegger's likeness is used for the character, but his voice is not.[11] He is instead voiced by Chris Cox at the suggestion of Schwarzenegger.[12][13] According to its biography, the Terminator in this game hails from the Dark Fate timeline.[14] In its arcade ending, the Terminator uses a device called the Hourglass to rewrite its timeline's history and attempt to destroy humanity on its Earth, but fails. Instead, it creates a future preserving peace between humans and machines before going into the bottomless Sea of Blood to make sure the Hourglass never falls into the wrong hands. In 2021, the T-800 became a character outfit in the online game Fortnite.[15] Concept and characteristics[edit] The Terminator is a formidable robotic assassin and soldier, designed by the military supercomputer Skynet for infiltration and combat duty, towards the ultimate goal of exterminating the Human Resistance. It can speak naturally, copy the voices of others, read human handwriting, and even genuinely sweat, smell, and bleed. However, it has no human emotions such as pity or fear unless learned through human contact and never stops until it fulfills its mission or is destroyed or shut down (although it appears to be able to sense moments of urgency or danger, as it is depicted as raising its voice or widening its eyes in shock on several said occasions). Later Terminators are outwardly indistinguishable from humans, but dogs become agitated and bark loudly in their presence; as a result, the human resistance uses the animals to detect Terminators. In the first film, Kyle Reese explains that the T-800 was designed to be an improvement over the earlier T-600 units, which could be easily detected because their skin was made of rubber and not organic tissue. Later models, such as the Guardian from Terminator Genisys or Carl from Terminator: Dark Fate, showed a greater capacity for emotion and physical aging. The most notable science fiction characteristics are that of an expert system featuring strong AI functionality combined with machine learning, and the system can interpret arbitrary non-formalized tasks. The other notable science fiction component is that of a power source which can last 120 years. A trait persistent throughout the series is the faint red glow of the "eyes" when the cyborg is online (or blue in the case of the T-X), which dim to nothing when a Terminator shuts down. In all four movies, the lack of the glow has been used to show when one is out of action. The trait is so characteristic that light-up eyes are often found on Terminator merchandise,[16] with some even replicating the dimming/reillumination effect that occurs during shut down or start up.[17] Construction[edit] A description from Kyle Reese from the film The Terminator states that: "The Terminator is an infiltration unit, part man – part machine. Underneath it's a hyperalloy combat chassis, microprocessor-controlled, fully armored, very tough. But outside it's living human tissue. Flesh, skin, hair, blood, grown for the cyborgs." As seen in the movies, a Terminator can withstand standard normal 20th century firearms, crash through walls with little to no damage, and survive explosions to some degree. Repeated shotgun blasts have enough force to knock it down and temporarily disable it, while heavy amounts of automatic fire are able to compromise the organic disguise layer. In the second film, the Terminator says he can fully operate for 120 years on his power cell before it drains. In the finale to Terminator 2, his power source is damaged, and he is able to find an alternate source, described on the DVD commentary as heat sinks, harnessing the thermal energy from the hot surroundings. In the third film, the Terminator—an 850 series rather than the 800 series depicted in the first two films—operates on two hydrogen fuel cells and discards one of them early due to damage. It explodes shortly thereafter with enough force to produce a small mushroom cloud. The endoskeleton is actuated by a powerful network of hydraulic servomechanisms, making Terminators superhumanly strong. For instance, in the third movie, Schwarzenegger's character was able to handle firing a Browning .30 machine gun from the hip with one hand, while holding a coffin containing an alive John Connor and a heavy cache of weapons, showing no signs of the extra weight being any real concern. Late in the first film, the Terminator is stripped of its organic elements when the tanker truck it is driving is blown up. What remains is the machine itself, in James Cameron's own words "a chrome skeleton, like death rendered in steel."[18] In the later Terminator films, armies of endoskeleton-only Terminators are seen. They are visually identical to the one in the first film, and feature prominently in the "future war" sequences of those films. CPU[edit] The Terminator CPU is an artificial neural network with the ability to learn and adapt. It was also briefly referred to as a room-temperature superconductor.[19] In Terminator 2, The Terminator states that "the more contact [it] has with humans, the more [it] learns." In the original film, it learns how to swear from the punks it encounters in the beginning of the film, and when a janitor of the building where one of the Sarah Connors he killed lived visits to ask about the odor from the room, it replies with "Fuck you, asshole", from a list of responses. In the second movie's Special Edition, it says that Skynet "presets the switch to 'read-only' when [Terminators] are sent out alone", to prevent them from "thinking too much". Sarah and John activate his learning ability, after which he becomes more curious and begins trying to understand and imitate human behavior. This leads to his use of the catchphrase "hasta la vista, baby". He ultimately "learn[s] the value of human life" as mused by Sarah in the closing narration. The Terminator apologized – something it had never done previously – when John was frantically trying to convince it not to be sacrificed. Its last words to John were "I know now why you cry, but it is something I can never do." The Terminator shown in Genisys underwent an even greater degree of personal development after spending over a decade raising Sarah Connor after her parents were killed when she was a child, with Sarah referring to it as "Pops" and the Terminator referring to her as "my Sarah", its words reflecting a reluctance to allow harm to come to her for emotional reasons rather than just its programmed mission. The Terminator in Dark Fate, after completing its mission of killing John Connor, was left purposeless but learned to become a part of humanity and effectively grew a conscience on its own over 20 years time. This Terminator states at one point that it can't love its human family like a human which it thought would be easier, but it is not. It is able to make a good father and husband, though it stresses the relationship is not physical and even successfully run a business. As Skynet and the timeline it came from was erased, it came to feel that it was set free to make its own choices. Its mission to aid Sarah and Grace protect Dani is one that is self-given rather than programmed, making it in many ways the most self-aware of the Terminators in the series as its actions, aside from the assassination of John Connor, are all its own. Organic camouflage[edit] The flesh-covering that is used on the majority of Terminator models has similar qualities to real human muscle and skin, as well as the ability to sweat, simulate breathing, and produce realistic body odor.[20] Although Terminator flesh does contain blood, it only displays minimal bleeding when damaged and has never been shown to experience any kind of profuse bleeding even from massive lacerations, dozens of gunshot wounds, or even complete removal. In the absence of a circulatory system, the flesh uses a system of "nanobots" which maintain the skin. It is unknown what biological processes take place to sustain the flesh covering, since Terminators do not require the consumption of food. Under 2007-era analysis, this blood is shown to be similar to human blood, using a synthetic oxygen carrier rather than human red blood cells, as Terminator endoskeletons contain no bone marrow.[21] Terminator flesh heals by itself,[22] and at a much faster rate than normal human tissue[23] and has never been shown to bruise or discolor from trauma, even after several days. However, a Terminator's flesh covering can die if it sustains adequately massive damage without maintenance, at which point it takes on a waxy, corpse-like pallor and begins to decompose.[24] In Terminator Genisys, it is also shown that a T-800's covering ages; Pops is shown as having aged over eleven years and then a further thirty-three. In Terminator: Dark Fate, the Terminator that killed John Connor visibly aged over the course of the twenty years between the assassination and when it was rediscovered by Sarah Connor, though not as much as Pops had. In addition, its skin covering aging over time allowed it to blend in undetected all that time as a human with a human family. By contrast, a T-800's undamaged flesh can remain un-aging for decades; Myron Stark immured itself for 89 years, emerging from its wall unchanged.[25] Although clearly not the normal procedure, a bare T-800 endoskeleton is able to grow itself a new flesh covering using 2007 technology (with the assistance of a geneticist and its own knowledge of future formulae) by submerging itself in a blood-like bath.[21] This improvised process results in a deformed covering that has the appearance of a burn victim and lacks its own biological eyes, requiring it to steal some and subsequently undergo cosmetic surgery to produce a more normal appearance (while escaping detection from law enforcement as it was able to undergo this procedure without the use of pain medication).[23] Whether or not this replacement flesh possessed the T-800's original flesh's un-aging properties, it appeared healthy despite the T-800's deactivation for many days. The theft of the eyes suggests that Terminator flesh is capable of accepting some degree of organ grafts from ordinary humans, that it can circumvent transplant rejection, and is capable of sustaining the life of the grafted tissue via its own unknown biological process. Although a T-800's physical covering ages like regular human skin,[26] it can be regrown with enough time. During a confrontation with a T-1000 in 1984, the organic covering on its right forearm is destroyed while it is holding the T-1000 under a shower of acid, and it states that its dissolved covering would take years to regrow. By the time it is seen thirty-three years later, its covering was fully regrown, and the Terminator had spent some time working in construction, implying that it had become operational in time for it to regularly interact with humans. Physical template[edit] Arnold Schwarzenegger as the Terminator (Model 101), in the promotional art of Terminator 2: Judgment Day It has been shown that Terminators' flesh coverings are somehow grown identically, producing many multiple copies of exactly the same physical appearance, indicating the use of specific physical templates for different variations of a model or series. The most well known is that worn by multiple units portrayed by Schwarzenegger; a scene in Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles displays a memory of a T-888 model, referred to as "Vick", facing a room (presumably in the factory where he was created) of several dozen units sharing an identical template to himself, naked and moving in unison to his direction.[27] A deleted scene from Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines reveals that the T-101's appearance was based on Chief Master Sergeant William Candy, portrayed by Schwarzenegger with a dubbed-over Southern accent, which was replaced by the more menacing Austrian-accented voice of one of the developers. In Terminator Salvation, the T-800 is shown to be stronger physically than its predecessor, tearing a malfunctioning T-600 in half. It is also the first model to be manufactured using a titanium alloy. However, titanium loses strength when heated above 430 °C (806 °F) which later prompted Skynet's decision to use coltan, which is also referred as columbite–tantalite, for better heat resistance as its metal base as stated in Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles; it is also used for the T-850 and T-888 models. According to Terminator Salvation, the T-800 was the first Terminator to have a human styled skeleton built using coltan and titanium alloy. The earlier Terminators had a bulkier appearance. An entirely different origin of the Terminator's physical and vocal templates was provided in the novel T2: Infiltrator (published prior to T3), in the form of former counter-terrorist Dieter von Rossbach, who meets and joins forces with the Connors in the present (the novel reveals that he was never questioned about the Terminators' actions as his superiors always knew that he was somewhere else during its rampages). The reason stated for copying Dieter was that Skynet was looking in the old military files for someone whose body could effectively conceal the Terminator's massive endoskeleton. Its voice was provided through Kurt Viemeister, the scientist that taught Skynet its sentience. Skynet also uses Viemeister's voice. The teaser trailer for Terminator 2: Judgment Day shows a Model 101 having its flesh covering applied by a large industrial mold. Reception[edit] In a rating of 100 Heroes & Villains made by the American Film Institute the character takes two positions at once — number 48 as the hero and number 22 as the villain. Schwarzenegger himself presented this on television. The character holds the 14th place in Empire magazine's rating of 100 greatest film characters.[28] As of September 2020, T-800 is voted #3 on Ranker's "Best Movie Characters of All Time".[29] Watch-Mojo puts T-800 in the Top 10 movie villains who turn good in film.[citation needed] References[edit] ^ Acuna, Kirsten (June 27, 2015). "Meet the bodybuilder who plays Arnold Schwarzenegger's body double in Terminator Genisys". Business Insider. ^ Dementia (1991). Terminator 2: Judgment Day (Amstrad CPC). Ocean Software. ^ Roberts, Nick (December 1991). "Terminator 2: Judgment Day". Crash. United Kingdom. pp. 54–55. ^ Terminator 2 Extreme Edition DVD 30-page booklet; DVD interactive documentary titled "Data Core", Chapter 9: "Casting" ^ Hagberg, David (2003). Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines. Macmillan. pp. 146–148. ISBN 9780765347411. Retrieved October 10, 2019. ^ Guardian: "As a T-800, I lack the mimetic skills to appear as anyone else." Terminator Genisys. ^ Linder, Brian (February 19, 2003). "Toying with the Terminator: Have a look at McFarlane Toys' T3 figures". IGN. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. ^ "Terminator 2: Judgment Day - Classic Teaser Trailer (1991) Arnold Schwarzenegger HD". YouTube. ^ "Arnold Schwarzenegger's T-800 in Terminator: Dark Fate Is Named Carl". Movies. Retrieved 2019-07-19. ^ "Mortal Kombat 11 Kombat Pack: Release date and characters". GameRevolution. August 21, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. ^ "Arnold Schwarzenegger Not Voicing Mortal Kombat 11 Terminator Role". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 29, 2019. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2019-09-27. Retrieved 2019-10-04.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ Dominic Cianciolo (2019-10-01). "Dominic Cianciolo on Twitter: "@Terminator vs. #CassieQuinn. Ready to play! #mk11 @ericalindbeck @ChrisCoxVox "". Twitter.com. Retrieved 2019-10-05. ^ "Mortal Kombat 11 Roster: Terminator". MortalKombat.com. 2020-10-08. Retrieved 2020-10-08. ^ Knoop, Joseph (January 21, 2021). "The Terminator and Sarah Connor are in Fortnite now". PC Gamer. Retrieved January 22, 2021. ^ "Hot Toys". hottoys.com.hk. Retrieved 8 July 2015. ^ "Pop Culture Collectible Figures – Sideshow Collectibles". Sideshow Collectibles. Retrieved 8 July 2015. ^ Dana Goodyear (26 October 2009). "Man of Extremes". The New Yorker. Retrieved 8 July 2015. ^ Tarissa: "It's a neural-net processor. It thinks and learns like we do. It's superconducting at room temperature." (Terminator 2: Judgment Day Script) ^ As mentioned by Kyle Reese in The Terminator. ^ a b Episode 3: "The Turk", Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles ^ According to the Terminator, when asked by Sarah Connor in Terminator 2: Judgment Day. ^ a b Episode 4: "Heavy Metal", Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles ^ As seen in the later scenes of the original film where the Terminator, holed up in his hotel room, is attracting flies and draws an inquiry from the janitor as to whether the smell is coming from a dead animal. The Terminator. ^ "Self-Made Man" ^ "James Cameron talks about his involvement with Terminator: Genisys". www.joblo.com. October 20, 2014. ^ Episode 8, "Vick's Chip", Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles. ^ Empire's The 100 Greatest Movie Characters. Empire Magazine. ^ "The Best Movie Characters of All Time". Ranker. ^ Appears in Terminator Salvation through digital recreation only. v t e Terminator Films The Terminator Judgment Day Rise of the Machines Salvation Genisys Dark Fate Television series Live-action The Sarah Connor Chronicles episodes "Pilot" "Heavy Metal" "Self Made Man" "Born to Run" Animated Salvation: The Machinima Series Characters Sarah Connor John Connor Miles Dyson Kyle Reese Skynet Terminators Terminator/Model 101/T-800 T-1000 T-X Cameron T-3000 Rev-9 Music The Terminator Judgment Day "You Could Be Mine" Rise of the Machines "The Current" The Sarah Connor Chronicles Salvation Genisys Dark Fate Video games Main The Terminator T2 (arcade) T2 (computer) Rampage RoboCop Versus The Terminator Future Shock Skynet Dawn of Fate Rise of the Machines War of the Machines The Redemption Salvation Genisys: Future War Resistance Other Gears 5 WWE 2K16 Ghost Recon Breakpoint Mortal Kombat 11 Fortnite Battle Royale Print Comics Aliens versus Predator versus The Terminator RoboCop Versus The Terminator Superman vs. The Terminator: Death to the Future The Burning Earth Infinity Salvation: The Final Battle Transformers vs. The Terminator T2 novels Attractions T2-3D: Battle Across Time X: A Laser Battle for Salvation Terminator Salvation: The Ride Quotes "I'll be back" "Hasta la vista, baby" Related James Cameron Gale Anne Hurd "Soldier" (The Outer Limits) Lady Terminator Shocking Dark The Terminators Category v t e James Cameron Filmography Bibliography Accolades Unrealized projects Directions Feature Piranha II: The Spawning (1982) The Terminator (1984) Aliens (1986) The Abyss (1989) Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) True Lies (1994) Titanic (1997) Avatar (2009) Avatar 2 (2022) Avatar 3 (2024) Short Xenogenesis (1978) T2-3D: Battle Across Time (1996) Documentaries Expedition: Bismarck (2002) Ghosts of the Abyss (2003) Aliens of the Deep (2005) Written Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985) Strange Days (1995) Alita: Battle Angel (2019) Terminator: Dark Fate (2019) Productions Solaris (2002) Characters Terminator Max Guevara Sarah Connor Kyle Reese John Connor Dwayne Hicks T-1000 Franchises Terminator Avatar Dark Angel Related articles Lightstorm Entertainment Digital Domain Deepsea Challenger Pristimantis jamescameroni Cameron Category v t e Arnold Schwarzenegger Bodybuilding Filmography Political career Awards Political career 2003 California gubernatorial recall election First term 2006 California gubernatorial election Second term Opinion polling LGBT rights Family Gustav Schwarzenegger (father) Meinhard Schwarzenegger (brother) Patrick M. Knapp Schwarzenegger (nephew) Maria Shriver (ex-wife) Katherine Schwarzenegger (daughter) Patrick Schwarzenegger (son) Chris Pratt (son-in law) Christopher Schwarzenegger (son) Christina Schwarzenegger (daughter) Joseph Baena (son) Related Arnold Classic Arnold Sports Festival Agra schwarzeneggeri Richardson v Schwarzenegger Planet Hollywood Statue of Arnold Schwarzenegger Terminator Terminator Predator The Expendables Category v t e Mortal Kombat Video games Fighting games Mortal Kombat (1992) Mortal Kombat II Mortal Kombat 3 Ultimate Trilogy Mortal Kombat 4 Gold Mortal Kombat: Deadly Alliance Mortal Kombat: Deception Mortal Kombat: Armageddon Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe Mortal Kombat (2011) Mortal Kombat X Mortal Kombat 11 Adventure games Mortal Kombat Mythologies: Sub-Zero Mortal Kombat: Special Forces Mortal Kombat: Shaolin Monks Compilations Mortal Kombat Arcade Kollection Other media Films Mortal Kombat (1995) Mortal Kombat: Annihilation Mortal Kombat Legends: Scorpion's Revenge Mortal Kombat (2021) Television Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm Mortal Kombat: Conquest Mortal Kombat: Legacy episodes Card games Mortal Kombat Kard Game Epic Battles Music Mortal Kombat: The Album Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Score Mortal Kombat: More Kombat Mortal Kombat: Annihilation – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Mortal Kombat: Songs Inspired by the Warriors Mortal Kombat: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Other Comics Malibu Comics Mortal Kombat: Live Tour Characters Baraka Cassie Cage Cyrax Ermac Goro Jade Jax Johnny Cage Kabal Kano Kenshi Kitana Kung Lao Liu Kang Mileena Nightwolf Noob Saibot Quan Chi Raiden Rain Reptile Scorpion Sektor Shang Tsung Shao Kahn Sheeva Shinnok Sindel Skarlet Smoke Sonya Blade Stryker Sub-Zero Related Controversies surrounding Mortal Kombat Fatality Midway Games NetherRealm Studios Mortal Kombat: Rebirth Injustice: Gods Among Us Injustice 2 Category Portals Access related topics 1980s portal Science fiction portal Find out more on Wikipedia's Sister projects Media from Commons