Painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder This article is about the painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder. For other uses, see API (disambiguation). The Triumph of Death Artist Pieter Bruegel the Elder Year c. 1562 Medium oil on panel Dimensions 117 cm × 162 cm (46 in × 63.8 in) Location Museo del Prado, Madrid The Triumph of Death is an oil panel painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder painted c. 1562.[1] It has been in the Museo del Prado in Madrid since 1827.[2] Contents 1 Description 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Description[edit] The painting shows a panorama of an army of skeletons wreaking havoc across a blackened, desolate landscape. Fires burn in the distance, and the sea is littered with shipwrecks.[3] A few leafless trees stud hills otherwise bare of vegetation; fish lie rotting on the shores of a corpse-choked pond. Art historian James Snyder emphasizes the "scorched, barren earth, devoid of any life as far as the eye can see."[1] In this setting, legions of skeletons advance on the living, who either flee in terror or try in vain to fight back. In the foreground, skeletons haul a wagon full of skulls; in the upper left corner, others ring the bell that signifies the death knell of the world. People are herded into a coffin-shaped trap decorated with crosses, while a skeleton on horseback kills people with a scythe. The painting depicts people of different social backgrounds – from peasants and soldiers to nobles as well as a king and a cardinal – being taken by death indiscriminately.[4] The picture in its frame Jan Brueghel's 1597 version of the The Triumph of Death 1628 version of the The Triumph of Death A skeleton parodies human happiness by playing a hurdy-gurdy while the wheels of his cart crush a man like he's nothing. A woman has fallen in the path of the death cart; she has a slender thread which is about to be cut by the scissors in her other hand—Bruegel's interpretation of Atropos. Nearby another woman in the path of the cart, holds in her hand a spindle and distaff, classical symbols of the fragility of human life—another Bruegel interpretation of Clotho and Lachesis; a starving dog nibbles at the face of a dead child she holds. Just beside her, a cardinal is helped towards his fate by a skeleton who mockingly wears the red hat, while a dying king's barrels of gold and silver coins are looted by yet another skeleton; oblivious to the fact that a skeleton is warning him with an empty hourglass that his life is about to literally run out of time, the foolish and miserly monarch's last thoughts still compel him to reach out for his useless and vain wealth, making him oblivious of repentance. In the centre, an awakening religious pilgrim has his throat cut by a robber-skeleton for his money purse; above the murder, skeleton-fishermen catch people in a net. In the bottom right-hand corner, a dinner has been broken up and the diners are putting up a futile resistance. They have drawn their swords in order to fight the skeletons dressed in winding-sheets; no less hopelessly, the court jester takes refuge beneath the dinner table. The backgammon board and the playing cards have been scattered, while a skeleton thinly disguised with a mask (possibly the face of a corpse) empties away the wine flasks. Of the menu of the interrupted meal, all that can be seen are a few pallid rolls of bread and an appetiser apparently consisting of a pared human skull. Above, a woman struggles in vain while being embraced by a skeleton in a hideous parody of after-dinner amorousness. To the right as the fighting breaks out, a skeleton in a hooded robe mockingly seems to bring another dish, also consisting of human bones, to the table—horrifying another woman with the realisation of mortality.[5] In the bottom right-hand corner a musician who plays a lute while his lady sings; both are oblivious to the fact that behind both of them, a skeleton that plays along is grimly aware that the couple can not escape their inevitable doom. A cross sits in the centre of the painting. The painting shows aspects of everyday life in the mid-sixteenth century, when the risk of plague was very severe. Clothes are clearly depicted, as are pastimes such as playing cards and backgammon. It shows objects such as musical instruments, an early mechanical clock, scenes including a funeral service, and various methods of execution, including the breaking wheel, the gallows, burning at the stake, and the headsman about to behead a victim who has just taken wine and communion. In one scene a human is the prey of a skeleton-hunter and his dogs. In another scene at the left, skeletons drag victims down to be drowned in a pond; a man with a grinding stone around his neck is about to be thrown into the pond by the skeletons—an echoing of Matthew 18.6 and Luke 17.2; on the bridge just above at the right a skeleton is about to strike a prostate victim with a Falchion Bruegel combines two distinct visual traditions within the panel. These are his native tradition of Northern woodcuts of the Dance of Death and the Italian conception of the Triumph of Death, as in frescoes he would have seen in the Palazzo Sclafani in Palermo and in the Camposanto Monumentale at Pisa.[6] See also[edit] 100 Great Paintings Notes[edit] ^ a b Snyder, James (1985). Northern Renaissance Art: Painting, Sculpture, the Graphic Arts from 1350 to 1575. New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 486. ISBN 0-8109-1081-0. ^ Pallucchini, Anna; Ragghianti, Carlo Ludovico; Collobi, Licia Ragghianti (1968). Prado, Madrid. Great Museums of the World. New York: Newsweek. p. 134. ^ According to the Italian Wikipedia the background of a tower "Particular of the triumph of the death of Pieter Bruegel the Elder (the Prado, Madrid), in which the profile of (Fortification of Reggio Calabria) and the Tower of Pentimele is recognized in the background, the Flemish painter was in Reggio in the sixteenth century and in this work refers to his notes of voyage in which It describes the attack of the Pirates of Dragut on the beach of the quarter of arches." ^ Woodward, Richard B. (February 14, 2009). "Death Takes No Holiday". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 22, 2011. ^ G. Gluck, Pieter Bruegel the Elder, London (1958), s.v. "Triumph of Death". See also Rose-Marie and Rainer Hagen, Bruegel: The Complete Paintings. aka Pieter Bruegel the Elder: peasants, fools and demons, Taschen (2004). ^ P. Thon, "Bruegel's Triumph of Death Reconsidered", Renaissance Quarterly Vol. 21, No. 3, Autumn, 1968. References[edit]  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Breughel, Pieter". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. Further reading[edit] Friedländer, M.J., Early Netherlandish Painting. Volume XIV: Pieter Bruegel, (Engl. transl.) Leyden (1976). Gibson, W.S. (1977). Bruegel. London. Grossman, F. (1973). Pieter Bruegel: Complete Edition of the Paintings (3rd ed.). London. Stechow, W. (1969). Pieter Bruegel. New York. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Triumph of Death by Peter Bruegel. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) www.Pieter-Bruegel-The-Elder.org 99 works by Pieter Bruegel the Elder Creativity Brueghel laid the foundation of the Netherlands School v t e Pieter Bruegel the Elder Paintings List of paintings Parable of the Sower (1557) The Fight Between Carnival and Lent (1559) Netherlandish Proverbs (1559) Children's Games (1560) Landscape with the Fall of Icarus The Triumph of Death (c. 1562) The Fall of the Rebel Angels (1562) The Suicide of Saul (1562) Two Monkeys (1562) Dull Gret (1563) The Tower of Babel (1563) Landscape with the Flight into Egypt (1563) Adoration of the Magi in a Winter Landscape (1563 or 1567) The Adoration of the Kings (1564) The Procession to Calvary (1564) Christ and the Woman Taken in Adultery (1565) The Gloomy Day (1565) The Harvesters (1565) The Hay Harvest (1565) The Return of the Herd (1565) The Wine of Saint Martin's Day (c. 1565–1568) The Hunters in the Snow (1565) The Bird Trap (1565) Massacre of the Innocents (c. 1565–1567) The Census at Bethlehem (1566) The Preaching of St John the Baptist (1566) The Wedding Dance (1566) Conversion of Paul (1567) The Land of Cockaigne (1567) The Peasant Wedding (1567) The Peasant Dance (c. 1567) The Beggars (1568) The Peasant and the Nest Robber (1568) The Blind Leading the Blind (1568) The Magpie on the Gallows (1568) The Misanthrope (1568) The Storm at Sea (c. 1569) Drawings The Painter and The Buyer (1565) Related Pieter Brueghel the Younger (son) Jan Brueghel the Elder (son) Jan Brueghel the Younger (grandson) Breugel, Netherlands Son en Breugel Bruegel (crater) 9664 Brueghel Bruegel (institution) v t e Death and mortality in art Themes Carpe diem Consolatio Danse Macabre Death and the Maiden Lamentation of Christ Macabre Memento mori Mono no aware Sic transit gloria mundi Ubi sunt Personifications of death Vanitas Forms Death mask Elegy Funerary art Funerary text Lament Memorial Post-mortem photography Requiem Tomb Tragedy Wreath Artwork Architecture Capuchin Crypt Catacombs of Paris Sedlec Ossuary Film The Seventh Seal Literature Ars moriendi Bardo Thodol Book of Job Book of the Dead Hamlet's soliloquy The Masque of the Red Death Music Danse macabre Erlkönig Der Tod und das Mädchen Totentanz Painting Et in Arcadia ego Death and Fire Death and Life Death and the Maiden Death and the Miser Gather Ye Rosebuds While Ye May La Calavera Catrina Plague Pyramid of Skulls Roman Widow Self-Portrait with Death Playing the Fiddle Skull of a Skeleton with Burning Cigarette Sleep and His Half-Brother Death The Ambassadors The Garden of Death The Shadow of Death The Three Ages of Man and Death The Triumph of Death Poetry "And death shall have no dominion" "Because I could not stop for Death" "Erlkönig" "Do not go gentle into that good night" Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125