The Southern Illinoisan Type Daily newspaper Format Broadsheet Owner(s) Lee Enterprises Publisher Terra Kerkemeyer Headquarters 710 North Illinois Ave. Carbondale, IL 62902 United States Website www.thesouthern.com Logo of The Southern Illinoisan (August 13, 2014) The Southern Illinoisan is a daily newspaper based in Carbondale, Illinois, known locally as "The Southern." As of October 2014, it has a daily circulation of 21,270, and a Sunday circulation of 26,958.[1] It is one of the major regional newspaper and media services for southern Illinois. History[edit] The Southern Illinoisan was created in 1947 when Lindsay-Schaub Newspapers of Decatur, Illinois, purchased three area newspapers—the Daily Free Press of Carbondale, the Murphysboro Daily Independent and the Herrin Daily Journal—and merged them into a single publication.[2][3] Lee Enterprises purchased the Southern Illinoisan and other Lindsay-Schaub papers in 1979. References[edit] ^ "Audiences". Lee Enterprises. Retrieved 2018-05-15. ^ "Lee, Lindsay-Schaub 'compatible'". Decatur Daily Review. January 26, 1979. p. 15. ^ Hammond, Trevor (January 23, 2015). "The Southern Illinoisan". Fishwrap. Retrieved February 24, 2017. v t e Lee Enterprises Inc. Newspapers Albany Democrat-Herald Arizona Daily Star Arizona Daily Sun Ashland Gazette Atlantic City Weekly Baraboo News Republic Beatrice Daily Sun Billings Gazette The Bismarck Tribune Bristol Herald Courier The Buffalo News The Capital Times The Casper Journal Casper Star-Tribune The Chippewa Herald The Citizen Clarinda Herald-Journal Columbus Telegram Corvallis Gazette-Times The Philomath Express Culpeper Star-Exponent Daily Journal The Daily News (Wash.) The Daily Nonpareil The Daily Progress Danville Register & Bee Denison Bulletin & Review The Dispatch / The Rock Island Argus Dothan Eagle The Eagle Elko Daily Free Press The Franklin News-Post The Free Lance–Star Fremont Tribune Globe Gazette The Grand Island Independent Herald & Review Hickory Daily Record Independent Record Independent Tribune Iowa Farmer Today Journal Gazette / Times-Courier Kearney Hub Kenosha News La Crosse Tribune Lake Geneva Regional News Lebanon Express Lexington Clipper-Herald Lincoln Journal Star Martinsville Bulletin The McDowell News Missoulian The Montana Standard Mooresville Tribune The Morning News Muscatine Journal Napa Valley Register The News & Advance News & Record The News Herald The News Virginian The North Platte Telegraph Omaha World-Herald Opelika-Auburn News The Pantagraph The Plattsmouth Journal Portage Daily Register The Post-Star The Press of Atlantic City Quad-City Times Racine Journal Times Rapid City Journal Ravalli Republic The Reidsville Review Richmond Times-Dispatch The Roanoke Times Laker Weekly The Sentinel Sioux City Journal The Southern Illinoisan Star-Herald Statesville Record & Landmark St. Helena Star St. Louis Post-Dispatch SWVA Today The Times and Democrat Times-News The Times of Northwest Indiana Tulsa World Twiner-Herald The Valley News Waco Tribune-Herald The Waterloo-Cedar Falls Courier Winona Daily News Winston-Salem Journal Wisconsin State Journal Woodford County Journal / Woodford Star York News-Times Acquisitions Howard Publications Pulitzer Scripps League Newspapers BH Media Group This article about an Illinois newspaper is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e