"The Statement of Randolph Carter" Title page of "The Statement of Randolph Carter" as it appeared in Weird Tales, February 1925, the second time the story was published. Illustration by Andrew Brosnatch.[1] Author H. P. Lovecraft Country United States Language English Genre(s) Horror Publisher The Vagrant Media type Magazine Publication date May, 1920 "The Statement of Randolph Carter" is a short story by American writer H. P. Lovecraft. Written in December 1919, it was first published in The Vagrant, May 1920.[2] It tells of a traumatic event in the life of Randolph Carter, a student of the occult loosely representing Lovecraft himself. It is the first story in which Carter appears. Its adaptations include the film The Unnamable II: The Statement of Randolph Carter. Contents 1 Plot 2 Characters 2.1 Randolph Carter 2.2 Harley Warren 3 Inspiration 4 Connections 5 Adaptations 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] "The Statement of Randolph Carter" is the first person testimony of the titular character, who has been found wandering through swampland in an amnesiac shock. In his statement, Carter attempts to explain the disappearance of his companion, the occultist Harley Warren. Warren has come into the possession of a book, written in an unknown language, the exact contents of which he never revealed to Carter. Carter mentions that Warren has other "strange, rare books on forbidden subjects", several of which are in Arabic. From his mysterious book, Warren apparently deduces that doors or stairways exist between the surface world, and the underworld, through which demons may travel. He encourages Carter to travel with him to the location of one such portal, an ancient graveyard near Big Cypress Swamp. Upon arriving, Warren locates a particular tomb, and opens it to reveal a staircase that descends into the earth. Taking a lantern, he leaves Carter on the surface, and follows the stairs into the darkness, communicating with his companion by a telephone wire. After several minutes of silence, Warren suddenly begins to make vague, panicked outbursts that culminate in a desperate plea for Carter to flee. Finally, after Warren is silent for several minutes, Carter calls to him down the line, only to hear an alien voice telling him that Warren is dead.[3] Characters[edit] Randolph Carter[edit] Main article: Randolph Carter Randolph Carter is one of Lovecraft's most commonly recurring characters. An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia places the events of the story after those of The Dream Quest of Unknown Kadath and before "The Unnamable" or "The Silver Key". Harley Warren[edit] Main article: Harley Warren Harley Warren is a mysterious occultist who apparently perishes while exploring an underground crypt in Big Cypress Swamp. After his disappearance, Randolph Carter tells police that "I have for five years been his closest friend, and a partial sharer of his terrible researches into the unknown." Warren, he says, "always dominated me, and sometimes I feared him." He mentions a facial expression of Warren's that caused him to shudder. Warren himself suggests that he sees himself as someone with "ironclad sensibilities". Carter describes Warren as having a "vast collection of strange, rare books on forbidden subjects," many of them apparently in Arabic, with one "fiend-inspired book...written in characters whose like I never saw elsewhere." In the dream that inspired the story, the Warren character was actually Lovecraft's friend Samuel Loveman. Loveman also figured in the dream that became the prose poem "Nyarlathotep". Warren is referred to in other Lovecraft stories. In "The Silver Key", he is alluded to as "a man in the south, who was shunned and feared for the blasphemous things he read in prehistoric books and clay tablets smuggled from India and Arabia." In "Through the Gates of the Silver Key", he is revealed to have come from South Carolina, and to have been an expert linguist of the primal Naacal language of the Himalayas. Warren is also mentioned in Brian Lumley's Titus Crow series, as a member of a Bostonian group of psychics. Inspiration[edit] Lovecraft based the story on a dream that he transcribed, adding only a preamble to make it more fluid as a narrative,[4] and wrote it in the form of a testimony given to the police. An account of the actual dream Lovecraft had can be found in one of his letters to August Derleth. Connections[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The story contains an early statement of a common theme of Lovecraft's—the terrible price of knowledge: As to the nature of our studies--must I say again that I no longer retain full comprehension? It seems to me rather merciful that I do not, for they were terrible studies, which I pursued more through reluctant fascination than through actual inclination. This theme is most famously stated in "The Call of Cthulhu": "The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of the human mind to correlate all its contents." Adaptations[edit] "The Statement of Randolph Carter" and Randolph Carter feature prominently in ‘’Lovecraftian: The Shipwright Circle’’ by Steven Philip Jones. The ‘’Lovecraftian’’ series reimagines the weird tales of H. P. Lovecraft into one single universe modern epic. The story has inspired several films, including The Testimony of Randolph Carter (1987), The Unnamable II: The Statement of Randolph Carter (1993), 13:de mars, 1941 (2004), and Kammaren (2007). The Case of Randolph Carter[5] is an interactive version of the story with alternate endings.[6] Radio adaptation by Macabre Fantasy Radio Theater was performed live at the H. P. Lovecraft Film Festival in September 2012.[7] Randolph Carter and the events in "The Statement of Randolph Carter" are key elements of Cosa Nosferatu, a fantasy/crime/horror novel featuring Eliot Ness and Al Capone, set in a 1930 era Chicago beset with Lovecraft-style undead. "The Statement of Randolph Carter" was loosely adapted as a horror comic known as H.P. Lovecraft's The Grave [8] References[edit] ^ "Publication: Weird Tales, February 1925". ISFDB. Retrieved 2020-01-16. ^ Straub, Peter (2005). Lovecraft: Tales. The Library of America. p. 823. ISBN 1-931082-72-3. ^ Lovecraft, Howard P. (1985) [1919]. "The Statement of Randolph Carter". In S. T. Joshi (ed.). At the Mountains of Madness and Other Novels (7th corrected printing ed.). Sauk City, WI: Arkham House. ISBN 0-87054-038-6. Definitive version. ^ Lovecraft, Howard P. (1999) [1920]. "The Statement of Randolph Carter". In S. T. Joshi (ed.). The Call of Cthulhu and Other Weird Stories (1st printing ed.). Penguin Books. p. 363. ISBN 0-14-118234-2. Explanatory Notes by S. T. Joshi. ^ "The Case of Randolph Carter". Hypergrafia.com. Retrieved 2015-09-19. ^ "Grand Text Auto". Grandtextauto.gatech.edu. Retrieved 2015-09-19. ^ "Macabre Fantasy Radio Theater". Macabre Fantasy Radio Theater. Retrieved 2019-01-11. ^ "The Grave - Comics by comiXology". www.comixology.com. Retrieved 2019-01-11. External links[edit] Works related to API at Wikisource API title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Full text – The Statement of Randolph Carter The Statement of Randolph Carter public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography Short stories "The Beast in the Cave" "The Alchemist" "The Tomb" "Dagon" "A Reminiscence of Dr. Samuel Johnson" "Polaris" "Beyond the Wall of Sleep" "Memory" "Old Bugs" "The Transition of Juan Romero" "The White Ship" "The Street" "The Doom That Came to Sarnath" "The Statement of Randolph Carter" "The Terrible Old Man" "The Tree" "The Cats of Ulthar" "The Temple" "Facts Concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family" "Celephaïs" "From Beyond" "Nyarlathotep" "The Picture in the House" "Ex Oblivione" "Sweet Ermengarde" "The Nameless City" "The Quest of Iranon" "The Moon-Bog" "The Outsider" "The Other Gods" "The Music of Erich Zann" "Herbert West–Reanimator" "Hypnos" "What the Moon Brings" "Azathoth" "The Hound" "The Lurking Fear" "The Rats in the Walls" "The Unnamable" "The Festival" "The Shunned House" "The Horror at Red Hook" "He" "In the Vault" "Cool Air" "The Call of Cthulhu" "Pickman's Model" "The Silver Key" "The Strange High House in the Mist" "The Colour Out of Space" "The Descendant" "History of the Necronomicon" "The Very Old Folk" "Ibid" "The Dunwich Horror" "The Dreams in the Witch House" "The Thing on the Doorstep" "The Evil Clergyman" "The Book" "The Haunter of the Dark" Novellas The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath The Whisperer in Darkness At the Mountains of Madness The Shadow over Innsmouth The Shadow Out of Time Novels The Case of Charles Dexter Ward Collaborations "The Green Meadow" "Poetry and the Gods" "The Crawling Chaos" "The Horror at Martin's Beach" "Imprisoned with the Pharaohs" "The Curse of Yig" The Mound "Medusa's Coil" "The Horror in the Museum" "Through the Gates of the Silver Key" "Out of the Aeons" "The Tree on the Hill" "Till A' the Seas" "In the Walls of Eryx" "The Thing in the Moonlight" Poetry Fungi from Yuggoth Essays "Supernatural Horror in Literature" To Quebec and the Stars Autobiography: Some Notes on a Nonentity Locations Arkham Dunwich Innsmouth Miskatonic University Lovecraft Country R'lyeh Yuggoth Characters Randolph Carter Harley Warren Herbert West Books about H. P. Lovecraft: A Life H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia Lovecraft: A Biography Lovecraft: A Look Behind the Cthulhu Mythos Related Cthulhu Mythos Cthulhu Mythos in popular culture Dream Cycle Lovecraftian horror Cosmicism H. P. Lovecraft Historical Society Necronomicon Lovecraft: Fear of the Unknown (documentary) Sonia Greene (wife) Category Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125