1990 American horror film This article is missing information about the film's production. Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page. (April 2019) The Suckling Promotional release poster Directed by Francis Teri Produced by Michael Helman Written by Francis Teri Starring Frank Rivera Allen Lieb Bobby Shapiro Caesar Monroy Antoinette Greene Brian Muirhill Jeff Burchfield Hector Collazo Michael Gingold Ella Aralovich Alley Ninestein Music by Joseph Teri Cinematography Harry Eisenstein Distributed by Hypercube Release date 24 December 1990 (1990-12-24) (Worldwide) Running time 89 minutes Country United States Language English The Suckling (also known as Sewage Baby) is a 1990 American horror film directed by Francis Teri and starring Frank Reeves, Marie Michaels, and Michael Logan. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Reception 4 Home media 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] At a back-alley abortion clinic/brothel, a reluctant woman's aborted fetus is flushed down a toilet into the sewer system where it comes into contact with toxic waste. It transforms into a giant mutated monster and goes on a killing spree in the clinic. Cast[edit] Frank Rivera as Frank Reeves Allen Lieb as Doctor Bobby Shapiro as Doctor Caesar Monroy as Attendant Antoinette Greene as Bertha Brian Muirhill as Customer Jeff Burchfield as Policeman Hector Collazo as Creature Michael Gingold as The Suckling Ella Aralovich as Mary Alley Ninestein as Nurse Reception[edit] John Squires of Bloody Disgusting referred to the film as an example of a "best worst movie", and wrote that it is "home to all the terrible acting and weird storytelling choices that make bad movies so much fun to watch. This movie has it all, and it’s highlighted by surprisingly good creature effects that outshine absolutely everything else on display in it."[1] Matt Hudson of HorrorNews.net gave the film a negative review, criticizing the film's low budget, acting, and script.[2] Home media[edit] The Suckling was released for on DVD by Elite on May 10, 2005. It was later released by Films Around World on August 28, 2018. The film was first released on Blu-ray on March 26, 2019, by Vinegar Syndrome.[3] References[edit] ^ Squires, John (January 16, 2018). "'The Suckling': The Best Worst Horror Movie You Need to Stream". Bloody Disgusting. Retrieved April 9, 2019. ^ Hudson, Matt. "Film Review: The Suckling (1990)". HorrorNews.net. Retrieved April 9, 2019. ^ "The Suckling (1990) - Francis Teri". AllMovie. Retrieved April 9, 2019. External links[edit] The Suckling at AllMovie The Suckling at IMDb The Suckling at Rotten Tomatoes This article about a 1980s horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e