This article is about the 1986 animated film. For the 2007 live action film, see Transformers (film). Not to be confused with Transformer (film). 1986 US animated film The Transformers: The Movie Theatrical release poster Directed by Nelson Shin Produced by Joe Bacal[1] Tom Griffith[1] Screenplay by Ron Friedman Based on The Transformers by Hasbro & Takara Starring Eric Idle Judd Nelson Leonard Nimoy Robert Stack Lionel Stander Orson Welles Narrated by Victor Caroli Music by Vince DiCola Cinematography Masatoshi Fukui Edited by David Hankins Production companies Sunbow Productions[1] Marvel Productions[2] Distributed by De Laurentiis Entertainment Group[1] Release date August 8, 1986 (1986-08-08) (United States) Running time 85 minutes[3] Countries United States[4] Japan[4] Language English Budget $6 million[5] or $5 million[6] Box office $5.8 million (US)[7] or $2.6 million (North America)[6] The Transformers: The Movie is a 1986 animated film based on the Transformers television series. It was released in North America on August 8, 1986, and in the United Kingdom on December 12, 1986.[8] It was co-produced and directed by Nelson Shin, who also produced the television series. The screenplay was written by Ron Friedman, who created The Bionic Six a year later. The film features the voices of Eric Idle, Judd Nelson, Leonard Nimoy, Casey Kasem, Robert Stack, Lionel Stander, John Moschitta Jr., Peter Cullen and Frank Welker. It also marked the final film roles for Orson Welles, Roger C. Carmel and Scatman Crothers before their deaths.[9] The film's story takes place in 2005, 20 years after the events of the TV series' second season.[10] After the death of Optimus Prime during a devastating assault on Autobot City, the Autobots are pursued by Galvatron, the regenerated form of Megatron and servant of Unicron, a planet-devouring Transformer who sets out to consume Cybertron. The soundtrack comprises synthesizer music by Vince DiCola and heavy metal by various groups. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Writing 4 Production 5 Music 6 Release 6.1 Home media 7 Reception 8 Comic book adaptations 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Plot[edit] In 2005, the evil Decepticons have conquered the Autobots' home planet of Cybertron. The heroic Autobots, operating from Cybertron's two moons, prepare a counter-offensive. Autobot leader Optimus Prime sends a shuttle to Autobot City on Earth for supplies. However, their plan is discovered by the Decepticons and their leader Megatron, who kill the crew (Ironhide, Prowl, Ratchet, Wheeljack and Windcharger) and hijack the ship. In Autobot City, Hot Rod, relaxing with human Daniel Witwicky (son of Spike Witwicky) spots the hijacked shuttle and a battle breaks out, resulting in casualties on both sides. Optimus arrives with reinforcements just as the Decepticons are near victory. Optimus defeats many of them and then engages Megatron in brutal combat, leaving both mortally wounded. On his deathbed, Optimus passes the Matrix of Leadership to Ultra Magnus, telling him that its power will light the Autobots' darkest hour, but it drops from Optimus' hands and is caught by Hot Rod, who hands it back to Ultra Magnus. Optimus Prime dies and his body loses colour a few seconds after. The Decepticons withdraw from Autobot City within Astrotrain. To conserve fuel in order to make it back to Cybertron, they jettison their wounded, including Megatron, who is personally released at the hands of his treacherous second-in-command Starscream. Drifting in space, the wounded are found by Unicron, a sentient planet who consumes other worlds. Unicron offers Megatron a new body in exchange for destroying the Matrix, which has the power to destroy Unicron. Megatron initially refuses, resulting in Unicron torturing him, Megatron reluctantly agrees; Unicron converts him into Galvatron and the corpses of other wounded Decepticons into his new troops: Cyclonus, Scourge, and the Sweeps. On Cybertron, Galvatron disrupts Starscream's coronation as Decepticon leader and kills him. Unicron then consumes the moons of Cybertron including the secret bases with Autobots and Spike. Retaking command of the Decepticons, Galvatron leads his forces to seek out Ultra Magnus at the ruined Autobot City. The surviving Autobots escape in separate shuttles, which are shot down by the Decepticons and crash on different planets. Hot Rod and Kup are taken prisoner by the Quintessons, tyrants who hold kangaroo courts and execute prisoners by feeding them to the Sharkticons. Hot Rod and Kup learn of Unicron from Kranix, a lone survivor of Lithone, a planet devoured by Unicron at the beginning of the film. After Kranix is executed, Hot Rod and Kup escape, aided by the Dinobots and the small Autobot Wheelie, who helps them find a ship to leave the planet.[11] The other Autobots land on the Junk Planet where they are attacked by the planet's natives, the Junkions. However, the Junkions call off their attack and hide when they see Galvatron's forces arrive. Ultra Magnus secures the remaining Autobots while attempting to release the power of the Matrix, but discovers that he is unable to open it and is then destroyed by Galvatron who seizes the Matrix, now intent on using it to control Unicron. The Autobots befriend the local Junkions, led by Wreck-Gar, who rebuild Magnus. They are then joined by the Autobots from the planet of the Quintessons. Deducing that Galvatron has the Matrix, the Autobots and Junkions (who have their own ship) fly to Cybertron. Galvatron attempts to threaten Unicron but, like Ultra Magnus, cannot activate the Matrix. In response to Galvatron's threats, Unicron transforms into a colossal robot and begins to dismember Cybertron. When Galvatron attacks him, Unicron swallows him, and the Matrix, whole. The Autobots crash their spaceship through Unicron's eye and become separated while Unicron continues to battle Decepticons, Junkions and other defenders of Cybertron. Daniel saves his father Spike from Unicron's digestive system, and the group rescue Jazz, Bumblebee, and Cliffjumper. Galvatron attempts to form an alliance with Hot Rod, but Unicron forces him to attack. Hot Rod recovers the Matrix and becomes Rodimus Prime, the new Autobot leader. Rodimus tosses Galvatron into space and uses the Matrix's power to destroy Unicron before escaping with the other Autobots. With the Decepticons in disarray from Unicron's attack, the Autobots celebrate the war's end and the retaking of their home planet while Unicron's severed head orbits Cybertron. Cast[edit] Character Voice actor Optimus Prime Peter Cullen Hot Rod / Rodimus Prime Judd Nelson Ultra Magnus Robert Stack Springer Neil Ross Arcee Susan Blu Kup Lionel Stander Wheelie Frank Welker Blurr John Moschitta Jr. Blaster Buster Jones Perceptor Paul Eiding Grimlock Gregg Berger Slag Neil Ross Swoop Michael Bell Jazz Scatman Crothers Cliffjumper Casey Kasem Bumblebee Dan Gilvezan Ironhide Peter Cullen Brawn Corey Burton Megatron Frank Welker Galvatron Leonard Nimoy Cyclonus Roger C. Carmel Scourge Stanley Jones Starscream Chris Latta Soundwave Frank Welker Frenzy Frank Welker Rumble Frank Welker Devastator Arthur Burghardt Bonecrusher Neil Ross Hook Neil Ross Scavenger Don Messick Scrapper Michael Bell Shockwave Corey Burton Astrotrain Jack Angel Blitzwing Ed Gilbert Kickback Clive Revill Shrapnel Hal Rayle Unicron Orson Welles Quintesson Leader Roger C. Carmel Wreck-Gar Eric Idle Spike Witwicky Corey Burton Daniel Witwicky David Mendenhall Kranix Norman Alden Narrator Victor Caroli Ramjet Jack Angel Inferno Walker Edmiston Gears Don Messick Writing[edit] According to director Nelson Shin, the decisions on which characters to include or kill off were made by Hasbro: "They created the story using characters that could best be merchandised for the film. Only with that consideration could I have freedom to change the storyline."[5] According to the screenwriters, Hasbro underestimated the extent to which Prime's death would shock the young audience. Story consultant Flint Dille said: "We didn’t know that he was an icon. It was a toy show. We just thought we were killing off the old product line to replace it with new products."[12][13] Transformers: The Movie writer Ron Friedman, who had written for the original Transformers series, advised against killing Prime; he said in a 2013 interview: "To remove Optimus Prime, to physically remove Daddy from the family, that wasn’t going to work. I told Hasbro and their lieutenants they would have to bring him back but they said no and had ‘great things planned'. In other words, they were going to create new, more expensive toys.”[12] Optimus Prime was subsequently revived in the Transformers series.[12] Production[edit] The film was budgeted at $6 million, six times greater than the budget used to create 90 minutes of the regular cartoon series.[5] Shin's team of almost one hundred personnel normally took three months to make one episode of the series, so, despite the extra budget, faced considerable time constraints in making the film whilst also continuing production on the TV series at the same time.[5] Shin came up with the concept of Prime fading to grey when he died to show "the spirit was gone from the body".[5] Toei Animation Vice President Kozo Morishita spent one year in the United States during production of the film. Morishita supervised the art direction, insisting the Transformers themselves be given several layers of shading and shadows to give them a more dynamic, detailed appearance.[14] The Transformers: The Movie was the last film to which Orson Welles contributed before his death.[15] Shortly before he died, he told his biographer, Barbara Leaming, "You know what I did this morning? I played the voice of a toy. I play a planet. I menace somebody called Something-or-other. Then I'm destroyed. My plan to destroy Whoever-it-is is thwarted and I tear myself apart on the screen."[16] However, Shin stated that Welles had originally been pleased to accept the role after reading the script and had expressed an admiration for animated films.[5] Music[edit] Main article: The Transformers The Movie: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Stan Bush's song "The Touch", which prominently featured in the film, was originally written for the Sylvester Stallone film Cobra.[17] The song later appeared again as remixed version for the 2012 game Transformers: Fall of Cybertron,[18] and in the live action 2018 Transformers film Bumblebee. The film also features other well known songs including "Instruments of Destruction" by NRG,[19] Stan Bush's song "Dare",[20] and also two songs by Spectre General, "Nothin's Gonna Stand in Our Way" and "Hunger".[21] The song “Dare To Be Stupid” by “Weird Al” Yankovic is also used in the film. The Transformers theme song for the film was performed by the band Lion.[22] v t e The Transformers: The Movie music Soundtrack The Transformers The Movie: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Score Til All Are One Lighting Their Darkest Hour Alternate versions The Protoform Sessions Artistic Transformations: Themes and Variations Songs "The Touch" "Dare" "Transformers" "Dare to Be Stupid" Contributors Stan Bush Vince DiCola Lion "Weird Al" Yankovic Kick Axe A.K.A Spectre General Release[edit] The film was released on 990 screens in the United States and grossed $1,778,559 on its opening weekend. It opened in 14th place behind About Last Night, which had been in theaters for five weeks at the time. The film's final box office gross was $5,849,647, which made it the 99th highest-grossing hit of 1986.[7] Hasbro lost US$10 million on the combined poor performance of this, and their previous collaboration with De Laurentiis Entertainment Group (DEG), My Little Pony: The Movie.[23] However, Transformers has become a cult classic.[24] The film has been remastered and re screened since.[25][26] In 2018, the film was re-released in September for one night only in the United States, screening in 450 (later increased with 300, totalling 750) theaters.[27] Home media[edit] Although the trailer describes the film as "spectacular widescreen action", the film was animated in 4:3 "fullscreen" format. The feature was vertically cropped to widescreen dimensions for theatrical showings and released in fullscreen on home video and DVD. The 20th anniversary DVD released by Sony BMG in 2006 features remastered video, and includes both the fullscreen and widescreen versions of the film.[28] The UK version, as well as the 1999 Rhino Films VHS release, feature scrolling text and narration at the beginning of the film replacing the cast credits, and an additional closing narration assuring viewers that "Optimus Prime will return."[29][30] The film was originally released in 1987 on VHS,[31] Betamax, and LaserDisc in North America by Family Home Entertainment.[32] The film was first released on DVD in 2000[10][33] by Rhino Entertainment and distributed exclusively in Canada by Seville Pictures.[note 1] Metrodome Distribution released an Ultimate Edition of The Transformers: The Movie DVD in June 2007 (a month prior to the release of the live-action Transformers film) in the UK (Region 2). The extras include many of the extras that were contained on the "Remastered" edition of the film on the first disc, with fan commentary serving as the only addition besides a fan-made Transformers trailer. The second disc contains interviews with Peter Cullen and Flint Dille. "Scramble City" is also included as an extra.[10][28] Shout! Factory released a 30th anniversary edition of the film on Blu-ray and DVD on September 13, 2016.[34] Reception[edit] Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggregator reports that 63% of 24 surveyed critics gave The Transformers: The Movie a positive review; the average rating is 5.5/10. Its critics consensus that states "A surprisingly dark, emotional, and almost excessively cynical experience for Transformers fans."[35] Film historian Leonard Maltin rated the picture the lowest possible rating in his Movie & Video Guide and wrote, "Little more than an obnoxious, feature-length toy commercial...That deafening rock score certainly doesn't help."[36] Caryn James of The New York Times described the film by stating, "While all this action may captivate young children, the animation is not spectacular enough to dazzle adults, and the Transformers have few truly human elements to lure parents along, even when their voices are supplied by well-known actors."[8] "Though a modest film compared with Michael Bay's (2007 Transformers), the original Transformers is the better film," wrote John Swansburg of Slate. "[T]here's nothing even approaching the original's narrative depth."[37] Gabe Toro of CinemaBlend wrote in 2014: "...Transformers: The Movie otherwise provides the sort of chase-heavy thrills that comes from robots that can become cars. Contrast that with Michael Bay's vision, where the robots basically abandon their transforming skills to have endless, violent punch-outs that annihilate cities. Bay's films show the action as a junkyard orgy. The '86 offering slows down to allow for actors like Leonard Nimoy and, yes, even Orson Welles to give actual performances. Fans of Michael Bay's Transformers movies are free to enjoy them. But they'll never top the gravity and excitement of The Transformers: The Movie."[38] "[N]ostalgia is a funny thing: for many of us in the 30-and-over Transformers fan club, that first movie was an integral part of our childhood. To hell with what the reviews said — the O.G. Transformers movie rocked our collective worlds," Kashann Kilson of Inverse wrote in 2015: "We still love the original so much today, part of the fun of watching Bay’s explosion-fests is being able to wave our canes at the youngsters and wax poetic about how back in our day, Hollywood knew how to make a real movie about giant, alien robot warriors."[39] Comic book adaptations[edit] Main article: Transformers (comics) Notes[edit] ^ The Transformers: The Movie printed text on DVD and accompanying packaging reads: "Distributed exclusively in Canada by Seville Pictures." References[edit] ^ a b c d "The Transformers -- The Movie". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Retrieved May 19, 2020. ^ https://www.flickeringmyth.com/2019/08/till-all-are-one-a-production-history-of-the-transformers-the-movie-1986/ ^ "TRANSFORMERS (U)". British Board of Film Classification. August 21, 1986. Retrieved May 2, 2015. ^ a b "The Transformers: The Movie (EN) [Original title]". Lumiere. Retrieved May 19, 2020. ^ a b c d e f Dormehl, Luke (August 2011). "Transformers: The Movie retrospective". SFX Magazine (211). ^ a b De Laurentiis PRODUCER'S PICTURE DARKENS: KNOEDELSEDER, WILLIAM K, Jr. Los Angeles Times August 30, 1987: 1. ^ a b "Transformers: The Movie (1986)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 2, 2015. ^ a b James, Caryn (August 9, 1986). "Movie Review - - Screen: 'Transformers,' Animation For Children". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2017. ^ "California Death Records". RootsWeb.com. Retrieved May 24, 2017. ^ a b c "Transformers: The Movie". IGN. January 29, 2002. Retrieved January 15, 2017. ^ Transformers The Movie, Kup and Hot Rod are captured by the Sharkticons, then escape, retrieved 2021-02-11 ^ a b c "Transformers: The Movie and The Great Toy Massacre of 1986". Den of Geek. 2019-08-08. Retrieved 2020-06-07. ^ "The Death of Optimus Prime as told by Susan Blu, Flint Dille, Nelson Shin, Tom Griffin and Joe Bacal". 2013-03-23. Retrieved 2020-10-25. ^ Kōzō, Morishita (2010). Tōei Animēshon enshutsuka 40-nen funtōshi: anime "Doragon bōru Z" "Seinto Seiya" "Toransufōmā" o tegaketa otoko. Tōkyō: Ichijinsha. pp. 116–117. ISBN 9784758011860. ^ The Associated Press (June 23, 2007). "Welles' last role? Original 'Transformers'". TODAY.com. Retrieved March 20, 2016. ^ Leaming, Barbara (1995). Orson Welles: A Biography (1st Limelight ed.). New York: Limelight Editions. p. 522. ISBN 9780879101992. Retrieved March 20, 2016. ^ "The Touch Songfacts". Songfacts.com. Retrieved April 27, 2010. ^ "The Best Licensed Songs Used in Video Game Commercials"You Got the Touch" - Stan Bush". Complex. ^ "Transformers The Movie - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack 20th Anniversary Edition". IGN. Retrieved January 11, 2016. ^ Entertainment, Newsarama Staff 2018-08-30T19:30:51Z. "'Transformers: The Movie' Re-Release Has the Touch, the Power and 300+ More Theaters". Space.com. ^ "Kick Axe Songs". Kickaxe.net. Retrieved May 24, 2017. ^ "The Transformers (Theme) Lyrics by Lion - The Transformers Soundtrack Lyrics". Lyricsondemand.com. Retrieved May 24, 2017. ^ Kline, Stephen (1993). Out of the Garden: Toys, TV, and Children's Culture in the Age of Marketing (1st ed.). London: Verso. p. 200. ISBN 086091397X. ^ Rabin, Nathan (March 29, 2002). "Transformers: The Movie". The A.V. Club. Retrieved May 2, 2015. ^ "'The Transformers: The Movie' Returning To Theaters For Remastered HD Showing". Movies. ^ "1986's Transformers: The Movie Coming to Theaters in September". ComingSoon.net. August 1, 2018. ^ "Transformers: The Movie Returns to Theaters for One Night Only". MovieWeb. August 1, 2018. ^ a b Gilchrist, Todd (October 28, 2006). "Double Dip Digest: Transformers: The Movie". IGN. Retrieved August 14, 2020. ^ "Transformers: The Movie - Reconstructed (Region 2)". DVD Talk. Retrieved August 14, 2010. ^ "Transformers: The Movie (20th Anniversary Special Edition)". DVD Talk. Retrieved August 14, 2010. ^ "The Transformers – The Movie (International Version)". Retrieved May 3, 2009. ^ Inc, Nielsen Business Media (December 26, 1987). "Billboard". Nielsen Business Media, Inc. – via Google Books. ^ Tribbey, Ralph (May 7, 2001). "Rhino Follows Up 'Tranformers Movie' Sales Shocker With Two More Special Editions on May 8". hive4media.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2001. Retrieved September 8, 2019. ^ "The Transformers: The Movie [30th Anniversary Edition]". Shout! Factory. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved June 16, 2016. ^ "The Transformers: The Movie". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved February 24, 2021. ^ Connelly, Sherilyn (March 7, 2017). Ponyville Confidential: The History and Culture of My Little Pony, 1981–2016. McFarland. ISBN 9781476662091 – via Google Books. ^ Swansburg, John (July 2, 2007). "When Orson Welles Was a Transformer". Slate. Retrieved August 8, 2016. ^ Toro, Gabe (June 24, 2014). "Sorry, Michael Bay - Why 1986's Transformers: The Movie Is The Best". CinemaBlend. Retrieved August 8, 2016. ^ Kilson, Kashann (October 22, 2015). "6 Enduring Legacies of 1986's Animated 'The Transformers: The Movie'". Inverse. Retrieved August 8, 2016. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API United States portal Japan portal Film portal Cartoon portal Anime and manga portal Science fiction portal 1980s portal API at IMDb API at AllMovie API at the Big Cartoon DataBase API at Box Office Mojo API at Rotten Tomatoes Storyboards from The Transformers: The Movie not included on the DVD v t e Transformers Autobot Decepticon First Generation Second Generation Characters Arcee Blaster Bumblebee Carly Witwicky Cliffjumper Grimlock Jazz Jetfire Megatron Optimus Prime Scorponok Soundwave Sideswipe Smokescreen Starscream The Fallen Ultra Magnus Unicron Windblade Toy lines Battle Beasts Diaclone Gobots Microman Beast Wars Armada Energon Cybertron Prime Wars Trilogy Power of the Primes War for Cybertron Trilogy Crossovers Built to Rule Star Wars Transformers Comic series Marvel The Transformers Generation 2 New Avengers/Transformers Dreamwave Generation 1 Armada/Energon The War Within Micromasters IDW 2005 series Infiltration Stormbringer Escalation Spotlight Megatron Origin Devastation Revelation All Hail Megatron Maximum Dinobots Last Stand of the Wreckers Infestation More than Meets the Eye Revolution Optimus Prime Lost Light First Strike Unicron Beast Wars The Gathering The Ascending 2021 series Generations Hearts of Steel Infestation 2 New Avengers/Transformers Film comic series Star Trek vs. Transformers 2019 series Galaxies '84: Secrets & Lies Transformers/My Little Pony Transformers vs. The Terminator Transformers/Back to the Future Lists Comics characters UK comics Transformers Comic UK Animated series Main group Generation 1 characters episodes Scramble City "The Return of Optimus Prime" Generation 2 Beast Wars characters episodes Beast Machines episodes Robots in Disguise (2000 series) characters Armada characters episodes Energon characters episodes Cybertron characters episodes Animated characters episodes Prime characters episodes Rescue Bots characters episodes Robots in Disguise (2015 series) characters episodes Cyberverse characters episodes Rescue Bots Academy characters episodes Japanese exclusive The Headmasters characters Super-God Masterforce characters Victory characters Zone characters Beast Wars II characters Beast Wars Neo characters Go! Web series Cyber Missions Prime Wars Trilogy characters Combiner Wars Titans Return Power of the Primes War for Cybertron Trilogy Films Animated The Transformers: The Movie Beast Wars II: Lio Convoy's Close Call! Transformers Prime Beast Hunters: Predacons Rising Live-action Transformers cast and characters Revenge of the Fallen Dark of the Moon Age of Extinction The Last Knight Bumblebee Audio releases The Transformers: The Movie Theme Song Collection History of Music 1984–1990 The Album Song Universe The Score Revenge of the Fallen – The Album Revenge of the Fallen – The Score Dark of the Moon – The Album Dark of the Moon – The Score Age of Extinction – The Score The Last Knight – The Score Video games The Transformers (1986) Battle to Save the Earth Mystery of Convoy Beast Wars Beast Senshi Saikyō Ketteisen Beast Wars Transmetals DreamMix TV World Fighters Transformers (2003) Transformers (2004) The Game Autobots Decepticons Animated: The Game G1: Awakening Revenge of the Fallen Autobots Decepticons War for Cybertron DS version Cybertron Adventures Dark of the Moon Universe Fall of Cybertron Prime – The Game Rise of the Dark Spark Angry Birds Transformers Transformers: Devastation Books Ghosts of Yesterday The Veiled Threat Exodus Dark of the Moon: The Junior Novel Exiles Retribution The Covenant of Primus Engagement BotCon Fun Publications Transformers: The Ride 3D HasCon Category v t e Animated television series and films in mid-1980s tied in to Hasbro properties TV specials The Charmkins G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero A Real American Hero (1983) The Revenge of Cobra (1984) My Little Pony 1984 special Escape from Catrina The Transformers More Than Meets the Eye The Return of Optimus Prime The Rebirth TV series Standalone series G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (1985) Inhumanoids Jem and the Holograms The Transformers Visionaries: Knights of the Magical Light Anthology series Super Sunday Bigfoot and the Muscle Machines Inhumanoids Jem Robotix My Little Pony 'n Friends Primary: My Little Pony Secondary: The Glo Friends MoonDreamers Potato Head Kids Films G.I. Joe: The Movie My Little Pony: The Movie The Transformers: The Movie Personnel Joe Bacal George Arthur Bloom Tom Griffin Nelson Shin Companies Main companies Hasbro Claster Television Griffin-Bacal Advertising/Sunbow Entertainment Marvel Productions De Laurentiis Entertainment Group Animation services Toei Animation AKOM See also Produced by DIC for Hasbro COPS G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero (1990, including Operation Dragonfire from 1989) Maxie's World (1987) Tie-in to properties later acquired by Hasbro Produced for Tonka (acquired in 1991): GoBots Challenge of the GoBots (1985) Battle of the Rock Lords (1986) Pound Puppies 1985 special 1986 TV series ... and the Legend of Big Paw (1988) Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125