1986 video game This article relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2016) The Movie Monster Game Developer(s) Epyx Publisher(s) Epyx Platform(s) Apple II, Commodore 64 Release NA: 1986 EU: 1986 Genre(s) Action Mode(s) Single-player The Movie Monster Game is a computer game released by Epyx for the Apple II and Commodore 64 in 1986. The game offers a variety of scenarios, playable monsters, and cities to demolish (complete with famous landmarks, such as Tokyo Tower. The monsters are based on popular movie monsters such as The Blob, Mothra, the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man, and the Transformers, and Epyx was able to officially license Godzilla. Contents 1 Gameplay 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Gameplay[edit] The gameplay is depicted on a movie screen in front of a movie theater crowd simulating an actual monster movie. Each scenario even starts off with an advertisement, (for popcorn and "Gummi Glogs"; in the Apple II version "Godzilla Mouthwash" is also featured), and other attractions, (such as promotions for Epyx's own Summer Games) before the "Feature Presentation" of the game begins. The game includes 5 different scenarios for the player to play through:[1] Berserk. The player must accumulate a certain number of points by destroying as many buildings and vehicles as possible. Escape. The player must flee the city before being killed by the military. Search. The player must use the monster to rescue its offspring hidden in a building. Godzilla's son is depicted as Minilla. Destroy Landmark. The player must destroy a specific landmark within the city such as the Statue of Liberty in New York City, the Tokyo Tower in Tokyo, Big Ben in London, etc. Lunch. The player must satisfy the monster's hunger by eating vehicles and civilians until the monster's hunger meter is depleted. The monsters are Godzilla, Sphectra (a giant wasp), The Glog (a huge green blob with red eyes), Tarantus (a giant Tarantula), Mr. Meringue (a knock-off of the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man), and Mechatron (a knock-off of Topspin from Transformers).[1] The cities featured in the game are New York City, San Francisco, London, Tokyo, Moscow, and Paris.[1] Reception[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (May 2015) Computer Gaming World said that The Movie Monster Game "gets a little tedious after a while".[2] See also[edit] Crush, Crumble and Chomp! References[edit] ^ a b c Commodore 64 version manual. archive.org. Epyx. 1984. ^ Ardai, Charles (April 1987). "Titans of the Computer Gaming World / Part 1 of V: Ardai on Epyx". Computer Gaming World. p. 12. External links[edit] The Movie Monster Game at Lemon 64 v t e Godzilla video games 1980s Godzilla (1983) The Movie Monster Game Monster of Monsters 1990s Godzilla (1990) Circus Caper War of the Monsters Battle Soccer: Field no Hasha Super Godzilla Kaijū-ō Godzilla Battle Legends Monster War Kaijuu no Daishingeki Trading Battle Generations 2000s Destroy All Monsters Melee Save the Earth Unleashed 2010s Godzilla (2014) City Shrouded in Shadow This action game–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e