May refer to one of two beasts described in the Book of Revelation. La Bête de la Mer (from the Tapisserie de l'Apocalypse in Angers, France). A medieval tapestry, this detail of which shows John, the Dragon, and the Beast of the Sea. Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism (Interpretations of Revelation) Futurism Preterism Idealism Dispensationalism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath Rapture Posttribulation Rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Heaven and New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The Beast (Greek: Θηρίον, Thērion) may refer to one of two beasts described in the Book of Revelation. The first beast comes "out of the sea" and is given authority and power by the dragon. This first beast is initially mentioned in Revelation 11:7 as coming out of the abyss. His appearance is described in detail in Revelation 13:1-10, and some of the mystery behind his appearance is revealed in Revelation 17:7-18. The second beast comes "out of the earth" and directs all peoples of the earth to worship the first beast. The second beast is associated with Revelation 13:11-18 the false prophet. The two beasts are aligned with the dragon in opposition to God. They persecute the "saints" and those who do "not worship the image of the beast [of the sea]" and influence the kings of the earth to gather for the battle of Armageddon.[1] The two beasts are defeated by Christ and are thrown into the lake of fire mentioned in Revelation 19:18-20. Contents 1 Book of Revelation 1.1 Beast from the sea 1.2 Beast from the Earth 1.3 Image of the beast 1.4 Mark of the beast 1.5 Fate of the beast and false prophet 2 Interpretations 2.1 Preterism 2.2 Historicism 2.3 Idealism 2.4 Futurism 2.5 Alternative views 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 Notes Book of Revelation[edit] The Revelation of St John: 12. The Sea Monster and the Beast with the Lamb's Horn. A woodcut by Albrecht Dürer Beast from the sea[edit] This article relies too much on references to primary sources. Please improve this by adding secondary or tertiary sources. (March 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The description of the beast is found in Revelation chapters thirteen and seventeen. Chapter thirteen gives the fullest description. John saw it "rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy." (Revelation 13:1) It was like a leopard, with feet like the feet of a bear, and had a mouth like a lion. One of its heads had a mortal wound which healed itself, causing people to wonder at it and follow it. (Revelation 13:1-10) This description draws many parallels with a vision in the Book of Daniel where four beasts symbolizing a succession of kingdoms come out of the sea in the forms of a lion, bear, leopard and a beast with ten horns.[2] Revelation 17 mentions a third beast described as "a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns." (Revelation 17:3) and some of the symbols are explained. The prevailing view[by whom?] is that the scarlet beast is another, distinct, visualisation of the same subject as the beast of the sea, which is pictured with crowns on its horns, unlike the scarlet beast.[citation needed] The scarlet beast is shown being ridden by a harlot who "reigns over the kings of the earth", (Revelation 17:18) whereas the beast of the sea is not described as being ridden, and is given "power and great authority." The seven heads represent both seven mountains and seven kings, and the ten horns are ten kings who have not yet received kingdoms. Of the seven kings, five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come. The beast itself is an eighth king who is of the seven and "was and is not and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition."[3] Beast from the Earth[edit] The second beast is primarily described in Revelation chapter thirteen. This second beast comes out of the earth whose overall appearance is not described, other than having "two horns like a lamb", and speaking "like a dragon".[4] His purpose is to promote the authority of the first beast with the ability to perform great signs, even making fire come down out of Heaven. This second beast is also called the false prophet.[5] He speaks like a dragon commanding the people of the Earth to make an image "to" the beast that was wounded by a sword. It is declared that anyone who does not worship the beast or its image would be killed.[6] The lamb-horned beast from the earth also causes all people to receive the mark of the beast "in their right hand or in their forehead."[7] Image of the beast[edit] Those who dwell on the Earth are deceived into making an image of the beast as a means to worship his authority. It is the lamb-horned beast who breathes life into the "image of the beast", so that the image becomes alive and is able to speak. It also declares death to anyone who does not worship the authority of the beast.[8] Those who are killed for not conforming to the authority of the beast are blessed through the "first resurrection" that allows them to rule in Christ's presence as priests during the one thousand-year reign. The second death has no power over these individuals who were victorious over the beast[9] by not being deceived, even though they lost their lives on Earth by his authority.[10] Mark of the beast[edit] See also: Number of the beast § Mark of the beast "The beast from the sea"[11] bears a name. This name is not given, but it corresponds to the number 666 or 616, which is also the number of a man. The mark of the beast's name or number was required of all who bought and sold.[12] Fate of the beast and false prophet[edit] The beast and the false prophet gather the kings of the earth and their armies to prepare for war against "He who sits on a white horse". The battle results in the beast being seized, along with the false prophet, where they are thrown alive into "the lake of fire". Those against the "King of Kings, and Lord of Lords" are killed and left for the fowls.[13] In the lake of fire, the beast and the false prophet are tormented day and night forever and ever.[14] The dragon joins them a little more than a millennium later after the great war.[15] Interpretations[edit] Preterism[edit] Main article: Preterism A coin bearing the Greek name and image of Nero, with radiant crown symbolizing the sun. Preterism is a Christian eschatological view that interprets prophecies of the Bible, especially the Books of Daniel and Revelation, by reference to events that had already happened. Preterist academic scholars generally identify the first beast from the sea with the Roman Empire, particularly with Emperor Nero.[16][17][18] The beast from the earth is generally identified with the Roman imperial cult.[19] Sometimes there is a particular identification with a personage such as a chief administrator of Roman rule in Ephesus and Asia Minor. This is probably the provincial governor (or proconsul) who would have overseen the political and religious operations of the area from his capital in Ephesus[20] or the High Priest of the provincial imperial cult. The imperial cult in Ephesus was set up by Domitian in AD 89.[20] (Ephesus is the location of one of the Seven Churches in Asia to whom the Book of Revelation was addressed.) This interpretation is based upon the angel's explanation of the beast in Revelation 17:7, that the beast's seven heads are seven kings (Revelation 17:10) and that Nero, is the sixth king "who is", who was possibly alive and the emperor reigning at the time John was writing the book.[21] The five kings who have fallen are seen as Julius, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula and Claudius; Galba is the one who "has not yet come, but when he does come, he must remain for a little while". (Revelation 17:10). Moreover, Rome was known in antiquity as the city of seven hills (Revelation 17:9) and Revelation was a warning about events that were "shortly" to take place (Revelation 1:1). In Revelation 13:5–8, the beast was given a mouth speaking in blasphemies against God and his name. Inscriptions have been found in Ephesus in which Nero is called "Almighty God" and "Savior".[22] In verse 4, the beast is worshiped by the world alongside the dragon that gave it authority. Nero and Caligula "abandoned all reserve" in promoting emperor worship–they were the only two who demanded divine honors while still alive. Nero claimed to be the sun-god Apollo. Revelation 13:7 speaks of the power given to the beast to make war with the saints. Nero was the first of the imperial authorities to persecute Christianity. Tacitus records the scene in Rome when the persecution of Christians (or Chrestians[23]) broke out: "And their death was aggravated with mockeries, insomuch that, wrapped in the hides of wild beasts, they were torn to pieces by dogs, or fastened to crosses to be set on fire, that when the darkness fell they might be burned to illuminate the night."[24] Revelation 13:5 says that the beast would continue for 42 months. The Neronic persecution was instituted in AD 64 and lasted until his death in June AD 68, which is three and a half years, or 42 months. Nero was even called the beast. Apollonius of Tyana specifically states that Nero was called a beast: "In my travels, which have been wider than ever man yet accomplished, I have seen man, many wild beasts of Arabia and India; but this beast, that is commonly called a Tyrant, I know not how many heads it has, nor if it be crooked of claw, and armed with horrible fangs. ... And of wild beasts you cannot say that they were ever known to eat their own mother, but Nero has gorged himself on this diet."[24] The manner of Nero's death corresponds with the prophecy of Revelation 13:10: "If anyone is destined for captivity, to captivity he goes; if any one kills with the sword, with the sword he must be killed." According to Tertullian, Nero was the first to assail the Christian sect with the imperial sword. He committed suicide by the sword at the age of 30. After Nero's death in AD 68, Rome saw a succession of short-lived emperors (Galba, Otho and Vitellius) and a year of civil wars until Vespasian eventually took control in AD 69. The Roman Empire destabilized so greatly that Tacitus reported: "Many believed the end of the empire was at hand" (Histories 4:5:4) According to Suetonius, to the surprise of the world, "the empire which for a long time had been unsettled and, as it were, drifting through the usurpation and violent death of three emperors, was at last taken in and given stability by the Flavian family" (Vespasian 1: 1). This may be a reference to the mortal wound on one of the heads of the beast "inflicted by the sword" which was later healed (Revelation 13:3, 13:14).[25] Scholar Daniel K. Wong wrote that the "healing of the wound" alludes to the so-called Nero Redivivus legend or the "revival of Nero" myth. A rumour said that Nero had just disappeared to Parthia and would one day reappear.[26] Finally, the readers of Revelation were told to "calculate the number of the beast, for the number is that of a man; and his number is six hundred and sixty-six" (Rev. 13:18). John did not expect that his readers "who had understanding" to have any difficulty identifying the beast, since they could simply calculate the meaning of this number. "Neron Kaisar" (the Greek rendering, documented by archaeological finds), transliterated into Hebrew נרון קסר (Nrwn Qsr). When using standard mispar hechrechi encoding of gematria, adding the corresponding values yields 666, as shown: Resh (ר) Samech (ס) Qof (ק) Nun (נ) Vav (ו) Resh (ר) Nun (נ) TOTAL 200 60 100 50 6 200 50 666 The variant number 616 found in some manuscripts of the Greek text of Revelation may represent the alternative Hebrew spelling נרו קסר (Nrw Qsr) based on the Latin form "Nero Caesar".[27] The variant probably existed to keep consistent the meaning of Nero as the beast.[28] Resh(ר) Samech (ס) Qof (ק) Vav (ו) Resh (ר) Nun (נ) TOTAL 200 60 100 6 200 50 616 Historicism[edit] Beast wearing papal tiara from Luther's translation of the New Testament from 1522. Main article: Historicism (Christianity) Historicism is a method of interpretation in Christian eschatology which interprets biblical prophecies as actual historical events and identifies symbolic beings with historical persons or societies in the history of the church. This interpretation was favored by the Protestant reformers[29] such as John Wycliff and Martin Luther, as well as other prominent figures such as Isaac Newton.[30] According to this interpretation, the beast and false prophet were most commonly identified with the papacy in its political and religious aspects.[31] The identification with the papacy is a viewpoint echoed by Seventh-day Adventist writers. According to the Seventh-day Adventist Church, the "image to the beast" represents Protestant churches which will form an alliance with the Papacy, and the "mark of the beast" refers to a future universal Sunday law. Adventists have interpreted the number of the beast, 666, as corresponding to a Latin title Vicarius Filii Dei of the Pope. The number 666 is calculated by using a form of gematria where only the letters which refer to Latin numerals are counted. V I C A R I V S F I L I I D E I TOTAL 5 1 100 0 0 1 5 0 0 1 50 1 1 500 0 1 666 In 1866, Uriah Smith was the first to propose the interpretation to the Seventh-day Adventist Church.[32] In The United States in the Light of Prophecy he wrote, The pope wears upon his pontifical crown in jeweled letters, this title: "Vicarius Filii Dei", "Viceregent of the Son of God"; the numerical value of which title is just six hundred and sixty-six. The most plausible supposition we have ever seen on this point is that here we find the number in question. It is the number of the beast, the papacy; it is the number of his name, for he adopts it as his distinctive title; it is the number of a man, for he who bears it is the "man of sin".[33] Adventist scholar J. N. Andrews also adopted this view.[34] Uriah Smith maintained his interpretation in the various editions of Thoughts on Daniel and the Revelation, which was influential in the church.[32] Jimmy Akin of Catholic Answers and additional Catholic sources[35] disagree with the above argument, claiming "Vicarius Filii Dei, although it adds up to 666, is not a title of the pope".[36] However, the term literally means Representative of the Son of God, is used on papal tiaras, and the title "vicar of Christ" has been applied to popes throughout the centuries, as well as to Saint Peter in Donation of Constantine, regarded as the first Pope by the Catholic Church.[37] The beast from the earth has also been interpreted as the Islamic prophet Muhammed, according to some medieval Christians, particularly Pope Innocent III;[38] Saracens and Antipopes, according to other medieval Christians, particularly Joachim of Fiore;[39] and the government of the United States of America (this is the view of the Seventh-day Adventist Church).[40] This interpretation was introduced by Adventist pioneer John Nevins Andrews.[41] Samuele Bacchiocchi, an Adventist scholar, has noted that Seventh-day Adventist teaching is moving away from historicism towards a more symbolic interpretation of the mark of the beast.[42][43] The Historicist interpretation has fallen out of favor with modern commentaries on Revelation, partially because it has failed to form a consensus on how the outline of the book of Revelation corresponds with history.[31][44] Idealism[edit] Main article: Idealism (Christian eschatology) Idealism, also known as the allegorical or symbolic approach, is an interpretation of the book of Revelation that sees the imagery of the book as non-literal symbols.[45] This is a common viewpoint of modern Christian scholars such as Gregory Beale in his New International Greek Testament Commentary on the Book of Revelation. Some Idealist interpretations identify none of the book's symbols with particular historical events while some idealists like Beale take a more eclectic approach which see that the book portrays events throughout history while also predicting some future events such as the return of Christ.[46] In this view, the beast from the sea is interpreted as the state or any human kingdom that is in opposition to God. This would include the Roman Empire but would broadly apply to all empires.[47] Scholars take their cue from the parallels between Revelation 13 and Daniel 7, noting that in Daniel 7:17 that the beasts are revealed as kingdoms. Therefore, given that the beast of Revelation thirteen is a composite of the beasts of Daniel, one should similarly interpret this beast as a kingdom, more specifically a composite of all kingdoms. Similarly, in some idealist circles, it is suggested that the beast represents different social injustices, such as exploitation of workers,[48] wealth, the elite, commerce,[49] materialism, and imperialism.[50] Various Christian anarchists, such as Jacques Ellul, have associated the State and political power as the beast.[51] The Idealist interpretation of the beast from the earth is that it represents religious, cultural and economic powers within society which work to compel people to give their allegiance to the state or governmental powers. This was first expressed in the imperial cult of Rome, but finds expression at all times of history. In his commentary, Michael Wilcock says "Religion, indeed is too narrow an identification of the second beast. He is, in modern parlance, the ideology-whether religious, philosophical, or political-which 'gives breath to' any human social structure organized independently of God."[52] The Idealist perspective on the number of the beast rejects gematria, envisioning the number not as a code to be broken, but a symbol to be understood. Because there are so many names that can come to 666 and that most systems require converting names to other languages or adding titles when convenient, it has been impossible to come to a consensus. Given that numbers are used figuratively throughout the book of Revelation, idealists interpret this number figuratively as well. The common suggestion is that because seven is a number of completeness and is associated with the divine, that six is incomplete and the three sixes mean completely incomplete.[53] Other scholars focus not on incompleteness but on the beast's ability to imitate perfection, that is, to appear authentic. Since the number six is one short of the perfect number seven, the beast's number bears "most of the hallmarks of truth, and so it can easily deceive".[54] The Idealist interpretation in which the beast finds expression in the socio-cultural, economic and political arena of all human activities since the existence of man best describes the scriptural perspective of the beast. This position was fully annunciated by Chike Udolisa is his book.[55] In this perspective, the image of the four kingdoms that were to rule the world as shown to Nebuchadnezzar were equated to the four beasts revealed to Daniel, and to the seven-headed beast revealed to John. The records of Revelation 17:2–3 and Revelation 13:1 show this beast to represent the kings of the earth. Furthermore, the revelation in Daniel 7 of four beasts comprising a lion, bear and leopard also correlates with the seven-headed beast as shown to John in Revelation 13:2 having the same features of the lion, bear and leopard. Thus the beast represents the kingdoms that will bear rule over the world from Adam until the second coming of Christ. While in the spirit, this beast is seen as a personality as in Revelation 19:20, in the physical he is represented at different ages throughout the period of human existence as different kingdoms. The import of this interpretation is that as the Whore of Babylon is seen to be riding this beast, the beast is the seat of operation of the whore from where she is expressed, and by whom her dominion is exercised.[citation needed] This corresponds to Revelation 13 where the power exercised by this beast was completely that of the dragon. This brings to light the scriptural fact that the governments of the nations are puppets in the hands of this beast, consistent with the truth that the whole world system is under the dragon, the god of this world.[citation needed] St. Augustine of Hippo takes a more Idealist interpretation when he writes And what this beast is, though it requires a more careful investigation, yet it is not inconsistent with the true faith to understand it of the ungodly city itself, and the community of unbelievers set in opposition to the faithful people and the city of God. For to this beast belong not only the avowed enemies of the name of Christ and His most glorious city, but also the tares which are to be gathered out of His kingdom, the Church, in the end of the world.[56] Futurism[edit] Main article: Futurism (Christianity) Futurism is a Christian eschatological view that interprets portions of the Book of Revelation and the Book of Daniel as future events in a literal, physical, apocalyptic, and global context.[57] This viewpoint is adopted by Dispensationalism and has become deeply rooted in American Evangelical churches.[58] Futurism interprets the beast from the sea to represent a revived Roman empire that will oppose Christians in the last days. Futurists would admit the symbolic ties to Rome and would interpret that the recovery from the fatal head wound would refer to a revival of this empire in the last days. It is usually understood that this revived empire will be ruled by the Antichrist, though some refer to the beast as the Antichrist. Futurist scholars, such as John Walvoord, identify this beast not as the individual ruler but as the revived Roman empire, noting that the reference to Rome's seven hills and the connection to the beasts in Daniel seven indicate that the beast represents a kingdom.[59] Futurism interprets the beast from the earth, or false prophet, as the future head of the apostate church or as a future expression of false religion in general.[60] Interpretation of the mark or number of the beast is similar to the idealist view suggesting that the number six refers to imperfection, falling short of the divine number seven.[61] Alternative views[edit] Aleister Crowley claimed that he was the Beast prophesied in Revelation and took the name Τὸ Μέγα Θηρίον (To Méga Thēríon), Greek for "The Great Beast", which adds up to 666 by isopsephy, the Greek form of gematria.[62][63] During the New Deal, some ministers identified the Congress of Industrial Organizations as a "Sign of the Beast".[64] Outside of black churches, 20th-century evangelicalism in America tended to regard labor unions as the mark of the beast, although evangelicals originally worked to eliminate class distinctions.[65] Some identify the Beast with a supercomputer in Brussels, Belgium.[66][67] However, author Joe Musser attributes the origin of this urban legend to his 1970 novel Behold, a Pale Horse and to an ad campaign promoting the movie The Rapture which featured the Brussels-based supercomputer. This ad campaign consisted of make-believe newspapers containing "reports" on various aspects of the movie. Musser speculates that stories subsequently run in an unnamed Pennsylvania newspaper and a 1976 issue of Christian Life magazine were mistakenly based on these ads.[66][67] Several websites identify the beast as referring to an indistinct modern-day cartel of banking organizations, sometimes referred to as the "New World Order". The theory extends to the digitization of money and the possible use of RFID chips in humans as being the mark of the beast without which none may buy or sell. An example of this is consumer privacy advocates, Katherine Albrecht and Liz McIntyre,[68] who believe spychips must be resisted because they argue that modern database and communications technologies, coupled with point of sale data-capture equipment and sophisticated ID and authentication systems, now make it possible to require a biometrically associated number or mark to make purchases. They fear that the ability to implement such a system closely resembles the number of the beast prophesied in the Book of Revelation. Various Christian anarchists, such as Jacques Ellul, have identified the State and political power as the beast in the Book of Revelation.[51][69] In popular culture[edit] In Highschool DxD, the Beast of Revelation also called the Apocalyptic Beast 666, was sealed away by God, and was later restored by the antagonist Rizevim in order to invade another world. It was eventually revived causing immense havoc on Heaven, Underworld and the Human world. Eventually, it was sealed away in a different dimension along with many gods and three Devil Kings to prevent it from destroying the world. The Beast appears in The Binding Of Isaac: Rebirth, as the final boss of the game. There it is depicted as a grey, three-eyed creature with a bloodied mouth and wearing Isaac's mother's clothing. It is supposed to represent the distorted vision that Isaac sees his mother in, a beast who just wants to kill him. See also[edit] Christianity portal Abomination of desolation Behemoth, a beast mentioned in the Tanach (Old Testament) Dābbat al-Arḍ in Islamic belief Events of Revelation (Chapter 13) Lotan - the seven-headed sea serpent or dragon of Ugaritic myths Mušḫuššu Therion (Thelema) Notes[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Beasts of Revelation. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) ^ Revelation 16:13-16 ^ Daniel 7:1-7 ^ Revelation 17:7-18 ^ Revelation 13:11 ^ Revelation 19:20 ^ Revelation 20:4 ^ Revelation 13:11-16 ^ Revelation 13:14-15 ^ Revelation 15:1-4 ^ Revelation 20:4-6 ^ Revelation 13:1 ^ Revelation 13:16-18 ^ Revelation 19:11-21 ^ Revelation 20:10 ^ Revelation 20:2-3 ^ The Book of Revelation, Catherine A. Cory ^ Revelation, Alan John Philip Garrow ^ The Message of Patmos, David Scott Clark ^ Beale, G. K. (1999). The book of Revelation: a commentary on the Greek text By Gregory K. Beale, p.240. ISBN 9780802821744. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ a b L. Michael White. "The AntiChrist, A Historical Puzzle". Frontline online. PBS. ^ The consensus among 20th century scholars is that John wrote during the reign of Domitian around 95 A.D., but that some date it earlier. See The Book of Revelation: A Commentary on the Greek Text – New International Greek Testament Commentary Series (1999), G. K. Beale Eerdmans Publishing, Grand Rapids, p. 4 ^ [1] A Second Look at the Second Coming, T.L. Frazier. ^ In the earliest extant manuscript containing Annales 15:44, the second Medicean, the e in "Chrestianos", Chrestians, has been changed into an i; cf. Gerd Theißen, Annette Merz, Der historische Jesus: ein Lehrbuch, 2001, p. 89. The reading Christianos, Christians, is therefore doubtful. ^ a b "The Mark Of The Beast". Ecclesia.org. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ Apocalypse Then Kenneth L. Gentry, Jr., Th.D. ^ Wong, Daniel K. "The Beast From The Sea in Revelation 13", in Bibliotheca Sacra, vol. 160 no. 639 (Dallas, TX: Dallas Theological Seminary, July–September 2003), 337-348 ^ "Nero as the Antichrist". Penelope.uchicago.edu. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ "Ancient Revelations: Papyrology Oxyrhynchus Papyri P. Oxy. LVI 4499". 2006-11-14. Archived from the original on November 14, 2006. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ The Prophetic Faith of Our Fathers, by LeRoy Froom. Vol. 2., pg. 121. ^ Best, Austin. "The Antichrist and The Protestant Reformation". Whitehorsemedia.com. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ a b A Theology of the New Testament, by George Eldon Ladd. Revised edition, Eerdmans Publishing, pg. 672. ^ a b Seventh-day Adventist Bible Commentary, 223. See Review and Herald 28:196, November 20, 1866. ^ Uriah Smith, The United States in the Light of Prophecy. Battle Creek, Michigan: Seventh-day Adventist Publishing Association (1884), 4th edition, p. 224. ^ The Three Angels of Revelation XIV. 6-12, p.109. 1877 reprint. Cited from Adventist Bible Commentary ^ Our Sunday Visitor, a Catholic newspaper (see Vicarius Filii Dei), has also denied the title. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-01-22. Retrieved 2010-10-23.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "St. Peter". Saints and Angels. Catholic Online. Retrieved 4 August 2013. ^ A Dictionary of biblical tradition in English literature, David L. Jeffrey, p.211 ^ A Dictionary of biblical tradition in English literature, David L. Jeffrey, p.211-212 ^ E. G. White, Will America Survive. Inspiration Books East, Inc.:, U.S.A (1984), p.559 ["It has been shown that the United States is the power represented by the beast with lamb-like horn"] Note: the book is originally published in 1888 under the title The Great Controversy ^ Mathisen, Robert R. (2006). Critical issues in American religious history By Robert R. Mathisen, p.220. ISBN 9781932792393. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ "ENDTIME ISSUES NEWSLETTER No 145". Biblicalperspectives.com. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ "ENDTIME ISSUES NEWSLETTER 146". Biblicalperspectives.com. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ Pate, J. Daniel Hays, J. Scott Duvall, C. Marvin (2009). Dictionary of Biblical Prophecy and End Times. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-57104-9. ^ Campbell, Stan & Bell, James S. (2001). The Complete Idiot's Guide to the Book of Revelation. Alpha Books. pp. 212–213. ISBN 9780028642383. ^ The Book of Revelation: A Commentary on the Greek Text – New International Greek Testament Commentary Series (1999), G. K. Beale Eerdmans Publishing, Grand Rapids, p. 48 ^ Discipleship on the Edge: An Expository Journey Through the Book of Revelation, Darrell W. Johnson, Regent College Publishing, 2004, p.233 ^ Third Way magazine, April 1987, p.23. Internet Archive. April 1987. p. 23. Retrieved 2014-04-30. beast. ^ Duff, Paul B. (31 May 2001). Who rides the beast?: prophetic rivalry and the rhetoric of crisis in the churches of the apocalypse, Paul Brooks Duff, p. 70, Oxford UP 2001. ISBN 9780198031635. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ Christopher R. Smith, "Reclaiming the Social Justice Message of Revelation: Materialism, Imperialism and Divine Judgement in Revelation 18", Transformation 7 (1990): 28-33 ^ a b Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre (2010). Christian Anarchism: A Political Commentary on the Gospel. Exeter: Imprint Academic. pp. 123–126. Revelation ^ Wilcock, Michael (1975). The Message of Revelation. Leicester England: Inter Varsity Press. p. 127. ^ The Book of Revelation: A Commentary on the Greek Text – New International Greek Testament Commentary Series (1999), G K Beale Eerdmans Publishing, Grand Rapids, pp.721-722 ^ Christopher C. Rowland, "The Book of Revelation, Introduction, Commentary, and Reflections" in The New Interpreter's Bible, ed. Leander E. Keck (Nashville: Abingdon, 1998), 12:501–743, at 659 ^ Udolisa, Chike= (2013). The Great Tribulation. Florida United States: Xulon Press. p. 46. ISBN 9781628391121. ^ of Hippo, St. Augustine. CHURCH FATHERS: City of God, Book XX Chapter IX (St. Augustine). Retrieved 6 October 2016. ^ Dictionary of Biblical Prophecy and End Times, by J. Daniel Hays, J. Scott Duvall, C. Marvin Pate ^ A Theology of the new Testament, by George Eldon Ladd. Revised edition, Eerdmans Publishing, pg. 673. ^ The Revelation of Jesus Christ, John Walvoord, Moody Publishers (1966), ISBN 0-8024-7309-1 pp. 197-198. ^ The Revelation of Jesus Christ, John Walvoord, Moody Publishers (1966), ISBN 0-8024-7309-1 p. 205. ^ The Revelation of Jesus Christ, John Walvoord, Moody Publishers (1966), ISBN 0-8024-7309-1 p. 210 ^ Carroll, Robert Todd (2003). The Skeptic's Dictionary (Aleister Crowley). Wiley. ISBN 0-471-27242-6 ^ Crowley, Aleister. The Magical Diaries of Aleister Crowley (Tunisia 1923), Skinner, Stephan (editor). Samuel Weiser. ISBN 0-87728-856-9 ^ Burgess, David S. (2000). Fighting for social justice: the life story of David Burgess. David S. Burgess, p.77, Wayne State UP, 2000. ISBN 0814328997. Retrieved 2014-04-30. ^ Third Way magazine, April 1987, p. 14. Internet Archive. April 1987. p. 14. Retrieved 2014-04-30. beast revelation social injustice. ^ a b Servers: IT Myths: Does the 'Beast of Brussels' know everything about us? ^ a b "The Beast", a supercomputer in Belgium, is Being Used to Track Every Human Being on Earth-Fiction! Truth or Fiction ^ Albrecht, Katherine; McIntyre, Liz (2006). The Spychips Threat: Why Christians Should Resist RFID and Electronic Surveillance. Nelson Current. ISBN 1-59555-021-6.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Ellul, Jacques (1988). Anarchy and Christianity. Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans. pp. 71–74. ISBN 9780802804952. The first beast comes up from the sea ... It is given 'all authority and power over every tribe, every people, every tongue, and every nation' (13:7). All who dwell on earth worship it. Political power could hardly, I think, be more expressly described, for it is this power which has authority, which controls military force, and which compels adoration (i.e., absolute obedience). v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Doomsday Clock Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Relativistic kinetic kill vehicle Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Nuclear warfare Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence AI takeover Technological singularity Transhumanism Year 2000 problem Year 2038 problem Year 10,000 problem Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Doomsday argument Self-Indication Assumption Doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust winter famine cobalt Societal collapse Collapsology World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Climate apocalypse Deforestation Desertification Extinction risk from global warming Tipping points in the climate system Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony Collapse Disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Little Rip Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Solar flare Stellar collision Mythological Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of Desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Dispensationalism Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Lake of fire Number of the Beast Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of Perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Post-tribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Revelation 12 sign prophecy World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films List of fictional doomsday devices Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios v t e Book of Revelation Bible (New Testament) Revelation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Places Armageddon Asia Babylon Egypt Ephesus Euphrates Jerusalem Laodicea Patmos Pergamum Philadelphia Sardis Smyrna Sodom Thyatira Persons Asher Balak Balaam Benjamin David Gad Issachar Jesus Christ Jezebel John Joseph Judah Levi Manasseh Michael Naphtali Reuben Simeon Zebulun Events/ Terms/ Phrases Abaddon/Apollyon Alpha and Omega Beast Book of Life Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Four Living Creatures Lake of Fire Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Revelation 12 sign prophecy Seven bowls Seven churches of Asia Seven seals Seven trumpets Son of Man Three Angels' Messages Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse Wormwood Related Authorship John of Patmos Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version ← Epistle of Jude Bible portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125