This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article consists almost entirely of a plot summary. It should be expanded to provide more balanced coverage that includes real-world context. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (October 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire DVD cover Directed by Charles Grosvenor Produced by Charles Grosvenor Written by Len Uhley Starring Thomas Dekker Anndi McAfee Aria Noelle Curzon Jeff Bennett Rob Paulsen Michael York Jim Cummings John Ingle Miriam Flynn Kenneth Mars Charles Kimbrough Patti Deutsch Tress MacNeille Music by Michael Tavera James Horner (music from The Land Before Time) Production company Universal Cartoon Studios Distributed by Universal Studios Home Video Release date December 5, 2000 (2000-12-05) Running time 74 minutes Country United States Language English The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire is a 2000 American direct-to-video animated adventure musical drama and the seventh film in The Land Before Time series, produced and directed by Charles Grosvenor. It stars the voices of Thomas Dekker, Anndi McAfee, Aria Curzon, Jeff Bennett and Rob Paulsen, and introduces Charles Kimbrough, Patti Deutsch, Jim Cummings and British actor Michael York. This was the only Land Before Time film to be written by Len Uhley. This is the first installment to not have John Ingle's narration. Starting with The Stone of Cold Fire, Taiwanese-American studio Wang Film Productions takes over the overseas animation work on the entire Land Before Time series until the 2007–08 television series of the same name and The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends, after South Korean studio AKOM provided their animation for the last five direct-to-video sequels: The Great Valley Adventure, The Time of the Great Giving, Journey Through the Mists, The Mysterious Island, and The Secret of Saurus Rock. Contents 1 Plot 2 Voice cast 3 Production 4 Songs 5 Release 6 Reception 7 References 8 External links Plot[edit] This article's plot summary may be too long or excessively detailed. Please help improve it by removing unnecessary details and making it more concise. (April 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Late one night, Littlefoot sees a strange, blue-colored meteor falling from the sky and crashing into Threehorn Peak, an active volcano in the Smoking Mountain range. When Littlefoot describes it the next morning, the adults in the Great Valley do not take it as a serious matter if they even believe it at all, except for two newcomers, the mysterious "Rainbow Faces". The Rainbow Faces tell them of possibilities of wonders beyond what they know, and suggest the rock may be a "Stone of Cold Fire", which is capable of possessing magical properties. Cera's father, however stops the Rainbow Faces and forbids them or anybody else to "fill the children's heads with rubbish". Littlefoot tries to tell Cera's father that he knew where the flying rock was and how he can find it. But Cera's father warns Littlefoot about the Mysterious Beyond and how it's off-limits. Littlefoot's grandfather agrees and tells Littlefoot that until the far-walkers leave the Great Valley, it would be better if they don't make any more fuss about the flying rock. Pterano, the long lost outcast uncle of Littlefoot's friend Petrie, overhears the entire conversation and conspires to find the rock to use its powers to take control of the Valley. Pterano asks Petrie, who idolizes him, for the location of the rock and learns its location. Littlefoot's friend Ducky overhears Pterano's plan, but before she can warn the others, Pterano and his cronies, Rinkus and Sierra (a pair of Rhamphorhynchus and Cearadactylus), capture her and set out to find the Stone. Upon discovering Ducky's abduction, the adults tell the young ones how Pterano led some of their herd during their search for the Valley, but had accidentally brought his followers to a pack of Deinonychus. Pterano was able to fly away, but the event left him emotionally scarred, and he was expelled from the herd as punishment for leading his followers into danger. Because the adults are slow to reach a decision, Littlefoot, Petrie, Cera, and Spike take off by themselves in search of Ducky. A thunderstorm comes. Meanwhile, Ducky escapes the Flyers and falls into a cave while fleeing. After the children find her, Ducky comforts Petrie, who is distraught about his uncle's actions, by stating that she could tell that Pterano is the least wicked of the three Flyers, and that he still has a potential of doing good. Rinkus and Sierra suddenly re-capture Ducky and pursue the children in violation of Pterano's orders, but the children are able to outsmart the two evil Flyers. Afterwards, Sierra displays mutinous feelings towards Pterano, but Rinkus convinces him to hold off betraying Pterano until they find the Stone. The children pursue the Flyers, hoping to reach the Stone before them. Aided by the Rainbow Faces, who suddenly appear and offer their knowledge of volcanoes, they manage to arrive at Threehorn Peak before the Flyers. However, both groups discover that the Stone is just an ordinary meteorite. Lamenting over this realization, Pterano explains that he had meant to create a paradise with the power of the stone, not realizing that this paradise already exists in the form of the Great Valley. Unwilling to believe the Stone is not magical, Rinkus and Sierra betray Pterano. However, as they attempt to get the Stone to give them power, the volcano begins to erupt, and Pterano saves Ducky from certain death when the eruption knocks her off the edge of the mountain. Petrie's mother arrives with a friend (who is a huge flyer) to evacuate the children, leaving Rinkus and Sierra to be caught in the meteorite's explosion (which they tried to bash) and they land back at the site where they camped earlier (quite burned, singed, and bruised). Pterano is thanked for saving Ducky's life. Back in the Great Valley, the grown-ups have a meeting and decide about Pterano's fate. For rescuing the children (spoken by Littlefoot's grandfather), Pterano's exile from the Valley will be reduced to until five cold times have passed (five winters/years). Petrie cuts in and tries to plead against the punishment, begging the grown-ups to let Pterano live in the Valley forever. However, Petrie's mother tells Petrie that even though Pterano may be sorry, it does not change what he did (erase his actions) and he must still be held responsible. Pterano, agreeing with the banishment, tells Petrie that everyone (including himself) has to take responsibility for their actions and assures Petrie that he should be fine. Accepting the result, Petrie tearfully bids Pterano farewell with the latter saying he will miss Petrie before Cera's father forces Pterano away (begging him to move on). This prompts him to remark to the latter that there are things he will not miss at all. That night, Littlefoot finds the Rainbow Faces and asks them if the meteorite really was a Stone of Cold Fire. They admit that while it wasn't, his effort to search for it was what really mattered, and reiterate that there are many unknowns to be discovered "beyond the Mysterious Beyond". Littlefoot is then momentarily distracted, and when he turns around, he finds the Rainbow Faces have disappeared in a pillar of light, implied to be a Tractor beam, indicating that the Rainbow Faces are aliens. As his friends find him, an inspired Littlefoot reflects that there are many unknowns and that such unknowns make life wonderful. Voice cast[edit] Main article: List of The Land Before Time characters Thomas Dekker as Littlefoot Anndi McAfee as Cera Aria Curzon as Ducky Jeff Bennett as Petrie / Spokes Dinosaur Michael York as Pterano Rob Paulsen as Rinkus/ Spike Jim Cummings as Sierra Kenneth Mars as Grandpa Longneck Miriam Flynn as Grandma Longneck John Ingle as Cera's father Tress MacNeille as Ducky's Mom / Petrie's Mom Charles Kimbrough as Rainbow Face #1 Patti Deutsch as Rainbow Face #2 Production[edit] Production of the film had concluded by June 2000.[1] This is the first film in the series to use Digital ink and paint rather than traditional cel animation that was used in the first 6 films. Songs[edit] All tracks are written by Michele Brourman and Amanda McBroom. No. Title Performer(s) Length 1. "Beyond the Mysterious Beyond" Thomas Dekker, Anndi McAfee, Charles Kimbrough & B. J. Ward   2. "Good Inside" Thomas Dekker, Anndi McAfee, Aria Curzon & Jeff Bennett   3. "Very Important Creature" Michael York, Jim Cummings & Rob Paulsen   4. "Beyond The Mysterious Beyond (Reprise)" Charles Kimbrough & B. J. Ward   5. "If We Hold on Together"     Release[edit] December 5, 2000 (VHS and DVD) December 4, 2001 (VHS and DVD) December 2, 2003 (VHS and DVD - 4 Movie Dino Pack (Volume 2) and 9 Movie Dino Pack) November 29, 2005 (DVD - 2 Mysteries Beyond the Great Valley) Reception[edit] Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "B" and wrote that it "beats the heck out of Barney's infantile dinosaur tales," with its "velociraptor-fast pace and a minimum of treacle".[2] In August 2014, the New York Post ranked each of the 13 Land Before Time films released up to that point and placed The Stone of Cold Fire at number 10, writing, "Though not quite as annoying as 'Tinysauruses,' the name 'Rainbow Faces' comes pretty close."[3] The film received nominations for "Best Animated Video Premier" and "Best Animated Character Performance" for Littlefoot and Pterano at the Video Premiere Awards in 2001, losing to Joseph: King of Dreams and Batman Beyond: Return of the Joker, respectively.[4] Aria Curzon received an award for "Outstanding Young Voice-Over" at the 23rd Young Artist Awards in 2002 for her role as Ducky in this film, as well as The Land Before Time V, The Land Before Time VI, and The Land Before Time VIII.[5] Award Date Nomination Nominee Result Video Premiere Award 2001 Best Animated Character Performance Thomas Dekker (voice, Littlefoot), Zeon Davush (supervising animator, Littlefoot) Nominated Michael York (voice, Pterano), Zeon Davush (supervising animator, Pterano) Nominated Best Animated Video Premier Charles Grosvenor (producer) Nominated Young Artist Award April 7, 2002 Outstanding Young Voice-Over Aria Curzon (Ducky) (1997-2001) Won References[edit] ^ Hettrick, Scott (23 June 2000). "Video bows mint coin". Variety. Retrieved 4 December 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Fretts, Bruce (December 1, 2000). "The Land Before Time VII". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 3, 2017. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Miller, Gregory E. (August 13, 2014). "A rundown of the best and worst 'The Land Before Time' movies". New York Post. Retrieved January 3, 2017. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Video Premiere Awards 2000". DVD Exclusive Awards. Archived from the original on November 28, 2001. Retrieved February 16, 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "23rd Annual Young Artists Awards". Young Artist Awards. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2019. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire at IMDb Wikiquote has quotations related to: API v t e The Land Before Time Film series The Land Before Time (1988) The Great Valley Adventure (1994) The Time of the Great Giving (1995) Journey Through the Mists (1996) The Mysterious Island (1997) The Secret of Saurus Rock (1998) The Stone of Cold Fire (2000) The Big Freeze (2001) Journey to Big Water (2002) The Great Longneck Migration (2003) Invasion of the Tinysauruses (2005) The Great Day of the Flyers (2006) The Wisdom of Friends (2007) Journey of the Brave (2016) Related TV series Characters Video games "If We Hold on Together" Book Category v t e Universal Animation Studios Direct-to-video feature films Universal Cartoon Studios The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure (1994) The Land Before Time III: The Time of the Great Giving (1995) The Land Before Time IV: Journey Through the Mists (1996) The Land Before Time V: The Mysterious Island (1997) Hercules and Xena – The Battle for Mount Olympus (1998) The Land Before Time VI: The Secret of Saurus Rock (1998) Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet Frankenstein (1999) An American Tail: The Treasure of Manhattan Island (2000) An American Tail: The Mystery of the Night Monster (2000) Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet the Wolfman (2000) The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire (2000) The Land Before Time VIII: The Big Freeze (2001) Balto II: Wolf Quest (2002) The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water (2002) Charlotte's Web 2: Wilbur's Great Adventure (2003) The Land Before Time X: The Great Longneck Migration (2003) Van Helsing: The London Assignment (2004) The Chronicles of Riddick: Dark Fury (2004) The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses (2005) Balto III: Wings of Change (2005) The Adventures of Brer Rabbit (2006) Universal Animation Studios The Land Before Time XII: The Great Day of the Flyers (2007) The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends (2007) The Little Engine That Could (2011) Curious George 3: Back to the Jungle (2015) The Land Before Time XIV: Journey of the Brave (2016) Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas Is You (2017) Curious George: Royal Monkey (2019) Curious George: Go West, Go Wild (2020) Theatrical films Curious George (2006) The Tale of Despereaux (2008) Curious George 2: Follow That Monkey! (2009) Woody Woodpecker (2017) Short films Fractured Fairy Tales: The Phox, the Box, & the Lox (1999) TV series Back to the Future (1991–92) Fievel's American Tails (1992) Exosquad (1993–94) Problem Child (1993–94) Monster Force (1994) Beethoven (1994–95) Earthworm Jim (1995–96) The Savage Dragon (1995–96) The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper (1996–98) Wing Commander Academy (1996) Vor-Tech: Undercover Conversion Squad (1996) The New Woody Woodpecker Show (1999–2002) The Mummy (2001–03) Curious George (2006–present) The Land Before Time (2007–08) Woody Woodpecker (2018–present) Mulligan (TBA) Q-Force (TBA) The Adventure Zone (TBA) Indivisible (TBA) TV specials Opus 'n' Bill: A Wish for Wings That Work (1991) Curious George: A Very Monkey Christmas (2009) How Murray Saved Christmas (2014) Miscellaneous 63rd Academy Awards Kids WB! promos The Incredible Hulk Coaster The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man Dudley-Do Right’s RipSaw Falls See also Universal Monsters Illumination Walter Lantz Productions DreamWorks Animation DreamWorks Classics Entertainment Rights Big Idea Entertainment Harvey Films UPA Amblimation List of unproduced Universal Pictures animated projects