1942 film The Arctic Giant Title card Directed by Dave Fleischer Produced by Max Fleischer Story by Bill Turner Tedd Pierce Based on Superman by Jerry Siegel Joe Shuster Starring Bud Collyer Joan Alexander Jackson Beck Julian Noa Music by Sammy Timberg Winston Sharples (uncredited) Lou Fleischer (uncredited) Animation by Willard Bowsky Reuben Grossman Color process Technicolor Production company Fleischer Studios Distributed by Paramount Pictures Release date February 27, 1942 Running time 9 minutes (one reel) Language English The Arctic Giant (1942) is the fourth of seventeen animated Technicolor short films based upon the DC Comics character of Superman, originally created by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster. This animated short was created by Fleischer Studios. The story runs nine minutes and covers Superman's adventures defeating a giant dinosaur that terrorizes the city. It was originally released February 27, 1942.[1] The short depicts a Godzilla-esque scenario while predating the 1954 film by 12 years.[2]。 Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 References 4 External links Plot[edit] Play media The animated short The story begins as the narrator tells about an "Arctic Giant" found frozen in perfect condition millions of years ago in Siberia. The monster is shipped to the Museum of Natural Science in Metropolis, where it is kept frozen using special refrigeration equipment. We next see people looking at the giant monster in the museum. Although the nameplate on the monster's case says "Tyrannosaurus", the dinosaur-like monster does not look like an actual Tyrannosaurus, being green-colored with an upward posture, large arms, and plantigrade feet. Lois Lane is sent to do a story on the monster because it is possible that if the ice were to thaw, it might still be alive. As she is leaving the Daily Planet, Clark asks if she wants him to come with her. She says "No, thanks. You'd probably faint if you saw the monster. You scare so easily." Then once she leaves the room, Clark says "Maybe she's right. But Superman hasn't fainted yet." At the museum, Lois is shown around the refrigeration plant that is responsible for keeping the monster frozen. The guide shows her the generator, and then proceeds to show her the control room downstairs. He places an oil can on a shelf right next to the generator. As the guide shows Lois' control room, he explains that any rise in temperature could be dangerous. Meanwhile, the shelf that the oil can is on is vibrating from the generator's movement, causing the oil can to move closer and closer to the turbine. The oil can falls into the turbine, jamming it. The workers nearby turn off the equipment so they can quickly repair the damage. But they are not quick enough. We see the temperature rise from freezing to melting to DANGER level. The ice around the monster begins to melt. Police officers escort everyone out of the museum, except Lois. As she attempts to call the Daily Planet from the museum, the monster destroys the entire building, leaving her in the rubble. The “Arctic Giant” rampages in the city. The monster escapes as a police squad starts to shoot at it, but the bullets have no affect. The monster begins to march towards the officers making them flee as the monster's foot comes down, crushing a mailbox, a streetlight, and the police cars which causes gasoline to leak out of them. The monster begins to wreak havoc throughout the city, destroying a train station and damaging buildings. Back at the Daily Planet, Perry White tells Clark he'd better get on over to the museum to see if Lois is alright. Clark goes into a closet and changes into Superman, then hurries over to the museum and rescues Lois from the rubble. He tells her to go back to the Daily Planet building where she'll be safe. But Lois, always looking for a good story, doesn't listen to Superman. As Superman leaps from building to building, the monster approaches a dam that is neighboring a small town. The monster destroys the dam, flooding the town while crushing some houses underfoot. Superman stops the flooding by pushing a giant boulder in to fill the gap. The monster continues its rampage through a lake, marching towards a suspension bridge. The fire department tries to slow down the monster by spraying it with high pressure hoses, but the monster is immune and capsizes the firefighter boats. The monster breaks through the suspension bridge, endangering several motorists. Superman then catches the falling bridge and ties it back together, saving the people on it. As the monster approaches a nearby baseball stadium, Superman uses one of the bridge cables to trip it. The monster falls, crushing cars and a gas station. While the monster is tied up on the ground, Lois stands by to take a picture. The monster's head falls right next to Lois and the monster tries to eat her. Superman flies into the monster's mouth and takes Lois out, telling her to stay put this time. Superman then pins the monster over a lamp post and the city is saved. Later at the Daily Planet, Lois and Clark are discussing the article Lois wrote about the monster which states that the monster is being held at the Metropolis Zoo. "You showed plenty of courage getting that monster story, Lois" says Clark. Lois quotes "Thanks, but where were you?" Clark replies "Me? Oh, I must have fainted." Cast[edit] Bud Collyer as Clark Kent / Superman, Reactor Worker #1, Police Officer #1, Police Dispatcher Joan Alexander as Lois Lane, Female Pedestrian Julian Noa as Perry White, Male Pedestrian, Police Officer #2 Jackson Beck as the Narrator, Reactor Worker #2 References[edit] ^ Lenburg, Jeff (1999). The Encyclopedia of Animated Cartoons. Checkmark Books. p. 139. ISBN 0-8160-3831-7. ^ Riley Black, 2009, Superman vs. the Arctic Giant, Smithsonian Magazine External links[edit] API at The Big Cartoon DataBase The Arctic Giant at the Internet Archive The Arctic Giant at the Internet Movie Database v t e 1940s Superman animated shorts Fleischer Studios era Superman (a.k.a. The Mad Scientist, 1941) The Mechanical Monsters (1941) Billion Dollar Limited (1942) The Arctic Giant (1942) The Bulleteers (1942) The Magnetic Telescope (1942) Electric Earthquake (1942) Volcano (1942) Terror on the Midway (1942) Famous Studios era Japoteurs (1942) Showdown (1942) Eleventh Hour (1942) Destruction, Inc. (1942) The Mummy Strikes (1943) Jungle Drums (1943) The Underground World (1943) Secret Agent (1943) See also: Superman in other media