1957 film by Virgil W. Vogel This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Land Unknown Theatrical release poster by Reynold Brown Directed by Virgil W. Vogel Produced by William Alland Screenplay by László Görög Story by Charles Palmer William N. Robson Starring Jock Mahoney Shirley Patterson Henry Brandon Music by Henry Mancini Hans J. Salter Herman Stein Cinematography Ellis W. Carter Edited by Fred MacDowell Production company Universal Pictures Distributed by Universal Pictures Release date October 30, 1957 (1957-10-30)[1] Running time 78 minutes Country United States Language English The Land Unknown is a 1957 science fiction CinemaScope adventure film about a naval expedition trapped in an Antarctic jungle. The story was allegedly inspired by the discovery of unusually warm water in Antarctica in 1947. It starred Jock Mahoney and Shirley Patterson and was directed by Virgil W. Vogel. The film is notable for its low-budget special effects, which include men in dinosaur suits, puppets and monitor lizards standing in for dinosaurs. William Reynolds recalled the studio spent so much money on their mechanical dinosaur that they could not afford to shoot the film in color as they first planned.[2] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Release 5 Reception 6 Comic book adaption 7 References 8 External links Plot[edit] A small crew led by Commander Harold Roberts and reporter Maggie Hathaway are on an expedition into Antarctica for the United States Navy. During a helicopter flight, they are called back to their ship via radio because of an unexpected storm approaching. At first they try to fly around the storm, but low on fuel, they fly into the storm, where they almost collide in mid-air with a man-sized pterosaur. Their rotor control rod is bent. Unable to stay in the air, they start to descend and are surprised when they end up landing well below sea-level in a warm volcanic crater. Inside, they discover a steamy tropical jungle with living dinosaurs, giant flesh-eating plants, and fresh human footprints. They cannot contact the ship by radio. When they try to straighten the bent rod, it breaks. They are trapped. The crew encounter many dangers and perils in the jungle in a fight for survival. The crew meet Hunter, the lone survivor of a plane crash from the 1947 expedition. He has learned to survive in this land with the aid of a conch that drives off the animals and by raiding the dinosaurs' nests. He offers the remains of his airplane to repair the helicopter, but only if the crew agree to leave Maggie with him. The crew refuses, but they also know that after 25 days their ship will have to leave before the Antarctic winter sets in. Unsuccessful in finding the remains of the plane, hidden by Hunter, the crew debate leaving Maggie, or forcing the information out of Hunter by torture. Commander Roberts refuses to sink to either low. Maggie is later attacked by an Elasmosaurus, but Hunter rescues her. After a fight and learning that the crew refuse to torture him for the location of his plane, Hunter gives them the map to its location. After repairing the helicopter, the crew take off in a hurry as a Tyrannosaurus rex attacks their base. They fly to pick up Maggie, who is with Hunter at the time. Hunter is ambushed by the Elasmosaurus, and the crew come to his rescue. They fly out of the lost world with him. Once clear of the crater, the crew are able to communicate again by radio with their ship; however, the helicopter runs out of fuel and crashes into the ocean before it reaches the vessel. The crew are rescued, and once safely on the ship Harold and Maggie declare their love for one another. The animals featured in this film include a Tyrannosaurus, Elasmosaurus, Stegosaurus live acted by monitor lizards (which would make them megalania), a pair of Pterosaurs and a giant flesh-consuming plant. The mammal found by the crew then later eaten by the carnivorous plant is referred to as a tarsier but is actually a loris. Cast[edit] Jock Mahoney as Cmndr. Harold 'Hal' Roberts Shirley Patterson as Margaret 'Maggie' Hathaway (as Shawn Smith) William Reynolds as Lt. Jack Carmen Henry Brandon as Dr. Carl Hunter Douglas Kennedy as Capt. Burnham Phil Harvey as Machinist's Mate Steve Miller Tim Smyth as a Tyrannosaurus Rex[3] Production[edit] Produced by William Alland for Universal International Pictures (UI) Filmed at Universal Studios - 100 Universal City Plaza, Universal City, California, USA[4] Release[edit] The Land Unknown was given a wide release on October 30, 1957.[5] Some sources (including Bill Warren) list its initial release as August, 1957.[citation needed] The film was released on LaserDisc in the 1990s. Universal Studios Home Entertainment released it on DVD in 2007 as part of a boxed set called The Classic Sci-Fi Ultimate Collection Vol. 2, along with Dr. Cyclops, The Leech Woman, The Deadly Mantis and Cult of the Cobra.[6] Kino Lorber's 2019 Blu-ray release featured a fact-filled audio commentary by Tom Weaver and David Schecter. Reception[edit] The film currently holds a rating of 5.9/10 from 812 users on the Internet Movie Database and a low score of 22% on Rotten Tomatoes. Comic book adaption[edit] Dell Four Color #845 (August 1957).[7][8] The story was drawn by Alex Toth.[9] References[edit] ^ http://www.anyfilm.co/the-land-unknown-1957/ ^ There's Always Tomorrow ^ Larson, Peter L.; Carpenter, Kenneth (2008). Tyrannosaurus Rex, the Tyrant King. ISBN 978-0253350879. ^ "The Land Unknown". imdb.com. Retrieved 9 February 2015. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "The Land Unknown (1957)". Allmovie. Retrieved 25 January 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Erickson, Glenn (September 13, 2007). "DVD Savant Review: The Classic Sci-Fi Ultimate Collection Vol. 2". DVD Talk. Retrieved January 15, 2019. ^ "Dell Four Color #845". Grand Comics Database. ^ Dell Four Color #845 at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) ^ https://www.lambiek.net/artists/t/toth_a.htm External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API API at IMDb The Land Unknown at the TCM Movie Database