This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. (March 2016) The Flesh Eaters Theatrical release poster Directed by Jack Curtis Produced by Jack Curtis Terry Curtis Arnold Drake Written by Arnold Drake Starring Martin Kosleck Rita Morely Byron Sanders Music by Julian Stein Cinematography Carson Davidson Edited by Radley Metzger Distributed by Cinema Distributors of America Release date March 18, 1964 (1964-03-18) Running time 91 minutes/later cut to 87 minutes Country United States Language English The Flesh Eaters is a 1964 American horror/science fiction thriller, directed on a low budget by Jack Curtis and edited by future filmmaker Radley Metzger. The film contains moments of violence much more graphic and extreme than many other movies of its time, making it one of the first ever gore films.[1] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Release 4.1 Theatrical release 4.2 Home Media 5 Reception 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] Jan Letterman (Barbara Wilkin), the personal assistant to a wealthy, over-the-hill actress named Laura Winters (Rita Morely), hires pilot Grant Murdoch (Byron Sanders) to fly her from New York to Provincetown on Cape Cod in Massachusetts, but a storm forces them to land on a small island. They soon meet Prof. Peter Bartell (Martin Kosleck) a marine biologist with a German accent who is living in seclusion on the isle. After a series of strange skeletons wash ashore (human, then fish) it turns out the water has become inhabited by some sort of glowing microbe which apparently devours flesh rapaciously. Bartell is a former US Government agent who was sent to Nazi Germany to recover as much of their scientific data as possible. He was chosen for the job for his scientific skills and knowledge of the German language. Using the methods learned there he hopes to cultivate a group of monstrous "flesh eaters" that can devour the skin off a victim in mere seconds. A beatnik named Omar (Ray Tudor) joins the group after becoming shipwrecked on their shore. Tensions mount after the plane drifts off into the ocean, leaving the castaways and Bartell as potential meals for the ravenous monsters. High-voltage electrification (from a battery system devised by Bartell) is utilized in an attempt to slay the monsters. Bartell explains that he has been tracking these creatures and attempting to cultivate them to sell as biological weapons. It is soon discovered that an electrical shock does not kill the creatures, but instead causes the numerous smaller microbes to merge into a larger organism. By accident, the survivors stumble upon the solution to killing them: the creatures devour flesh but not blood, as in each case where remains have been found blood has been present. Bartell surmises that the creatures have a negative reaction to hemoglobin and, when directly injected with it, the creatures are indeed slain. By applying a large electrical shock to the waters surrounding the island, the survivors hope to force the numerous dispersed microbes into forming a giant single organism. The plan works and following a struggle, Bartell is killed just before Murdoch destroys the last of the creatures. Afterwards, Murdoch and Letterman leave the island together. Cast[edit] Byron Sanders as Grant Murdoch Barbara Wilkin as Jan Letterman Martin Kosleck as Prof. Peter Bartell Rita Morley as Laura Winters Ray Tudor as Omar Christopher Drake as Matt Darby Nelson as Jim Rita Floyd as Radio Operator Warren Houston as Cab Driver Barbara Wilson as Ann Ira Lewis as Freddy Production[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The film has developed a cult following due to its gruesome, if primitive, special effects, including some memorably bloody death scenes.[2] One character is eaten from the inside out by the titular monsters, resulting in a gushing fountain of intestinal matter. Another victim is stabbed with a wooden stake, then shot twice in the face, with resultant gaping bullet holes. The deep focus cinematography was the work of director Jack Curtis (working under a pseudonym, Carson Davidson), who shot most scene outdoors under the sun of Long Island. The film was scripted by comic book writer Arnold Drake (The Doom Patrol, Marvel's Captain Marvel, et al.). Drake storyboarded the film, so every shot has the careful, formalized composition of a well-drawn comic strip.[3] One shot, for example is a shot in deep focus: the right profile of the hero dominates the left-side foreground of the frame; in a moment, two or three tiny figures at the far-removed shoreline move left to right, from behind the actor's head, and in focus. According to the film's writer and producer Arnold Drake, Tenny Curtis, wife of director Jack Curtis won $72,000 on the television quiz show: "High Low". Part of the money was used finishing the production. While filming on location at Montauk, New York, a real hurricane destroyed the sets and equipment. Production was delayed for a year and the cost rose from $60,000 to $105,000.[citation needed] In 1967, George A. Romero began work on a horror film provisionally called Night of the Flesh Eaters; to avoid confusion with this film, the title was changed to Night of the Living Dead. The title was changed when its distributor, The Walter Reade Organization, expressed concern over confusion with The Flesh Eaters, released three years earlier. The film was copyrighted two years before its original release in 1964.[citation needed] Release[edit] Theatrical release[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Flesh Eaters was first released in Phoenix, Arizona on March 18, 1964. It later had a re-release in 1968 which removed a flashback sequence showing the original Nazi human experiments with "the flesh eaters". Home Media[edit] The film was released on DVD by MPI Home Video on Oct 25, 2005.[4] Reception[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (March 2016) Author and film critic Leonard Maltin awarded the film one and a half out of four stars calling the film, "occasionally tense, but gruesome and boring".[5] Dennis Schwartz on his website Ozus' World Movie Reviews awarded the film a grade C-, calling it, "A lovable but bad mad scientist B-film."[6] TV Guide gave the film two out of four stars, stating that the film's dedication and imagination made up for its lack of budget.[7] Allmovie gave the film a positive review, writing, "This fun, endearingly trashy B-movie gem is one of the best-kept secrets in cult movie fandom. Simply put, The Flesh Eaters offers everything one could want from a drive-in flick of this era: there are colorful characters, action, suspense, fun plot hooks, and a really cool monster".[8] References[edit] ^ Corupe, Paul. "The Flesh Eaters". DVD Verdict. Retrieved 2007-11-08. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Reis, George R. "The Flesh Eaters". DVD Drive-In. Retrieved 2007-11-07. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Guilty Pleasures of the Horror Film: Gary J. Svehla ^ "The Flesh Eaters (1964) - Jack Curtis". Allmovie.com. AllMovie. Retrieved 2 March 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Leonard Maltin; Spencer Green; Rob Edelman (January 2010). Leonard Maltin's Classic Movie Guide. Plume. p. 212. ISBN 978-0-452-29577-3. ^ Schwartz, Dennis. "flesheaters". Sover.net. Dennis Schwartz. Retrieved 6 February 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "The Flesh Eaters - Movie Reviews and Movie Ratings". TV Guide.com. TV Guide. Retrieved 6 February 2018. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ Guarisco, Donald. "The Flesh Eaters (1964) - Jack Curtis". Allmovie.com. Donald Guarisco. Retrieved 2 March 2016. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API The Flesh Eaters (1964) at AllMovie The Flesh Eaters (1964) at IMDb The Flesh Eater (1964) at Rotten Tomatoes API at the TCM Movie Database