American sitcom The Ghost & Mrs. Muir Edward Mulhare and Hope Lange, 1968 Genre Situation comedy Starring Hope Lange Edward Mulhare Reta Shaw Charles Nelson Reilly Theme music composer Dave Grusin Country of origin United States Original language English No. of seasons 2 No. of episodes 50 (list of episodes) Production Executive producer David Gerber Producers Howard Leeds Gene Reynolds Stanley Rubin Camera setup Single-camera Running time 30 min. Production company 20th Century-Fox Television Distributor 20th Century-Fox Television Release Original network NBC (1st season) ABC (2nd season) Audio format Monaural Original release September 28, 1968 (1968-09-28) – March 13, 1970 (1970-03-13) Chronology Related shows The Ghost and Mrs. Muir (1947 film) Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) The Ghost & Mrs. Muir is an American sitcom based on the 1947 film of the same name, which was based on the 1945 novel by R. A. Dick. It premiered in September 1968 on NBC. After NBC cancelled the series at the end of its first season, it was picked up by ABC for its second season before being cancelled a final time. Contents 1 Premise 2 Production and reception 3 Cast 4 Episodes 5 Home media 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Premise[edit] The series stars Hope Lange as Carolyn Muir, a young widow and writer who rents Gull Cottage, near the fictional fishing village of Schooner Bay, Maine, along with her two children, a housekeeper (played by Reta Shaw), and their dog. The cottage is haunted by the ghost of its former owner Daniel Gregg, a 19th-century sea captain, played by Edward Mulhare. Charles Nelson Reilly plays Claymore Gregg, wacky local man and great-nephew to the captain, who rents the cottage to Mrs. Muir without telling her it is haunted by his ancestor. The book of the same name, by R.A. Dick, was published in 1945. It was brought to the silver screen in 1947 with Gene Tierney playing Mrs. Muir and Rex Harrison as Captain Gregg. While the movie had been a romantic fantasy combining comic and dramatic elements, the series focused much more on laughs. Production and reception[edit] The story was developed as a TV series by Jean Holloway and filmed at the Hollywood Studios. Hope Lange won two Emmy Awards for Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for 1968–1969 and 1969–1970. Despite Lange's consecutive Emmy wins, the show struggled in the ratings and only ran for two seasons. During its first year on NBC, it followed Get Smart; its Big Three competition was My Three Sons on CBS and the first half of The Lawrence Welk Show on ABC. In spring 1969, NBC cancelled the series. ABC picked it up and scheduled it to be shown on Thursday nights at 7:30 pm in September 1969, followed by That Girl and Bewitched. The series was again unsuccessful in beating out another hit CBS series, Family Affair. It was later moved to Friday nights at 8:30 pm in January 1970, but ratings did not improve. As a result, ABC cancelled The Ghost & Mrs. Muir in spring 1970. The following year, Family Affair was cancelled by CBS after a five-year run because it was in the same time slot as the NBC hit variety series The Flip Wilson Show. Cast[edit] Hope Lange, as Carolyn Muir, is a widowed writer with two children. Edward Mulhare, as Captain Daniel Gregg, is a poltergeist, able to affect things not only in the house, but also at a distance, and can appear and disappear at will. He can only be seen and heard by the people he chooses. His bad temper can affect the weather. Charles Nelson Reilly, as Claymore Gregg, is the town clerk among other jobs, a great-nephew of Captain Gregg (although the captain is often ashamed of this and claims that Claymore is not related to him), and Mrs. Muir's landlord. He is one of the few who knows of the captain's continued presence, and is usually terrified of his ancestor. Reilly made this terror of "The Captain" a running gag during his appearances on The Hollywood Squares. Reta Shaw, as Martha Grant, is the housekeeper. Towards the very end of the series (in episode 47 of 50), the captain reveals himself to her, but during most of the series, she is unaware of the ghost. Kellie Flanagan, as nine-year-old Candace "Candy" Muir, is Mrs. Muir's daughter. Starting in the second episode of season two, she can also see and hear the captain. Harlen Carraher, as Jonathan Muir, is Mrs. Muir's son; from the beginning, he can see, hear, and talk to the captain. Scruffy, as Scruffy, is the Muirs' Wire Fox Terrier. Episodes[edit] Main article: List of The Ghost & Mrs. Muir episodes Home media[edit] On April 16, 2014, Madman Entertainment released both seasons on DVD in Region 4 (Australia) for the first time. In July 2014, amazon.com started selling both seasons of The Ghost & Mrs. Muir in the United States.[1][2] On 1 November 2018, Madman Entertainment released the "Complete Collection"[3] box set. This box set contains the same individual Season 1 and 2 sets. See also[edit] List of ghost films References[edit] ^ "The Ghost & Mrs. Muir: The Complete First Season". Madman Entertainment. Retrieved 15 September 2014. ^ "The Ghost & Mrs. Muir: The Complete Second Season". Madman Entertainment. Retrieved 15 September 2014. ^ "Ghost & Mrs. Muir, The - Complete Collection". www.jbhifi.com.au. Retrieved 2019-01-31. External links[edit] Media related to The Ghost & Mrs. Muir (TV series) Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata - please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons The Ghost & Mrs. Muir at IMDb "...And Then I Wrote" - Interview with Kellie Flanagan (2014)