The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses Directed by Charles Grosvenor Produced by Charles Grosvenor Written by John Loy Based on Characters by Judy Freudberg Tony Geiss Starring Aaron Spann Anndi McAfee Aria Noelle Curzon Jeff Glen Bennett Rob Paulsen Leigh Kelly Cree Summer Nika Futterman Ashley Rose Orr Michael Clarke Duncan Kenneth Mars Miriam Flynn John Ingle Camryn Manheim Tress MacNeille Narrated by John Ingle Music by Michael Tavera James Horner (archive music from The Land Before Time) Edited by Jay Bixsen Production company Universal Cartoon Studios Distributed by Universal Studios Home Video Release date January 11, 2005 Running time 81 minutes Country United States Language English The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses is a 2005 direct-to-video animated film and the 11th film in The Land Before Time series. It was released on January 11, 2005 by Universal Studios Home Video. Contents 1 Plot 2 Voice cast 3 Music 4 Release 5 Reception 6 References 7 External links Plot[edit] Every year, as the warm season approaches, a certain tree in Great Valley blooms with pink flowers. Because of the tastiness of these "treesweets", every dinosaur in the valley wants his/her fair share of it. However, because of this tastiness (and the fact that there seems to be only one such tree in the whole valley), there is hardly enough for everyone. Because of this, none may eat any of the treesweets until the day they "reach the peak of their tastiness". Littlefoot and his friends Ducky, Petrie and Spike are eagerly waiting to nibble the first treesweets. Ducky is about to take one, but Littlefoot quickly tells her to stop and reminds them all that none may take any treesweets until "Nibbling Day". This however, doesn't stop Petrie from flying to the tree's crown and trying to take one. Just then, Cera's father emerges and states very clearly how every dinosaur in the valley has waited a long time to taste the treesweets. As Cera, too, appears before them, she reminds them that she is the one who is supposed to get the first treesweet because she was the one who found the treesweet-tree in the first place, although it was indeed Littlefoot who did it. Cera also teases Littlefoot for being too little to actually reach the treesweets. Meanwhile, Cera's father is visited by an old friend—a female threehorn named Tria – whom, it seems, he used to have a crush on. She also reveals his name to be Topsy (although it may simply be a nickname). After speaking a while with her, he promises Tria that she will get the first treesweet of the season; which Cera, who appears just in time to hear him say this, becomes very upset about. From that moment on, Cera refuses to make friends with Tria and simply shrugs her off whenever she tries to talk to her. In addition, Cera will turn violent towards her friends should they make any references involving Tria (be it Tria herself or Cera's father's nickname). Littlefoot, meanwhile, goes off by himself, feeling very down about how "little" he is. As he returns to the treesweet tree, he climbs up the cliff right next to it and tries to reach the treesweets by himself. As he does, he accidentally falls right through the tree and knocks down every single treesweet. Realizing the trouble he is now in, he faints. As he wakes up, he finds himself surrounded by several miniature longnecks (Mussaurus). They have eaten all the treesweets and quickly run away once the shocked Littlefoot starts screaming out of fear. Upon noticing that every treesweet is gone, the other dinosaurs begin to suspect that Littlefoot is responsible. Littlefoot, afraid to admit it was his fault that the treesweets fell off the tree, blames everything on the tiny longnecks. At first, no one believes him, but when they see evidence of tiny teeth marks on a tree sweet, he is believed and everyone starts looking for the tiny longnecks, preparing to drive them out of the valley once they have been found. Cera's father takes note of the tree sweet petal, discovers the bite marks on it, and says that the teeth marks were made by something really small (maybe smaller than Littlefoot). As Littlefoot and Cera are searching the valley, Littlefoot falls down a pothole in the ground where, it turns out, the tiny longnecks are hiding in. First being afraid of them, Littlefoot flees deeper into the cave; but soon enough, he finds out that the tiny longnecks are not as bad as he thought and befriends them. Upon hearing how difficult it is for the tinysauruses to find food, he promises to help bring them as many treestars as he can every night. Eventually, Littlefoot’s friends spied him while he was bringing food to them. They also fell in the pothole. They all get to see the tiny longnecks for themselves, and promises not to tell the adults. Even Cera, who is still angry with her father, promises to keep it secret, mainly because she finds out that she can relate more to them than she would've imagined. Many of the tiny longnecks in the colony feel that their leader, Big Daddy, bosses them around a bit too much, though he simply wants their best. As to the reason that he doesn't trust the "bigger" dinosaurs is that they, in his opinion, only seem to think: "Because they're bigger, it makes them more important". When sneaking off to see the tiny longnecks again, Littlefoot and his friends are busted by Topsy. But when he tries to ask them where they're going this time of night, Cera angrily throws the question back at him. But Topsy tells the children that it is the tiny longnecks that they have to worry about. Then he tells them, "Now skedaddle! All of you!". And he warns them to not let him catch them out late at night again (saying, "Don't let me catch you out this late again!"). He turns to Littlefoot, Petrie, Ducky, and Spike, and to them, he warns them that if he ever catches them out this late at any time of night again, their "parents" are going to hear from him. Then he orders them to get on home. Topsy, not wanting Cera to find out about him and Tria, manages to see them off. Just as Tria comes up to him, they spot one of the tiny longnecks. A chase ensues which eventually reveals their hideout. As the grown-ups prepare to block the caverns; Littlefoot, realizing that he must tell the truth, admits that it was his fault that the treesweets are gone, and not the tiny longnecks'. However, just as he's finished, the tiny longnecks' cavern collapses, trapping them inside. The tiny longnecks escape. As they went off to find another hideout, the tiny longnecks encountered 2 Deinonychus that chase them and find their way into Great Valley. Meanwhile, Littlefoot's friends are mad at him. They later try to apologize to him for being angry. However, they mistake the sharpteeth for Littlefoot. The two carnivores lunge at them, causing a chase. Littlefoot shows up just at the right time and saves Ducky just as she was about to get eaten. When all seems lost, the tiny longnecks show up and fight the sharpteeth. The grown-ups of the Valley then show up and drive the sharpteeth back into Mysterious Beyond through a hole. Then they cover up the hole with a large boulder. Nibbling Day finally comes at last. Voice cast[edit] Main article: List of The Land Before Time characters Aaron Spann as Littlefoot Anndi McAfee as Cera/Diplodocus Aria Curzon as Ducky Jeff Bennett as Petrie Rob Paulsen as Spike/Kosh Leigh Kelly as Skitter Cree Summer as Lizzie/Bonehead Nika Futterman as Rocky Ashley Rose Orr as Dusty Michael Clarke Duncan as Big Daddy Kenneth Mars as Grandpa Longneck/Longneck Miriam Flynn as Grandma Longneck John Ingle as Narrator/Topsy Camryn Manheim as Tria Tress MacNeille as Mama Swimmer/Petrie's mother Music[edit] The music score was composed by Michael Tavera. Some of his rearrangements of James Horner's original themes from the first film can still be heard in two shots of the film (one where Ducky, Petrie, and Spike tell Littlefoot why they are mad at him and the other where the Sharpteeth come out of a cave), but he was uncredited this film, making this film the last time Tavera's rearrangements of Horner's themes would be heard in a Land Before Time film, as Horner died in a plane crash on June 22, 2015. Also, Michael Tavera's older themes from the previous sequels can still be heard in some other shots of the film. The music that plays in the background when Topsy catches Petrie trying to get one of the blossoms is the booby trap sliding scene music from An American Tail: The Treasure of Manhattan Island. All tracks are written by Michele Brourman and Amanda McBroom. No. Title Performer(s) Length 1. "Creepy Crawlies" John Ingle, Camryn Manheim, Tress MacNeille, Miriam Flynn & Kenneth Mars   2. "Girls and Dads" Anndi McAfee & Cree Summer   3. "If Only" Aaron Spann & Kenneth Mars   4. "Stupid Stompers" Michael Clarke Duncan, Cree Summer & Ashley Rose Orr   Release[edit] January 11, 2005 - VHS & DVD, the last Land Before Time film ever released on VHS September 19, 2006 - DVD – 2 Tales of Discovery and Friendship August 5, 2008 - Carrying Case DVD with Fun Activity Book – 2 Tales of Discovery and Friendship – Universal Watch on the Go[1] Reception[edit] Due to its ridiculous story and bad songs, The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses is considered by many critics and fans to be among the worst in the series alongside The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends.[2] References[edit] ^ Grosvenor, Charles (2008-08-05), The Land Before Time: 2 Tales of Discovery and Friendship Carrying Case, Universal Studios Home Entertainment, ASIN B001AK3S7Q ^ "The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved February 8, 2021. External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: API The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses at IMDb The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses at AllMovie v t e The Land Before Time Film series The Land Before Time (1988) The Great Valley Adventure (1994) The Time of the Great Giving (1995) Journey Through the Mists (1996) The Mysterious Island (1997) The Secret of Saurus Rock (1998) The Stone of Cold Fire (2000) The Big Freeze (2001) Journey to Big Water (2002) The Great Longneck Migration (2003) Invasion of the Tinysauruses (2005) The Great Day of the Flyers (2006) The Wisdom of Friends (2007) Journey of the Brave (2016) Related TV series Characters Video games "If We Hold on Together" Book Category v t e Universal Animation Studios Direct-to-video feature films Universal Cartoon Studios The Land Before Time II: The Great Valley Adventure (1994) The Land Before Time III: The Time of the Great Giving (1995) The Land Before Time IV: Journey Through the Mists (1996) The Land Before Time V: The Mysterious Island (1997) Hercules and Xena – The Battle for Mount Olympus (1998) The Land Before Time VI: The Secret of Saurus Rock (1998) Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet Frankenstein (1999) An American Tail: The Treasure of Manhattan Island (2000) An American Tail: The Mystery of the Night Monster (2000) Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet the Wolfman (2000) The Land Before Time VII: The Stone of Cold Fire (2000) The Land Before Time VIII: The Big Freeze (2001) Balto II: Wolf Quest (2002) The Land Before Time IX: Journey to Big Water (2002) Charlotte's Web 2: Wilbur's Great Adventure (2003) The Land Before Time X: The Great Longneck Migration (2003) Van Helsing: The London Assignment (2004) The Chronicles of Riddick: Dark Fury (2004) The Land Before Time XI: Invasion of the Tinysauruses (2005) Balto III: Wings of Change (2005) The Adventures of Brer Rabbit (2006) Universal Animation Studios The Land Before Time XII: The Great Day of the Flyers (2007) The Land Before Time XIII: The Wisdom of Friends (2007) The Little Engine That Could (2011) Curious George 3: Back to the Jungle (2015) The Land Before Time XIV: Journey of the Brave (2016) Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas Is You (2017) Curious George: Royal Monkey (2019) Curious George: Go West, Go Wild (2020) Theatrical films Curious George (2006) The Tale of Despereaux (2008) Curious George 2: Follow That Monkey! (2009) Woody Woodpecker (2017) Short films Fractured Fairy Tales: The Phox, the Box, & the Lox (1999) TV series Back to the Future (1991–92) Fievel's American Tails (1992) Exosquad (1993–94) Problem Child (1993–94) Monster Force (1994) Beethoven (1994–95) Earthworm Jim (1995–96) The Savage Dragon (1995–96) The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper (1996–98) Wing Commander Academy (1996) Vor-Tech: Undercover Conversion Squad (1996) The New Woody Woodpecker Show (1999–2002) The Mummy (2001–03) Curious George (2006–present) The Land Before Time (2007–08) Woody Woodpecker (2018–present) Mulligan (TBA) Q-Force (TBA) The Adventure Zone (TBA) Indivisible (TBA) TV specials Opus 'n' Bill: A Wish for Wings That Work (1991) Curious George: A Very Monkey Christmas (2009) How Murray Saved Christmas (2014) Miscellaneous 63rd Academy Awards Kids WB! promos The Incredible Hulk Coaster The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man Dudley-Do Right’s RipSaw Falls See also Universal Monsters Illumination Walter Lantz Productions DreamWorks Animation DreamWorks Classics Entertainment Rights Big Idea Entertainment Harvey Films UPA Amblimation List of unproduced Universal Pictures animated projects