The Watchers Out of Time and Others Dust jacket illustration by Herb Arnold for The Watchers Out of Time and Others Author H. P. Lovecraft and August Derleth Cover artist Herb Arnold Country United States Language English Genre Science fiction, fantasy, horror Publisher Arkham House Publication date 1974 Media type Print (hardback) Pages ix, 405 ISBN 0-87054-033-5 OCLC 232354670 The Watchers Out of Time and Others is an omnibus collection of stories by American writer August Derleth, inspired in part by notes left by H. P. Lovecraft after his death and presented as a "posthumous collaboration" between the two writers (Derleth acted as Lovecraft's literary executor). It was published in an edition of 5,070 copies. Several of the stories relate to the Cthulhu Mythos and had appeared previously in the earliest collections The Lurker at the Threshold, The Survivor and Others, The Shuttered Room and Other Pieces, The Dark Brotherhood and Other Pieces and other Arkham House publications. Some controversy exists among Lovecraft's admirers as to the ethics of presenting the stories as collaborative works. Upon this volume's publication, Donald Wandrei, one of Arkham House's founders, wrote letters to reviewers complaining that the stories were essentially Derleth's own works, incorporating fragments of unpublished Lovecraft prose. Gahan Wilson agreed that the stories "should really be billed as his [Derleth's] own, and merely based on the notes and letters of Lovecraft, and on the Lovecraftian mythos as he [Derleth] saw it, and no more than that."[1] Contents 1 Contents 1.1 Notes 2 References 3 Sources Contents[edit] "Foreword", by April Derleth The Lurker at the Threshold "The Survivor" "Wentworth's Day" "The Peabody Heritage" "The Gable Window" "The Ancestor" "The Shadow Out of Space" "The Lamp of Alhazred" "The Shuttered Room" "The Fisherman of Falcon Point" "Witches' Hollow" "The Shadow in the Attic" "The Dark Brotherhood" "The Horror from the Middle Span" "Innsmouth Clay" "The Watchers Out of Time" Notes[edit] The title story at the end of the book was left incomplete and unfinished at the time of Derleth's death. References[edit] ^ "Books", F&SF, April 1976, pp.65=66 Sources[edit] Jaffery, Sheldon (1989). The Arkham House Companion. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, Inc. pp. 107–108. ISBN 1-55742-005-X. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) Chalker, Jack L.; Mark Owings (1998). The Science-Fantasy Publishers: A Bibliographic History, 1923-1998. Westminster, MD and Baltimore: Mirage Press, Ltd. pp. 50–51. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) Joshi, S.T. (1999). Sixty Years of Arkham House: A History and Bibliography. Sauk City, WI: Arkham House. pp. 131–132. ISBN 0-87054-176-5. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) Nielsen, Leon (2004). Arkham House Books: A Collector's Guide. Jefferson, NC and London: McFarland & Company, Inc. p. 118. ISBN 0-7864-1785-4. v t e Works of August Derleth Solar Pons "In Re: Sherlock Holmes" – The Adventures of Solar Pons The Memoirs of Solar Pons Three Problems for Solar Pons The Return of Solar Pons The Reminiscences of Solar Pons Mr. Fairlie's Final Journey The Casebook of Solar Pons A Praed Street Dossier The Chronicles of Solar Pons The Solar Pons Omnibus The Original Text Solar Pons Omnibus Edition The Final Adventures of Solar Pons Horror Someone in the Dark Something Near Not Long for this World The Survivor and Others The Mask of Cthulhu Lonesome Places The Trail of Cthulhu Mr. George and Other Odd Persons Colonel Markesan and Less Pleasant People The Watchers Out of Time and Others (based on fragments by H. P. Lovecraft) Dwellers in Darkness In Lovecraft's Shadow The Lurker at the Threshold (based on fragments by H. P. Lovecraft) Science fiction Harrigan's File Short fiction "The Lonesome Place" "The Adventure of the Unique Dickensians" Biography Some Notes on H. P. Lovecraft History The Milwaukee Road: Its First Hundred Years Wisconsin Murders Anthologies edited by Sleep No More Who Knocks? The Night Side The Sleeping and the Dead Strange Ports of Call The Other Side of the Moon Beyond Time and Space Far Boundaries The Outer Reaches Beachheads in Space Night's Yawning Peal: A Ghostly Company Worlds of Tomorrow Portals of Tomorrow Time to Come Dark Mind, Dark Heart New Worlds for Old The Sleeping and the Dead The Time of Infinity The Unquiet Grave When Evil Wakes From Other Worlds Over the Edge Travellers by Night Tales of the Cthulhu Mythos Dark Things New Horizons Commons