The Dinosaur Project UK theatrical release poster Directed by Sid Bennett Produced by Nick Hill Written by Sid Bennett Jay Basu Story by Sid Bennett Tom Pridham Starring Richard Dillane Peter Brooke Matthew Kane Natasha Loring Stephen Jennings Andre Weideman Abena Ayivor Sivu Nobongoza Music by Richard Blair-Oliphant Cinematography Tom Pridham Edited by Ben Lester Production companies Moonlighting Films Kent Films LoveFilm Anton Capital Entertainment Dinosaur Productions Distributed by StudioCanal Release date 10 August 2012 (2012-08-10) (United Kingdom) Running time 83 minutes Country United Kingdom Language English Budget Unknown Box office $2,412,576 (Foreign Total) The Dinosaur Project is a 2012 British science fiction thriller drama adventure film edited by Ben Lester, produced by Moonlighting Films, Kent Films, LoveFilm, Anton Capital Entertainment, Dinosaur Productions and Nick Hill, distributed by StudioCanal, music composed by Richard Blair-Oliphant, based on an original idea by Sid Bennett and Tom Pridham, written by Sid Bennett and Jay Basu, and directed by Sid Bennett. It stars Richard Dillane, Peter Brooke, Matthew Kane, Natasha Loring, Stephen Jennings, Andre Weideman with Abena Ayivor and Sivu Nobongoza. The visual effects for the film were provided by Jellyfish Pictures. The Dinosaur Project was filmed in South Africa on 8 August 2012. The film was rated PG-13 for some violence, terror and a brief suggestive image. The film was released in cinemas in the UK on 10 August 2012 by StudioCanal. The movie has received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $2,412,576 worldwide. The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on 27 February 2013 by StudioCanal. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 3.1 Filming 4 Release 4.1 Theatrical release 4.2 International releases 4.3 Home media 5 Reception 5.1 Critical reception 5.2 Box office 5.3 Rating 6 Music 7 References 8 External links Plot[edit] A group of explorers from the British Cryptozoological Society (and two television cameramen) goes on an expedition into the Congo in search of a cryptid—the so-called Mokele-mbembe—which is believed to be a Plesiosaur called Elasmosaurus. The explorers' leader, Jonathan, discovers during the helicopter flight, that his son Luke sneaked into the chopper as a stowaway. Shortly after that, a flock of large flying reptiles (pterosaurs) appears next to the helicopter, causing the helicopter to crash. Everyone but the pilot escape just before the chopper explodes. Now lost, they discover that the satellite phone they had with them was broken during the crash, Amara, their local guide, suggests to go to the village they saw while in the helicopter. Upon arriving, the group discovers the village destroyed and the villagers, dead. Jonathan chooses a hut to stay in for the night while his son installs a night vision camera outside the hut. At night, everyone is woken up by a swarm of bat-like reptiles outside. They try to flee from the village because it's infested with the animals. Liz, their medic, is attacked and killed while the rest escape in a pair of wooden boats. Some time later, they arrive on a small island where they encounter a group of dinosaurs with one in particular that seems to like Luke. Luke calls it "Crypto" and decides to attach one of his cameras onto Crypto's neck to see where he would go to. The broadcast cuts out as the dinosaurs swim into a cave. When the broadcast returns, Luke and Charlie see that the dinosaurs went straight to some kind of underground gateway, where the camera is dropped. When they try to steer through a whitewater, Luke's and Charlie's boat gets separated. The rest of the explorers rejoin them in a river canyon, where they encounter a magnificent Elasmosaurus. A suddenly emerging Pliosaur attacks the group. Believing that the rest of the group died, Charlie and Luke continue to search for the place where the dinosaurs came from. When Charlie learns that Luke has fixed the satellite phone, he pushes Luke down into the gateway to kill him. On the other side of the underground passageway, Luke speaks into the camera, trying to reach the other survivors via the monitor to no avail. Meanwhile, Amara leaves the other survivors, taking one of the boats. Jonathan and Pete continue the search for Luke and Charlie. In the meantime, Luke meets Crypto and follows him deeper into the jungle, where he is attacked by the bat-like creatures. He is rescued by Pete, who chases the creatures into the jungle, when he is suddenly encircled by them and presumably killed. Charlie is seen, speaking to the camera, when he is interrupted and forced to hide by Jonathan and Luke, continuing through the jungle. They follow a steep cliffway, when they are hit by a rockfall caused by Charlie. Luke tries to help his father who is holding onto a rock, but his father ends up falling down the cliff. Luke hides in the dense jungle, evading Charlie who is chasing him, when he meets Crypto who leads him to the place where he dropped his camera earlier, when suddenly Charlie emerges in front of him, intending to kill him. Crypto spits fluid into Luke's face, when two adult dinosaurs (presumably Crypto's parents) appear. Sniffing at Luke and smelling the fluid, they leave him alone, most likely because he smells like one of their offspring, and kill Charlie. Luke proceeds into the jungle and stops at a high cliff, filming himself and the little dinosaur, saying that the satellite phone has been crushed again and that he has to destroy the cameras to use the parts, he waves the camera over the view from the cliff, showing a big valley full of dinosaurs. In the next scene he is seen throwing the backpack down a waterfall into a river. Luke's fate is unknown. The floating backpack is found by men in a boat, who find video hard drives and tapes labelled "the Dinosaur Project" inside. In a blurry video, Luke says "I think it works". Cast[edit] Richard Dillane ... Jonathan Marchant Peter Brooke ... Charlie Rutherford Matthew Kane ... Luke Marchant Natasha Loring ... Liz Draper Stephen Jennings ... Dave Moore Andre Weideman ... Pete Van Aarde Abena Ayivor ... Amara Sivu Nobogonza ...Etienne Production[edit] Filming[edit] The Dinosaur Project was filmed at South Africa on 8 August 2012. Release[edit] Theatrical release[edit] The film was released in cinemas in the UK on 10 August 2012.[1] It was scheduled for release in cinemas worldwide through 2012–13, starting with South-East Asia on 23 August 2012.[2] International releases[edit] UK – 10 August 2012 Ireland – 10 August 2012 Brazil – 7 September 2012 Estonia – 5 October 2012 Singapore – 18 October 2012 Greece – 1 November 2012 Mexico – 2 November 2012 France – 9 November 2012 Russia – 7 February 2013 Sweden – 27 February 2013 Philippines – 13 March 2013 Japan – 16 March 2013 Australia – 20 March 2013 Italy – 18 July 2013 Taiwan – 16 August 2013 Venezuela – 16 August 2013 Argentina – 18 September 2013 Home media[edit] The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on 27 February 2013 by StudioCanal. Reception[edit] Critical reception[edit] Richard Dillane and Matthew Kane were praised by critics for their performances. The movie has received mixed reviews from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a 29% rotten rating based on 14 critic reviews, with an average rating of 4.33/10.[3] The Financial Times awarded the film 4 out of 5 stars (80%) and called it "rip-roaring fun...Feature debutant Sid Bennett's motion-capture movie also does emotion capture. You will jump, gasp, grimace, just like the characters. The creatures are often very creepy. The Cloverfield-style dependency on "found footage" means everyone on screen must have a camera, but even that is carried off with dash and nonchalance."[4] Digital Spy awarded the movie 3 stars out of 5 (60%) and labelled it "Decent found-footage caper...The Dinosaur Project is good and undemanding fun. There are enough sharp claws to overcome the flaws and ensure this is never a dino-bore...[5] The Guardian wrote 'The CGI monsters are surprisingly convincing and children will identify with the intrepid 15-year-old lad who stows away on his dad's helicopter and turns up trumps by using his computer wizardry."[6] Katie Fraser of Screenjabber.com awarded the film 3½ stars out of 5, writing "If you don't mind the shakiness of the found-footage genre (beware – a headache is likely), definitely go see this film if not for the computer-generated dinosaurs. It's no Jurassic Park, but they did create some pretty cool-looking prehistoric monsters."[7] Total Film awarded it three stars out of five and said "Though it's desperate to be the next Jurassic Park, there's little Spielbergian bite to this low-budget Brit flick. Instead we get wobbly cameras and equally wobbly acting from a cast of unknowns as a group of explorers hunt dinos in the Congo....Its money shots generally impress, and the breakneck pace bounds over a multitude of sins – including Park's deadly dilophosaurus getting a makeover as a cute little critter that'll have the nippers cooing."[8] IGN awarded the film 4 out of ten and said "Writer-director Sid Bennett does manage to eek moments of tension out of the premise, and the vast African vistas glimpsed throughout are a joy to behold...a found footage flick that disappoints at just about every turn, and makes you wish the tapes had remained lost."[9] The Independent awarded the film two stars out of five and said "The script stinks like dino-poo... but for all the silliness you may find yourself entertained."[10] SFX awarded the film two and a half out of five stars and said "...has just enough charm to be worth a look – particularly if you have kids who like watching giant reptiles eating people...A few unexpected twists that mark it out as interesting (the running order of the deaths isn't quite what you'd expect, for example) and the dinos are a cut above most films of this nature – particularly one little cutie who's basically dino-Lassie. Admirably, the vast majority of the action is shot on location, with some white-water rafting to spice up the scenes with no reptiles in. Despite the plus points, though, it's still a cheesy, childish adventure which tries very hard not to be the TV movie it actually is."[11] Empire Magazine awarded the film two stars out of five and said that the film was "More Terra Nova meets Sanctum 3D than Jurassic Park meets Cloverfield."[12] On its international cinema release, debuting in South East Asia, the movie was a commercial hit, entering the Malaysian box office charts in second position behind The Expendables 2.[13] On its release in Thailand, The Dinosaur Project attained third spot.[14] Box office[edit] The Dinosaur Project grossed $2,412,576 from cinemas worldwide.[15] DVD and TV sales totals to date have not been collated. Rating[edit] The Dinosaur Project was rated PG-13 for some violence, terror and a brief suggestive image. Music[edit] Richard Blair-Oliphant scored the music for the film and on its soundtrack. References[edit] ^ Semlyen, Phil de. "Exclusive: The Dinosaur Project Poster". Empire. ^ "The Dinosaur Project (2012)". www.boxofficemojo.com. ^ "The Dinosaur Project (2012)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 10 June 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Subscribe to read". Financial Times. Cite uses generic title (help) ^ "'The Dinosaur Project' review". 7 August 2012. ^ French, Philip (11 August 2012). "The Dinosaur Project – review". the Guardian. ^ "The Dinosaur Project review". 9 August 2012. ^ "Total Film - GamesRadar+". ^ The Dinosaur Project Review – IGN ^ "The Dinosaur Project (12A)". 10 August 2012. ^ "SFX - GamesRadar+". ^ Crook, Simon. "The Dinosaur Project". Empire. ^ "Malaysia Box Office, August 23–26, 2012". www.boxofficemojo.com. ^ "Thailand Box Office, August 23–26, 2012". www.boxofficemojo.com. ^ "The Dinosaur Project (2012)". www.boxofficemojo.com. External links[edit] API at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes