"Sea bat" redirects here. For the fish, see Ogcocephalidae. For the helicopter, see HSS-1 Seabat. 1930 film The Sea Bat Film poster Directed by Lionel Barrymore Wesley Ruggles Produced by Wesley Ruggles Written by Bess Meredyth John Howard Lawson Story by Dorothy Yost Starring Charles Bickford Raquel Torres Nils Asther George F. Marion Cinematography Ira Morgan Edited by Harry Reynolds Jerome Thoms Distributed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Release date July 5, 1930 (1930-07-05) Running time 73 minutes Country United States Language English Still with Charles Bickford and Raquel Torres. The Sea Bat is a 1930 American pre-Code melodrama thriller film directed by Lionel Barrymore and Wesley Ruggles, starring Raquel Torres, Charles Bickford and featuring Boris Karloff.[1] Part of the film was filmed on location in Mazatlán, Mexico. The film was originally intended as a vehicle for Lon Chaney, but he was too ill from throat cancer to undertake the project and died on August 26, 1930. The film concerns a community of sponge divers who are harassed by a large and hostile manta ray.[1] Contents 1 Cast 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Cast[edit] Raquel Torres as Nina Charles Bickford as Reverend Sims Nils Asther as Carl George F. Marion as Antone John Miljan as Juan Boris Karloff as Corsican Gibson Gowland as Limey Edmund Breese as Maddocks Mathilde Comont as Mimba Mack Swain as Dutchy James Dime as the sailor See also[edit] Boris Karloff filmography Lionel Barrymore filmography List of monster movies References[edit] ^ a b Sala, Ángel (October 2005). "Apéndices". Tiburón ¡Vas a necesitar un barco más grande! El filme que cambió Hollywood (1st ed.). Festival Internacional de Cinema de Catalunya. p. 114. ISBN 84-96129-72-1. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Sea Bat (1930 film). Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) The Sea Bat at IMDb The Sea Bat at the TCM Movie Database The Sea Bat at AllMovie This article about a 1930s thriller film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e