The Ruins of Undermountain Author Ed Greenwood Genre Role-playing game Publisher TSR Publication date 1991 Media type Boxed set Pages 128 ISBN 9781560760610 The Ruins of Undermountain is a boxed set for the Forgotten Realms campaign setting for the second edition of the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game. The set was written by Ed Greenwood and published by TSR.[1] It featured box cover art by Brom. and was published in 1991. Contents 1 Contents 2 Publication history 3 Reception 4 References 5 Further reading Contents[edit] The set consists of a 128-page booklet titled Campaign Guide to Undermountain, a 32-page booklet titled Undermountain Adventures, 8 double-sided loose-leaf monster statistics pages, 8 double-sided heavy-stock "adventure aid" cards, and 4 color fold-out poster maps. It uses the same Brom cover art as the box cover itself, with interior art by Karl Waller and cartography by Diesel, Steve Beck, and David Sutherland. This book contains detailed information on the dungeon Undermountain, including non-player characters (such as Halaster Blackcloak) that can be encountered within the dungeons or in the city above it, as well as spells and magic items that can be found. The book also keys the maps to what can be found in various locations and contains expansion guidelines for creating future adventures and deeper parts of the dungeon. The set provides the "first three levels of the original dungeon of Undermountain, beneath the city of Waterdeep".[1] The entire Ruins of Undermountain is purported to be the "deepest dungeon of them all" with nine levels and fourteen sub-levels.[1] It contains two books describing the Undermountain complex.[1] The larger is the Campaign Guide to Undermountain.[1] It includes Undermountain history and other related information.[1] The second book contains adventures, monster descriptions, maps, and other products.[1] There are over 350 rooms per level, but not all are detailed: "even with approximately 25 areas of interest on the first level, 26 on the second level and none on the third, a remarkably high percentage of rooms are left completely undetailed".[1] The Undermountain Adventures booklet describes seven adventures designed to be used within Undermountain, but can be used in any dungeon. The booklet also contains a "Monster Guide" of statblocks and descriptions of monsters not otherwise featured in the boxed set, and a description of the city of Skullport. The booklet has a detached cover, with cover art by Jeff Easley, and maps of some of the encounters on the inside, with cartography by David Sutherland. The monster sheets detail 11 monsters in the Monstrous Compendium style: elder orb beholder, death kiss beholder-kin, darktentacles, ibrandlin, scaladar, sharn, slithermorph, flying snakes (flying fang and deathfang), steel shadow, and watchghost. The cards are adventure aids for the Dungeon Master, detailing traps, encounters, treasure, and sundries that can be placed in the midst of adventures. The maps detail the first three levels of the ruins of Undermountain; level three takes up two of the maps. Publication history[edit] Shannon Appelcline commented that "The Ruins of Undermountain (1991), located under the City of Waterdeep, was one of the first real "mega" dungeons — though it trailed Greyhawk's own offering, Greyhawk Ruins, by a year."[2]:93 Reception[edit] The adventure was ranked the 17th greatest adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine for the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game in 2004.[3] Keith Eisenbeis reviewed the module in the February 1992 issue of White Wolf Magazine.[1] He noted the appearance of the product materials, especially the maps, as exceptional, but the remainder of lesser quality.[1] Overall, he rated the product a 3 out of a possible 5.[1] References[edit] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Eisenbeis, Keith H. (February 1992). "Capsule Reviews: The Ruins of Undermountain". White Wolf Magazine. No. 30. White Wolf Publishing. p. 54. ^ Shannon Appelcline (2014). Designers & Dragons: The '70s. Evil Hat Productions. ISBN 978-1-61317-075-5. ^ Mona, Erik; Jacobs, James; Dungeon Design Panel (November 2004). "The 30 Greatest D&D Adventures of All Time". Dungeon. Paizo Publishing (116): 68–81. Greenwood, Ed. Ruins of Undermountain (TSR, 1991) Further reading[edit] "Seeing the Sights in Skullport", Dragon #172 "Understanding Undermountain--The King of All Dungeons", Dragon #167 v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond This Dungeons & Dragons article related to the Forgotten Realms is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e