26th president of the United States This article is about the 26th president of the United States. For other people with the same name, see API (disambiguation). This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably. Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (March 2021) API Roosevelt, c. 1904 26th President of the United States In office September 14, 1901 – March 4, 1909 Vice President None (1901–1905)[a] Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) Preceded by William McKinley Succeeded by William Howard Taft 25th Vice President of the United States In office March 4, 1901 – September 14, 1901 President William McKinley Preceded by Garret Hobart Succeeded by Charles W. Fairbanks 33rd Governor of New York In office January 1, 1899 – December 31, 1900 Lieutenant Timothy L. Woodruff Preceded by Frank S. Black Succeeded by Benjamin Barker Odell Jr. Assistant Secretary of the Navy In office April 19, 1897 – May 10, 1898 President William McKinley Preceded by William McAdoo Succeeded by Charles Herbert Allen President of the New York City Board of Police Commissioners In office May 6, 1895 – April 19, 1897 Preceded by James J. Martin Succeeded by Frank Moss Minority Leader of the New York State Assembly In office January 1, 1883 – December 31, 1883 Preceded by Thomas G. Alvord Succeeded by Frank Rice Member of the New York State Assembly from the 21st district In office January 1, 1882 – December 31, 1884 Preceded by William J. Trimble Succeeded by Henry A. Barnum Personal details Born Theodore Roosevelt Jr. (1858-10-27)October 27, 1858 New York City, U.S. Died January 6, 1919(1919-01-06) (aged 60) Oyster Bay, New York, U.S. Resting place Youngs Memorial Cemetery, Oyster Bay, New York, U.S. Political party Republican (1880–1911, 1916–1919) Other political affiliations Progressive "Bull Moose" (1912–1916) Spouse(s) Alice Lee ​ ​(m. 1880; died 1884)​ Edith Carow ​(m. 1886)​ Children Alice Theodore III Kermit Ethel Archibald Quentin Parents Theodore Roosevelt Sr. Martha Stewart Bulloch Relatives Roosevelt family Education Harvard University (AB) Columbia Law School Profession Author conservationist explorer historian naturalist police commissioner politician soldier sportsman Civilian awards Nobel Peace Prize (1906) Signature Military service Branch/service United States Army Years of service 1882–1886 (New York National Guard), 1898 Rank Colonel Commands 1st United States Volunteer Cavalry Battles/wars Spanish–American War Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Military awards Medal of Honor (posthumously, 2001) Coat of arms of Theodore Roosevelt This article is part of a series aboutTheodore Roosevelt Political positions Electoral history Early life Family The Naval War of 1812 Rough Riders Battle of San Juan Hill 1886 New York City mayoral election Governor of New York Governorship "The Strenuous Life" Vice President of the United States 1900 McKinley-Roosevelt campaign "Speak softly and carry a big stick" President of the United States Presidency Timeline First term McKinley assassination 1st inauguration Square Deal West Wing Coal strike Booker T. Washington dinner Venezuela crisis Roosevelt Corollary Second term 1904 campaign Election 2nd inauguration Conservation Antiquities Act Forest Service Pure Food and Drug Act FDA Swift & Co. v. United States Meat Inspection Act Treaty of Portsmouth Nobel Prize FBI Panama Canal Great White Fleet 1912 election Republican Convention Progressive Party Convention New Nationalism Assassination attempt Post Presidency African Expedition River of Doubt Expedition "Citizenship in a Republic" WWI volunteers Legacy Memorials v t e Theodore Roosevelt Jr. (/ˈroʊzəvɛlt/ ROH-zə-velt;[b] October 27, 1858 – January 6, 1919), often referred to as Teddy or his initials T. R., was an American statesman, conservationist, naturalist, historian, and writer, who served as the 26th president of the United States from 1901 to 1909. He previously served as 33rd governor of New York from 1899 to 1900 and the 25th vice president of the United States from March to September 1901. Roosevelt emerged as a leader of the Republican Party and became a driving force for anti-trust and Progressive policies. Roosevelt was a sickly child with debilitating asthma but partly overcame his health problems by embracing a strenuous lifestyle. He integrated his exuberant personality, a vast range of interests and achievements into a "cowboy" persona defined by robust masculinity. He was home-schooled and began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard. His book The Naval War of 1812 (1882) established his reputation as a learned historian and popular writer. Upon entering politics, he became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in New York's state legislature. His wife and mother both died in rapid succession, and he began to frequent a cattle ranch in the Dakotas. He served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy under President William McKinley but resigned to lead the Rough Riders during the Spanish–American War. Returning a war hero, he was elected governor of New York in 1898.[2] After Vice President Garret Hobart died in 1899, the New York state party leadership convinced McKinley to accept Roosevelt as his running mate in the 1900 election. Roosevelt campaigned vigorously, and the McKinley–Roosevelt ticket won a landslide victory based on a platform of peace, prosperity, and conservation. Roosevelt took office as vice president in 1901 and assumed the presidency at age 42 after McKinley was assassinated the following September.[3] He remains the youngest person to become President of the United States. Roosevelt was a leader of the progressive movement and championed his "Square Deal" domestic policies, promising the average citizen fairness, breaking of trusts, regulation of railroads, and pure food and drugs. He prioritized conservation and established national parks, forests, and monuments intended to preserve the nation's natural resources. In foreign policy, he focused on Central America where he began construction of the Panama Canal. He expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project American naval power. His successful efforts to broker the end of the Russo-Japanese War won him the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize. Roosevelt was elected to a full term in 1904 and continued to promote progressive policies. He groomed his close friend William Howard Taft to succeed him in the 1908 presidential election. Roosevelt grew frustrated with Taft's brand of conservatism and belatedly tried to win the 1912 Republican nomination for president. He failed, walked out, and founded the Progressive Party. He ran in the 1912 presidential election and the split allowed the Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson to win the election. Following the defeat, Roosevelt led a two-year expedition to the Amazon basin where he nearly died of tropical disease. During World War I, he criticized Wilson for keeping the country out of the war; his offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected. He considered running for president again in 1920, but his health continued to deteriorate. He died in 1919. He is generally ranked in polls of historians and political scientists as one of the five best presidents.[citation needed] Contents 1 Early life and family 1.1 Education 1.2 Naval history and strategy 1.3 First marriage and widowerhood 2 Early political career 2.1 State Assemblyman 2.2 Presidential election of 1884 3 Cowboy in Dakota 4 Second marriage 5 Reentering public life 5.1 Civil Service Commission 5.2 New York City Police Commissioner 6 Emergence as a national figure 6.1 Assistant Secretary of the Navy 6.2 War in Cuba 6.3 Governor of New York 6.4 Vice President 7 Presidency (1901–1909) 7.1 Domestic policies 7.1.1 Trust busting and regulation 7.1.2 Coal strike 7.1.3 Prosecuted misconduct 7.1.4 Railroads 7.1.5 Pure food and drugs 7.1.6 Conservation 7.2 Foreign policy 7.2.1 Japan 7.2.2 Europe 7.2.3 Latin America and Panama Canal 7.3 Media 7.4 Election of 1904 7.5 Second term 8 Post-presidency (1909–1914) 8.1 Election of 1908 8.2 Africa and Europe (1909–1910) 8.3 Republican Party schism 8.3.1 Dispute over arbitration treaties 8.4 Election of 1912 8.4.1 Republican primaries and convention 8.4.2 The Progressive ("Bull Moose") Party 8.4.3 Assassination attempt 8.4.4 Farewell manifesto 8.4.5 Election results 8.5 1913–1914 South American expedition 9 Final years (1914–1918) 9.1 League of Nations 9.2 World War I 10 Death 11 Writer 12 Character and beliefs 12.1 Strenuous life 12.2 Warrior 12.3 Religion 13 Political positions 14 Legacy 14.1 Persona and masculinity 14.2 Memorials and cultural depictions 15 Audiovisual media 16 See also 17 Notes 18 References 19 Bibliography 19.1 Full biographies 19.2 Personality and activities 19.3 Domestic policies 19.4 Politics 19.5 Foreign and military policies 19.6 Historiography 19.7 Primary sources 20 External links 20.1 Official 20.2 Organizations 20.3 Libraries and collections 20.4 Media 20.5 Other Early life and family[edit] Theodore Roosevelt at age 11 The Roosevelt coat of arms as displayed on Theodore Roosevelt's bookplate, featuring three roses in a meadow (in reference to the family name, which means "rose field" in Dutch).[4] Theodore Roosevelt Jr. was born on October 27, 1858, at 28 East 20th Street in Manhattan, New York City.[5] He was the second of four children born to socialite Martha Stewart "Mittie" Bulloch and businessman and philanthropist Theodore Roosevelt Sr. He had an older sister (Anna, nicknamed "Bamie"), a younger brother (Elliott) and a younger sister (Corinne).[6] Elliott was later the father of First Lady Anna Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of Theodore's distant cousin, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. His paternal grandfather was of Dutch descent;[7] his other ancestry included primarily Scottish and Scots-Irish, English[8] and smaller amounts of German, Welsh and French.[9] Theodore Sr. was the fifth son of businessman Cornelius Van Schaack "C.V.S." Roosevelt and Margaret Barnhill as well as a brother of Robert Roosevelt and James A. Roosevelt. Theodore's fourth cousin, James Roosevelt I, who was also a businessman, was the father of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Mittie was the younger daughter of Major James Stephens Bulloch and Martha P. "Patsy" Stewart.[10] Through the Van Schaacks, Roosevelt was a descendant of the Schuyler family.[11] Roosevelt's youth was largely shaped by his poor health and debilitating asthma. He repeatedly experienced sudden nighttime asthma attacks that caused the experience of being smothered to death, which terrified both Theodore and his parents. Doctors had no cure.[12] Nevertheless, he was energetic and mischievously inquisitive.[13] His lifelong interest in zoology began at age seven when he saw a dead seal at a local market; after obtaining the seal's head, Roosevelt and two cousins formed what they called the "Roosevelt Museum of Natural History". Having learned the rudiments of taxidermy, he filled his makeshift museum with animals that he killed or caught; he then studied the animals and prepared them for exhibition. At age nine, he recorded his observation of insects in a paper entitled "The Natural History of Insects".[14] Roosevelt's father significantly influenced him. His father was a prominent leader in New York's cultural affairs; he helped to found the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and had been especially active in mobilizing support for the Union during the Civil War, even though his in-laws included Confederate leaders. Roosevelt said, "My father, Theodore Roosevelt, was the best man I ever knew. He combined strength and courage with gentleness, tenderness, and great unselfishness. He would not tolerate in us children selfishness or cruelty, idleness, cowardice, or untruthfulness." Family trips abroad, including tours of Europe in 1869 and 1870, and Egypt in 1872, shaped his cosmopolitan perspective.[15] Hiking with his family in the Alps in 1869, Roosevelt found that he could keep pace with his father. He had discovered the significant benefits of physical exertion to minimize his asthma and bolster his spirits.[16] Roosevelt began a heavy regime of exercise. After being manhandled by two older boys on a camping trip, he found a boxing coach to teach him to fight and strengthen his body.[17][18] 6-year-old Theodore and 5-year-old Elliott watch Lincoln's funeral procession from the second-floor window of their grandfather's mansion (at top left, facing the camera), Manhattan, April 25, 1865 A 6-year-old Roosevelt witnessed the funeral procession of Abraham Lincoln from his grandfather's mansion in Union Square, New York City where he was photographed in the window along with his brother Elliott, as confirmed by wife Edith who was also present.[19] Education[edit] Roosevelt's taxidermy kit[20] Roosevelt was homeschooled, mostly by tutors and his parents.[21] Biographer H. W. Brands argued that "The most obvious drawback to his home schooling was uneven coverage of the various areas of human knowledge."[22] He was solid in geography and bright in history, biology, French, and German; however, he struggled in mathematics and the classical languages.[citation needed] When he entered Harvard College on September 27, 1876, his father advised: "Take care of your morals first, your health next, and finally your studies."[23] His father's sudden death on February 9, 1878, devastated Roosevelt, but he eventually recovered and doubled his activities.[24] He did well in science, philosophy, and rhetoric courses but continued to struggle in Latin and Greek. He studied biology intently and was already an accomplished naturalist and a published ornithologist. He read prodigiously with an almost photographic memory.[25] While at Harvard, Roosevelt participated in rowing and boxing; he was once runner-up in a Harvard boxing tournament.[26] Roosevelt was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi literary society (later the Fly Club), the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and the prestigious Porcellian Club; he was also an editor of The Harvard Advocate. In 1880, Roosevelt graduated Phi Beta Kappa (22nd of 177) from Harvard with an A.B. magna cum laude. Biographer Henry Pringle states: Roosevelt, attempting to analyze his college career and weigh the benefits he had received, felt that he had obtained little from Harvard. He had been depressed by the formalistic treatment of many subjects, by the rigidity, the attention to minutiae that were important in themselves, but which somehow were never linked up with the whole.[27] Roosevelt's birthplace at 28 East 20th Street in Manhattan, New York City After his father's death, Roosevelt had inherited $65,000 (equivalent to $1,722,052 in 2019), enough to live off comfortably for the rest of his life.[28] Roosevelt gave up his earlier plan of studying natural science and instead decided to attend Columbia Law School, moving back into his family's home in New York City. Roosevelt was an able law student, but he often found law to be irrational. He spent much of his time writing a book on the War of 1812.[29] Determined to enter politics, Roosevelt began attending meetings at Morton Hall, the 59th Street headquarters of New York's 21st District Republican Association. Though Roosevelt's father had been a prominent member of the Republican Party, the younger Roosevelt made an unorthodox career choice for someone of his class, as most of Roosevelt's peers refrained from becoming too closely involved in politics. Roosevelt found allies in the local Republican Party, and he defeated an incumbent Republican state assemblyman closely tied to the political machine of Senator Roscoe Conkling. After his election victory, Roosevelt decided to drop out of law school, later saying, "I intended to be one of the governing class."[29] Naval history and strategy[edit] While at Harvard, Roosevelt began a systematic study of the role played by the young United States Navy in the War of 1812.[30][31] Assisted by two uncles, he scrutinized original source materials and official U.S. Navy records, ultimately publishing The Naval War of 1812 in 1882. The book contained drawings of individual and combined ship maneuvers, charts depicting the differences in iron throw weights of cannon shot between rival forces, and analyses of the differences and similarities between British and American leadership down to the ship-to-ship level. Upon release, The Naval War of 1812 was praised for its scholarship and style, and it remains a standard study of the war.[32] With the publication of The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660–1783 in 1890, Navy Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan was immediately hailed as the world's outstanding naval theorist by the leaders of Europe. Roosevelt paid very close attention to Mahan's emphasis that only a nation with the world's most powerful fleet could dominate the world's oceans, exert its diplomacy to the fullest, and defend its own borders.[33][34] He incorporated Mahan's ideas into his views on naval strategy for the remainder of his career.[35][36] First marriage and widowerhood[edit] In 1880, Roosevelt married socialite Alice Hathaway Lee.[37][38] Their daughter, Alice Lee Roosevelt, was born on February 12, 1884. Two days after giving birth, Roosevelt's wife died due to an undiagnosed case of kidney failure, which had been masked by the pregnancy. In his diary, Roosevelt wrote a large 'X' on the page and then, "The light has gone out of my life." His mother, Mittie, had died of typhoid fever eleven hours earlier at 3:00 a.m., in the same house on 57th Street in Manhattan. Distraught, Roosevelt left baby Alice in the care of his sister Bamie in New York City while he grieved. He assumed custody of his daughter when she was three.[39][page needed] After the death of his wife and mother, Roosevelt focused on his work, specifically by re-energizing a legislative investigation into corruption of the New York City government, which arose from a concurrent bill proposing that power be centralized in the mayor's office.[40] For the rest of his life, he rarely spoke about his wife Alice and did not write about her in his autobiography. While working with Joseph Bucklin Bishop on a biography that included a collection of his letters, Roosevelt did not mention his marriage to Alice nor his second marriage to Edith Kermit Carow.[41] Early political career[edit] State Assemblyman[edit] Roosevelt as New York State Assemblyman, 1883 Roosevelt was a member of the New York State Assembly (New York Co., 21st D.) in 1882, 1883 and 1884.[42] He immediately began making his mark, specifically in corporate corruption issues.[42] He blocked a corrupt effort by financier Jay Gould to lower his taxes. Roosevelt exposed suspected collusion in the matter by Judge Theodore Westbrook, and argued for and received approval for an investigation to proceed, aiming for the impeachment of the judge. The investigation committee rejected impeachment, but Roosevelt had exposed the potential corruption in Albany, and thus assumed a high and positive political profile in multiple New York publications.[43] Roosevelt's anti-corruption efforts helped him win re-election in 1882 by a margin greater than two-to-one, an achievement made even more impressive by the fact that Democratic gubernatorial candidate Grover Cleveland won Roosevelt's district.[44] With Conkling's Stalwart faction of the Republican Party in disarray following the assassination of President James Garfield, Roosevelt won election as the Republican party leader in the state assembly. He allied with Governor Cleveland to win passage of a civil service reform bill.[45] Roosevelt won re-election a second time, and sought the office of Speaker of the New York State Assembly, but was defeated by Titus Sheard in a 41 to 29 vote of the GOP caucus.[46][47] In his final term, Roosevelt served as Chairman of the Committee on Affairs of Cities; he wrote more bills than any other legislator.[48] Presidential election of 1884[edit] See also: 1884 United States presidential election With numerous presidential hopefuls to choose from, Roosevelt supported Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont, a colorless reformer. The state GOP preferred the incumbent president, New York City's Chester Arthur, who was known for passing the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act. Arthur, at the time, was suffering from Bright's disease, unknown to the public, and out of duty he did not contest his own nomination. Roosevelt fought hard and succeeded in influencing the Manhattan delegates at the state convention in Utica. He then took control of the state convention, bargaining through the night and outmaneuvering the supporters of Arthur and James G. Blaine; he gained a national reputation as a key person in New York State.[49] Roosevelt attended the 1884 GOP National Convention in Chicago and gave a speech convincing delegates to nominate African American John R. Lynch, an Edmunds supporter, to be temporary chair. Roosevelt fought alongside the Mugwump reformers; however, Blaine, having gained support from Arthur's and Edmunds's delegates, won the nomination by 541 votes on the fourth ballot. In a crucial moment of his budding political career, Roosevelt resisted the demand of the Mugwumps that he bolt from Blaine. He bragged about his one small success: "We achieved a victory in getting up a combination to beat the Blaine nominee for temporary chairman... To do this needed a mixture of skill, boldness and energy... to get the different factions to come in... to defeat the common foe."[50] He was also impressed by an invitation to speak before an audience of ten thousand, the largest crowd he had addressed up to that date. Having gotten a taste of national politics, Roosevelt felt less aspiration for advocacy on the state level; he then retired to his new "Chimney Butte Ranch" on the Little Missouri River.[51] Roosevelt refused to join other Mugwumps in supporting Grover Cleveland, the governor of New York and the Democratic nominee in the general election. He debated the pros and cons of staying loyal with his political friend, Henry Cabot Lodge. After Blaine won the nomination, Roosevelt had carelessly said that he would give "hearty support to any decent Democrat". He distanced himself from the promise, saying that it had not been meant "for publication".[52] When a reporter asked if he would support Blaine, Roosevelt replied, "That question I decline to answer. It is a subject I do not care to talk about."[53] In the end, he realized that he had to support Blaine to maintain his role in the GOP, and he did so in a press release on July 19.[54] Having lost the support of many reformers, Roosevelt decided to retire from politics and move to North Dakota.[55] Cowboy in Dakota[edit] Theodore Roosevelt as Badlands hunter in 1885. New York studio photo. Roosevelt first visited the Dakota Territory in 1883 to hunt bison.[56] Exhilarated by the cowboy life, and with the cattle business booming in the territory, Roosevelt invested $14,000 in hopes of becoming a prosperous cattle rancher. For the next several years, he shuttled between his home in New York and his ranch in Dakota.[57] Following the 1884 presidential election, Roosevelt built a ranch named Elkhorn, which was 35 mi (56 km) north of the boomtown of Medora, North Dakota. Roosevelt learned to ride western style, rope, and hunt on the banks of the Little Missouri. Though he earned the respect of the authentic cowboys, they were not overly impressed.[58] However, he identified with the herdsman of history, a man he said possesses "few of the emasculated, milk-and-water moralities admired by the pseudo-philanthropists; but he does possess, to a very high degree, the stern, manly qualities that are invaluable to a nation".[59][60] He reoriented, and began writing about frontier life for national magazines; he also published three books – Hunting Trips of a Ranchman, Ranch Life and the Hunting-Trail, and The Wilderness Hunter.[61] Roosevelt brought his desire to address the common interests of citizens to the West. He successfully led efforts to organize ranchers to address problems of overgrazing and other shared concerns; his work resulted in the formation of the Little Missouri Stockmen's Association. He felt compelled to promote conservation and was able to form the Boone and Crockett Club, whose primary goal was the conservation of large game animals and their habitats.[62] After the uniquely severe US winter of 1886–87 wiped out his herd of cattle and those of his competitors, and with it over half of his $80,000 investment, Roosevelt returned to the East.[63][64] Though his finances suffered from the experience, Roosevelt's time in the West made it impossible to peg him as an ineffectual intellectual, a characterization that could have hampered his political career.[65] Second marriage[edit] On December 2, 1886, Roosevelt married his childhood and family friend, Edith Kermit Carow.[66] Roosevelt was deeply troubled that his second marriage had taken place so soon after the death of his first wife, and he faced resistance from his sisters.[67] Nonetheless, the couple married at St George's, Hanover Square in London, England.[68] The couple had five children: Theodore "Ted" III in 1887, Kermit in 1889, Ethel in 1891, Archibald in 1894, and Quentin in 1897. The couple also raised Roosevelt's daughter from his first marriage, Alice, who often clashed with her stepmother.[69] Reentering public life[edit] Upon Roosevelt's return to New York in 1886, Republican leaders quickly approached him about running for mayor of New York City in the city's mayoral election. Roosevelt accepted the nomination despite having little hope of winning the race against United Labor Party candidate Henry George and Democratic candidate Abram Hewitt.[70] Roosevelt campaigned hard for the position, but Hewitt won with 41% (90,552 votes), taking the votes of many Republicans who feared George's radical policies.[71][70] George was held to 31% (68,110 votes), and Roosevelt took third place with 27% (60,435 votes).[71] Fearing that his political career might never recover, Roosevelt turned his attention to writing The Winning of the West, a historical work tracking the westward movement of Americans; the book was a great success for Roosevelt, earning favorable reviews and selling numerous copies.[72] Civil Service Commission[edit] After Benjamin Harrison unexpectedly defeated Blaine for the presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican National Convention, Roosevelt gave stump speeches in the Midwest in support of Harrison.[73] On the insistence of Henry Cabot Lodge, President Harrison appointed Roosevelt to the United States Civil Service Commission, where he served until 1895.[74] While many of his predecessors had approached the office as a sinecure,[75] Roosevelt vigorously fought the spoilsmen and demanded enforcement of civil service laws.[76] The New York Sun then described Roosevelt as "irrepressible, belligerent, and enthusiastic".[77] Roosevelt frequently clashed with Postmaster General John Wanamaker, who handed out numerous patronage positions to Harrison supporters, and Roosevelt's attempt to force out several postal workers damaged Harrison politically.[78] Despite Roosevelt's support for Harrison's reelection bid in the presidential election of 1892, the eventual winner, Grover Cleveland, reappointed him to the same post.[79] Roosevelt's close friend and biographer, Joseph Bucklin Bishop, described his assault on the spoils system: The very citadel of spoils politics, the hitherto impregnable fortress that had existed unshaken since it was erected on the foundation laid by Andrew Jackson, was tottering to its fall under the assaults of this audacious and irrepressible young man... Whatever may have been the feelings of the (fellow Republican party) President (Harrison)—and there is little doubt that he had no idea when he appointed Roosevelt that he would prove to be so veritable a bull in a china shop—he refused to remove him and stood by him firmly till the end of his term.[77] New York City Police Commissioner[edit] In 1894, a group of reform Republicans approached Roosevelt about running for Mayor of New York again; he declined, mostly due to his wife's resistance to being removed from the Washington social set. Soon after he declined, he realized that he had missed an opportunity to reinvigorate a dormant political career. He retreated to the Dakotas for a time; his wife Edith regretted her role in the decision and vowed that there would be no repeat of it.[80] NYC Police Commissioner Roosevelt walks the beat with journalist Jacob Riis in 1894—Illustration from Riis's autobiography. William Lafayette Strong, a reform-minded Republican, won the 1894 mayoral election and offered Roosevelt a position on the board of the New York City Police Commissioners.[73][81] Roosevelt became president of the board of commissioners and radically reformed the police force. Roosevelt implemented regular inspections of firearms and annual physical exams, appointed recruits based on their physical and mental qualifications rather than political affiliation, established Meritorious Service Medals, and closed corrupt police hostelries. During his tenure, a Municipal Lodging House was established by the Board of Charities, and Roosevelt required officers to register with the Board; he also had telephones installed in station houses.[82] In 1894, Roosevelt met Jacob Riis, the muckraking Evening Sun newspaper journalist who was opening the eyes of New Yorkers to the terrible conditions of the city's millions of poor immigrants with such books as How the Other Half Lives. Riis described how his book affected Roosevelt: When Roosevelt read [my] book, he came... No one ever helped as he did. For two years we were brothers in (New York City's crime-ridden) Mulberry Street. When he left I had seen its golden age... There is very little ease where Theodore Roosevelt leads, as we all of us found out. The lawbreaker found it out who predicted scornfully that he would "knuckle down to politics the way they all did", and lived to respect him, though he swore at him, as the one of them all who was stronger than pull... that was what made the age golden, that for the first time a moral purpose came into the street. In the light of it everything was transformed.[83] Roosevelt made a habit of walking officers' beats late at night and early in the morning to make sure that they were on duty.[84] He made a concerted effort to uniformly enforce New York's Sunday closing law; in this, he ran up against boss Tom Platt as well as Tammany Hall—he was notified that the Police Commission was being legislated out of existence. His crackdowns led to protests and demonstrations. Invited to one large demonstration, not only did he surprisingly accept, he delighted in the insults, caricatures and lampoons directed at him, and earned some surprising good will.[85] Roosevelt chose to defer rather than split with his party.[86] As Governor of New York State, he would later sign an act replacing the Police Commission with a single Police Commissioner.[87] Emergence as a national figure[edit] Assistant Secretary of the Navy[edit] The Asiatic Squadron destroying the Spanish fleet in the Battle of Manila Bay on May 1, 1898 In the 1896 presidential election, Roosevelt backed Speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed for the Republican nomination, but William McKinley won the nomination and defeated William Jennings Bryan in the general election.[88] Roosevelt opposed Bryan's free silver platform, viewing many of Bryan's followers as dangerous fanatics, and Roosevelt gave campaign speeches for McKinley.[89] Urged by Congressman Henry Cabot Lodge, President McKinley appointed Roosevelt as the Assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1897.[90] Secretary of the Navy John D. Long was more concerned about formalities than functions, was in poor health, and left many major decisions to Roosevelt. Influenced by Alfred Thayer Mahan, Roosevelt called for a build-up in the country's naval strength, particularly the construction of battleships.[91] Roosevelt also began pressing his national security views regarding the Pacific and the Caribbean on McKinley, and was particularly adamant that Spain be ejected from Cuba.[92] He explained his priorities to one of the Navy's planners in late 1897: I would regard war with Spain from two viewpoints: first, the advisability on the grounds both of humanity and self-interest of interfering on behalf of the Cubans, and of taking one more step toward the complete freeing of America from European dominion; second, the benefit done our people by giving them something to think of which is not material gain, and especially the benefit done our military forces by trying both the Navy and Army in actual practice.[93] On February 15, 1898, USS Maine, an armored cruiser, exploded in the harbor of Havana, Cuba, killing hundreds of crew members. While Roosevelt and many other Americans blamed Spain for the explosion, McKinley sought a diplomatic solution.[94] Without approval from Long or McKinley, Roosevelt sent out orders to several naval vessels, directing them to prepare for war.[94][95] George Dewey, who had received an appointment to lead the Asiatic Squadron with the backing of Roosevelt, later credited his victory at the Battle of Manila Bay to Roosevelt's orders.[96] After finally giving up hope of a peaceful solution, McKinley asked Congress to declare war upon Spain, beginning the Spanish–American War.[97] War in Cuba[edit] Main article: Rough Riders Colonel Theodore Roosevelt With the beginning of the Spanish–American War in late April 1898, Roosevelt resigned from his post as Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Along with Army Colonel Leonard Wood, he formed the First US Volunteer Cavalry Regiment.[98] His wife and many of his friends begged Roosevelt to remain in his post in Washington, but Roosevelt was determined to see battle. When the newspapers reported the formation of the new regiment, Roosevelt and Wood were flooded with applications from all over the country.[99] Referred to by the press as the "Rough Riders", the regiment was one of many temporary units active only for the duration of the war.[100] The regiment trained for several weeks in San Antonio, Texas, and in his autobiography, Roosevelt wrote that his prior experience with the New York National Guard had been invaluable, in that it enabled him to immediately begin teaching his men basic soldiering skills.[101] The Rough Riders used some standard issue gear and some of their own design, purchased with gift money. Diversity characterized the regiment, which included Ivy Leaguers, professional and amateur athletes, upscale gentlemen, cowboys, frontiersmen, Native Americans, hunters, miners, prospectors, former soldiers, tradesmen, and sheriffs. The Rough Riders were part of the cavalry division commanded by former Confederate general Joseph Wheeler, which itself was one of three divisions in the V Corps under Lieutenant General William Rufus Shafter. Roosevelt and his men landed in Daiquirí, Cuba, on June 23, 1898, and marched to Siboney. Wheeler sent parts of the 1st and 10th Regular Cavalry on the lower road northwest and sent the "Rough Riders" on the parallel road running along a ridge up from the beach. To throw off his infantry rival, Wheeler left one regiment of his Cavalry Division, the 9th, at Siboney so that he could claim that his move north was only a limited reconnaissance if things went wrong. Roosevelt was promoted to colonel and took command of the regiment when Wood was put in command of the brigade. The Rough Riders had a short, minor skirmish known as the Battle of Las Guasimas; they fought their way through Spanish resistance and, together with the Regulars, forced the Spaniards to abandon their positions.[102] Colonel Roosevelt and the Rough Riders after capturing Kettle Hill along with members of the 3rd Volunteers and the regular Army black 10th Cavalry Under his leadership, the Rough Riders became famous for the charge up Kettle Hill on July 1, 1898, while supporting the regulars. Roosevelt had the only horse, and rode back and forth between rifle pits at the forefront of the advance up Kettle Hill, an advance that he urged despite the absence of any orders from superiors. He was forced to walk up the last part of Kettle Hill, because his horse had been entangled in barbed wire. The victories came at a cost of 200 killed and 1,000 wounded.[103] In August, Roosevelt and other officers demanded that the soldiers be returned home. Roosevelt always recalled the Battle of Kettle Hill (part of the San Juan Heights) as "the great day of my life" and "my crowded hour". In 2001, Roosevelt was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions;[104] he had been nominated during the war, but Army officials, annoyed at his grabbing the headlines, blocked it.[105] After returning to civilian life, Roosevelt preferred to be known as "Colonel Roosevelt" or "The Colonel", though "Teddy" remained much more popular with the public, even though Roosevelt openly despised that moniker. Men working closely with Roosevelt customarily called him "Colonel" or "Theodore".[106] Henceforth, political cartoons of Roosevelt usually depicted him in his Rough Rider garb.[citation needed] Governor of New York[edit] After leaving Cuba in August 1898, the Rough Riders were transported to a camp at Montauk Point, Long Island, where Roosevelt and his men were briefly quarantined due to the War Department's fear of spreading yellow fever.[107] Shortly after Roosevelt's return to the United States, Republican Congressman Lemuel E. Quigg, a lieutenant of party boss Tom Platt, asked Roosevelt to run in the 1898 gubernatorial election. Platt disliked Roosevelt personally, feared that Roosevelt would oppose Platt's interests in office, and was reluctant to propel Roosevelt to the forefront of national politics. However, Platt also needed a strong candidate due to the unpopularity of the incumbent Republican governor, Frank S. Black, and Roosevelt agreed to become the nominee and to try not to "make war" with the Republican establishment once in office.[108] Roosevelt defeated Black in the Republican caucus by a vote of 753 to 218, and faced Democrat Augustus Van Wyck, a well-respected judge, in the general election.[109] Roosevelt campaigned vigorously on his war record, winning the election by a margin of just one percent.[110] As governor, Roosevelt learned much about ongoing economic issues and political techniques that later proved valuable in his presidency. He was exposed to the problems of trusts, monopolies, labor relations, and conservation. Chessman argues that Roosevelt's program "rested firmly upon the concept of the square deal by a neutral state". The rules for the Square Deal were "honesty in public affairs, an equitable sharing of privilege and responsibility, and subordination of party and local concerns to the interests of the state at large".[111] By holding twice-daily press conferences—which was an innovation—Roosevelt remained connected with his middle-class political base.[112] Roosevelt successfully pushed the Ford Franchise-Tax bill, which taxed public franchises granted by the state and controlled by corporations, declaring that "a corporation which derives its powers from the State, should pay to the State a just percentage of its earnings as a return for the privileges it enjoys".[113] He rejected "boss" Thomas C. Platt's worries that this approached Bryanite Socialism, explaining that without it, New York voters might get angry and adopt public ownership of streetcar lines and other franchises.[114] The New York state government affected many interests, and the power to make appointments to policy-making positions was a key role for the governor. Platt insisted that he be consulted on major appointments; Roosevelt appeared to comply, but then made his own decisions. Historians marvel that Roosevelt managed to appoint so many first-rate men with Platt's approval. He even enlisted Platt's help in securing reform, such as in the spring of 1899, when Platt pressured state senators to vote for a civil service bill that the secretary of the Civil Service Reform Association called "superior to any civil service statute heretofore secured in America".[115] Chessman argues that as governor, Roosevelt developed the principles that shaped his presidency, especially insistence upon the public responsibility of large corporations, publicity as a first remedy for trusts, regulation of railroad rates, mediation of the conflict of capital and labor, conservation of natural resources and protection of the less fortunate members of society.[111] Roosevelt sought to position himself against the excesses of large corporations on the one hand and radical movements on the other.[116] As the chief executive of the most populous state in the union, Roosevelt was widely considered a potential future presidential candidate, and supporters such as William Allen White encouraged him to run for president.[117] Roosevelt had no interest in challenging McKinley for the Republican nomination in 1900, and was denied his preferred post of Secretary of War. As his term progressed, Roosevelt pondered a 1904 presidential run, but was uncertain about whether he should seek re-election as governor in 1900.[118] Vice President[edit] Main article: 1900 United States presidential election In November 1899, Vice President Garret Hobart died of heart failure, leaving an open spot on the 1900 Republican national ticket. Though Henry Cabot Lodge and others urged him to run for vice president in 1900, Roosevelt was reluctant to take the powerless position and issued a public statement saying that he would not accept the nomination.[119] Additionally, Roosevelt was informed by President McKinley and campaign manager Mark Hanna that he was not being considered for the role of vice president due to his actions prior to the Spanish–American War. Eager to be rid of Roosevelt, Platt nonetheless began a newspaper campaign in favor of Roosevelt's nomination for the vice presidency.[120] Roosevelt attended the 1900 Republican National Convention as a state delegate and struck a bargain with Platt: Roosevelt would accept the nomination for vice president if the convention offered it to him, but would otherwise serve another term as governor. Platt asked Pennsylvania party boss Matthew Quay to lead the campaign for Roosevelt's nomination, and Quay outmaneuvered Hanna at the convention to put Roosevelt on the ticket.[121] Roosevelt won the nomination unanimously.[122] Roosevelt's vice-presidential campaigning proved highly energetic and an equal match for Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan's famous barnstorming style of campaigning. In a whirlwind campaign that displayed his energy to the public, Roosevelt made 480 stops in 23 states. He denounced the radicalism of Bryan, contrasting it with the heroism of the soldiers and sailors who fought and won the war against Spain. Bryan had strongly supported the war itself, but he denounced the annexation of the Philippines as imperialism, which would spoil America's innocence. Roosevelt countered that it was best for the Filipinos to have stability and the Americans to have a proud place in the world. With the nation basking in peace and prosperity, the voters gave McKinley an even larger victory than that which he had achieved in 1896.[123][124] After the campaign, Roosevelt took office as vice president in March 1901. The office of vice president was a powerless sinecure and did not suit Roosevelt's aggressive temperament.[125] Roosevelt's six months as vice president were uneventful, and Roosevelt presided over the Senate for a mere four days before it adjourned.[126] On September 2, 1901, Roosevelt first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters at the Minnesota State Fair: "Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far."[127] Presidency (1901–1909)[edit] Main article: Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt Bureau of Engraving and Printing engraved portrait of Roosevelt as President On September 6, 1901, President McKinley was attending the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York when he was shot by Leon Czolgosz. Roosevelt was vacationing in Vermont, and traveled to Buffalo to visit McKinley in the hospital. It appeared that McKinley would recover, so Roosevelt resumed his vacation in the Adirondacks. When McKinley's condition worsened, Roosevelt again traveled to Buffalo. McKinley died on September 14, and Roosevelt was informed while he was in North Creek; he continued on to Buffalo and was sworn in as the nation's 26th president at the Ansley Wilcox House.[39][page needed] Roosevelt's accession to the presidency left the vice presidency vacant. As there was no constitutional provision for filling an intra-term vacancy in that office (prior to ratification of the 25th Amendment in 1967), Roosevelt served his first term without a vice president. McKinley's supporters were nervous about the new president, and Hanna was particularly bitter that the man he had opposed so vigorously at the convention had succeeded McKinley. Roosevelt assured party leaders that he intended to adhere to McKinley's policies, and he retained McKinley's Cabinet. Nonetheless, Roosevelt sought to position himself as the party's undisputed leader, seeking to bolster the role of the president and position himself for the 1904 election.[128] Shortly after taking office, Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington to dinner at the White House. To his dismay, this sparked a bitter, and at times vicious, reaction across the heavily segregated South. Roosevelt reacted with astonishment and protest, saying that he looked forward to many future dinners with Washington. Upon further reflection, Roosevelt wanted to ensure that this had no effect on political support in the South, and further dinner invitations to Washington were avoided;[129] their next meeting was scheduled as typical business at 10:00 a.m. instead.[130] Domestic policies[edit] Trust busting and regulation[edit] Official White House portrait by John Singer Sargent For his aggressive use of the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, compared to his predecessors, Roosevelt became mythologized as the "trust-buster"; but in reality he was more of a trust regulator.[131] Roosevelt viewed big business as a necessary part of the American economy, and sought only to prosecute the "bad trusts" that restrained trade and charged unfair prices.[132] He brought 44 antitrust suits, breaking up the Northern Securities Company, the largest railroad monopoly; and regulating Standard Oil, the largest oil and refinery company.[133][131] Presidents Benjamin Harrison, Grover Cleveland, and William McKinley combined prosecuted only 18 antitrust violations under the Sherman Antitrust Act.[131] Bolstered by his party's winning large (but slightly smaller) majorities in the 1902 elections, Roosevelt proposed the creation of the United States Department of Commerce and Labor, which would include the Bureau of Corporations. While Congress was receptive to Department of Commerce and Labor, it was more skeptical of the antitrust powers that Roosevelt sought to endow within the Bureau of Corporations. Roosevelt successfully appealed to the public to pressure Congress, and Congress overwhelmingly voted to pass Roosevelt's version of the bill.[134] In a moment of frustration, House Speaker Joseph Gurney Cannon commented on Roosevelt's desire for executive branch control in domestic policy-making: "That fellow at the other end of the avenue wants everything from the birth of Christ to the death of the devil." Biographer Brands states, "Even his friends occasionally wondered whether there wasn't any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update or otherwise improve."[135] In fact, Roosevelt's willingness to exercise his power included attempted rule changes in the game of football; at the Naval Academy, he sought to force retention of martial arts classes and to revise disciplinary rules. He even ordered changes made in the minting of a coin whose design he disliked, and ordered the Government Printing Office to adopt simplified spellings for a core list of 300 words, according to reformers on the Simplified Spelling Board. He was forced to rescind the latter after substantial ridicule from the press and a resolution of protest from the House of Representatives.[136] Coal strike[edit] Main article: Coal strike of 1902 In May 1902, anthracite coal miners went on strike, threatening a national energy shortage. After threatening the coal operators with intervention by federal troops, Roosevelt won their agreement to dispute arbitration by a commission, which succeeded in stopping the strike. The accord with J. P. Morgan resulted in the miners getting more pay for fewer hours, but with no union recognition.[137][138] Roosevelt said, "My action on labor should always be considered in connection with my action as regards capital, and both are reducible to my favorite formula—a square deal for every man."[139] Roosevelt was the first president to help settle a labor dispute.[140] Prosecuted misconduct[edit] During Roosevelt's second year in office it was discovered there was corruption in the Indian Service, the Land Office, and the Post Office Department. Roosevelt investigated and prosecuted corrupt Indian agents who had cheated the Creeks and various tribes out of land parcels. Land fraud and speculation were found involving Oregon federal timberlands. In November 1902, Roosevelt and Secretary Ethan A. Hitchcock forced Binger Hermann, the General Land Office Commissioner, to resign from office. On November 6, 1903 Francis J. Heney was appointed special prosecutor and obtained 146 indictments involving an Oregon Land Office bribery ring. U.S. Senator John H. Mitchell was indicted for bribery to expedite illegal land patents, found guilty in July 1905, and sentenced to six months in prison.[141] More corruption was found in the Postal Department, that brought on the indictments of 44 government employees on charges of bribery and fraud.[142] Historians generally agree that Roosevelt moved "quickly and decisively" to prosecute misconduct in his administration.[143] Railroads[edit] Main article: Hepburn Act Merchants complained that some railroad rates were too high. In the 1906 Hepburn Act, Roosevelt sought to give the Interstate Commerce Commission the power to regulate rates, but the Senate, led by conservative Nelson Aldrich, fought back. Roosevelt worked with the Democratic Senator Benjamin Tillman to pass the bill. Roosevelt and Aldrich ultimately reached a compromise that gave the ICC the power to replace existing rates with "just-and-reasonable" maximum rates, but allowed railroads to appeal to the federal courts on what was "reasonable."[144][145] In addition to rate-setting, the Hepburn Act also granted the ICC regulatory power over pipeline fees, storage contracts, and several other aspects of railroad operations.[146] Pure food and drugs[edit] Roosevelt responded to public anger over the abuses in the food packing industry by pushing Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and the Pure Food and Drug Act. Though conservatives initially opposed the bill, Upton Sinclair's The Jungle, published in 1906, helped galvanize support for reform.[147] The Meat Inspection Act of 1906 banned misleading labels and preservatives that contained harmful chemicals. The Pure Food and Drug Act banned food and drugs that were impure or falsely labeled from being made, sold, and shipped. Roosevelt also served as honorary president of the American School Hygiene Association from 1907 to 1908, and in 1909 he convened the first White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children.[148] Conservation[edit] Main article: Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt § Conservation Roosevelt driving through a sequoia tree tunnel Of all Roosevelt's achievements, he was proudest of his work in conservation of natural resources and extending federal protection to land and wildlife.[149] Roosevelt worked closely with Interior Secretary James Rudolph Garfield and Chief of the United States Forest Service Gifford Pinchot to enact a series of conservation programs that often met with resistance from Western members of Congress, such as Charles William Fulton.[150] Nonetheless, Roosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 bird reserves, four game preserves, and 150 National Forests. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately 230 million acres (930,000 square kilometers).[151] Roosevelt extensively used executive orders on a number of occasions to protect forest and wildlife lands during his tenure as president.[152] By the end of his second term in office, Roosevelt used executive orders to establish 150 million acres (600,000 square kilometers) of reserved forestry land.[153] Roosevelt was unapologetic about his extensive use of executive orders to protect the environment, despite the perception in Congress that he was encroaching on too many lands.[153] Eventually, Senator Charles Fulton (R-OR) attached an amendment to an agricultural appropriations bill that effectively prevented the president from reserving any further land.[153] Before signing that bill into law, Roosevelt used executive orders to establish an additional 21 forest reserves, waiting until the last minute to sign the bill into law.[154] In total, Roosevelt used executive orders to establish 121 forest reserves in 31 states.[154] Prior to Roosevelt, only one president had issued over 200 executive orders, Grover Cleveland (253). The first 25 presidents issued a total of 1,262 executive orders; Roosevelt issued 1,081.[155] Foreign policy[edit] Further information: History of U.S. foreign policy, 1897–1913 Japan[edit] The American annexation of Hawaii in 1898 was stimulated in part by fear that otherwise Japan would dominate the Hawaiian Republic.[156] Likewise Japan was the alternative to American takeover of the Philippines in 1900. These events were part of the American goal of transitioning into a naval world power, but it needed to find a way to avoid a military confrontation in the Pacific with Japan.[157] In the 1890s, Roosevelt had been an ardent imperialist and vigorously defended the permanent acquisition of the Philippines in the 1900 campaign. After the Philippine–American War ended in 1902, he largely lost his imperialist interest in the Philippines and Asian expansion but wished to have a strong U.S. presence in the region as a symbol of democratic values. One of Theodore Roosevelt's priorities during his presidency and afterwards, was the maintenance of friendly relations with Japan.[158][159] From 1904 to 1905 Japan and Russia were at war. Both sides asked Roosevelt to mediate a peace conference, held successfully in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.[160] In California, anti-Japanese hostility was growing, and Tokyo protested. Roosevelt negotiated a "Gentleman's Agreement" in 1907. Explicit discrimination against the Japanese was ended, and Japan agreed not to allow unskilled immigrants into the United States.[161] Europe[edit] Following the Spanish–American War, Roosevelt believed that the United States had emerged as a world power, and he sought ways to assert America's newly-eminent position abroad.[162] Roosevelt also played a major role in mediating the First Moroccan Crisis by calling the Algeciras Conference, which averted war between France and Germany.[163] Roosevelt's presidency saw the strengthening of ties with Great Britain. The Great Rapprochement had begun with British support of the United States during the Spanish–American War, and it continued as Britain withdrew its fleet from the Caribbean in favor of focusing on the rising German naval threat.[164] In 1901, Britain and the United States signed the Hay–Pauncefote Treaty, abrogating the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty, which had prevented the United States from constructing a canal connecting the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean.[165] The long-standing Alaska boundary dispute was settled on terms favorable to the United States, as Great Britain was unwilling to alienate the United States over what it considered to be a secondary issue. As Roosevelt later put it, the resolution of the Alaskan boundary dispute "settled the last serious trouble between the British Empire and ourselves."[166] Latin America and Panama Canal[edit] As president, he primarily focused the nation's overseas ambitions on the Caribbean, especially locations that had a bearing on the defense of his pet project, the Panama Canal.[167] Roosevelt also increased the size of the navy, and by the end of his second term the United States had more battleships than any other country besides Britain. The Panama Canal when it opened in 1914 allowed the U.S. Navy to rapidly move back and forth from the Pacific to the caribbean to European waters.[168] In December 1902, the Germans, British, and Italians blockaded the ports of Venezuela in order to force the repayment of delinquent loans. Roosevelt was particularly concerned with the motives of German Emperor Wilhelm II. He succeeded in getting the three nations to agree to arbitration by tribunal at The Hague, and successfully defused the crisis.[169] The latitude granted to the Europeans by the arbiters was in part responsible for the "Roosevelt Corollary" to the Monroe Doctrine, which the President issued in 1904: "Chronic wrongdoing or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere, the adherence of the United States to the Monroe doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power."[170] The U.S.'s intentions to influence the area (especially the Panama Canal construction and control) led to the separation of Panama from Colombia in 1903 The pursuit of an isthmus canal in Central America during this period focused on two possible routes—Nicaragua and Panama, which was then a rebellious district within Colombia. Roosevelt convinced Congress to approve the Panamanian alternative, and a treaty was approved, only to be rejected by the Colombian government. When the Panamanians learned of this, a rebellion followed, was supported by Roosevelt, and succeeded. A treaty with the new Panama government for construction of the canal was then reached in 1903.[171] Roosevelt received criticism for paying the bankrupt Panama Canal Company and the New Panama Canal Company $40,000,000 (equivalent to $11.38 billion in 2019) for the rights and equipment to build the canal.[143] Critics charged that an American investor syndicate allegedly divided the large payment among themselves. There was also controversy over whether a French company engineer influenced Roosevelt in choosing the Panama route for the canal over the Nicaragua route. Roosevelt denied charges of corruption concerning the canal in a January 8, 1906 message to Congress. In January 1909, Roosevelt, in an unprecedented move, brought criminal libel charges against the New York World and the Indianapolis News known as the "Roosevelt-Panama Libel Cases".[172] Both cases were dismissed by U.S. District Courts, and on January 3, 1911, the U.S. Supreme Court, upon federal appeal, upheld the lower courts' rulings.[173] Historians are sharply critical of Roosevelt's criminal prosecutions of the World and the News, but are divided on whether actual corruption in acquiring and building the Panama Canal took place.[174] In 1906, following a disputed election, an insurrection ensued in Cuba; Roosevelt sent Taft, the Secretary of War, to monitor the situation; he was convinced that he had the authority to unilaterally authorize Taft to deploy Marines if necessary, without congressional approval.[175] Examining the work of numerous scholars, Ricard (2014) reports that: The most striking evolution in the twenty-first century historiography of Theodore Roosevelt is the switch from a partial arraignment of the imperialist to a quasi-unanimous celebration of the master diplomatist.... [Hagiographies of Roosevelt] have underlined cogently Roosevelt's exceptional statesmanship in the construction of the nascent twentieth-century "special relationship". ...The twenty-sixth president's reputation as a brilliant diplomatist and realpolitician has undeniably reached new heights in the twenty-first century...yet, his Philippine policy still prompts criticism.[176] Media[edit] 1903 cartoon: "Go Away, Little Man, and Don't Bother Me". Roosevelt intimidating Colombia to acquire the Panama Canal Zone. Building on McKinley's effective use of the press, Roosevelt made the White House the center of news every day, providing interviews and photo opportunities. After noticing the reporters huddled outside the White House in the rain one day, he gave them their own room inside, effectively inventing the presidential press briefing. The grateful press, with unprecedented access to the White House, rewarded Roosevelt with ample coverage.[177] Roosevelt normally enjoyed very close relationships with the press, which he used to keep in daily contact with his middle-class base. While out of office, he made a living as a writer and magazine editor. He loved talking with intellectuals, authors, and writers. He drew the line, however, at expose-oriented scandal-mongering journalists who, during his term, sent magazine subscriptions soaring by their attacks on corrupt politicians, mayors, and corporations. Roosevelt himself was not usually a target, but a speech of his from 1906 coined the term "muckraker" for unscrupulous journalists making wild charges. "The liar", he said, "is no whit better than the thief, and if his mendacity takes the form of slander he may be worse than most thieves."[178] The press did briefly target Roosevelt in one instance. After 1904, he was periodically criticized for the manner in which he facilitated the construction of the Panama Canal. According to biographer Brands, Roosevelt, near the end of his term, demanded that the Justice Department bring charges of criminal libel against Joseph Pulitzer's New York World. The publication had accused him of "deliberate misstatements of fact" in defense of family members who were criticized as a result of the Panama affair. Though an indictment was obtained, the case was ultimately dismissed in federal court—it was not a federal offense, but one enforceable in state courts. The Justice Department had predicted that result, and had also advised Roosevelt accordingly.[179] Election of 1904[edit] Main article: 1904 United States presidential election 1904 election results The control and management of the Republican Party lay in the hands of Ohio Senator and Republican Party chairman Mark Hanna until McKinley's death. Roosevelt and Hanna frequently cooperated during Roosevelt's first term, but Hanna left open the possibility of a challenge to Roosevelt for the 1904 Republican nomination. Roosevelt and Ohio's other Senator, Joseph B. Foraker, forced Hanna's hand by calling for Ohio's state Republican convention to endorse Roosevelt for the 1904 nomination.[180] Unwilling to break with the president, Hanna was forced to publicly endorse Roosevelt. Hanna and Pennsylvania Senator Matthew Quay both died in early 1904, and with the waning of Thomas Platt's power, Roosevelt faced little effective opposition for the 1904 nomination.[181] In deference to Hanna's conservative loyalists, Roosevelt at first offered the party chairmanship to Cornelius Bliss, but he declined. Roosevelt turned to his own man, George B. Cortelyou of New York, the first Secretary of Commerce and Labor. To buttress his hold on the party's nomination, Roosevelt made it clear that anyone opposing Cortelyou would be considered to be opposing the President.[182] The President secured his own nomination, but his preferred vice-presidential running mate, Robert R. Hitt, was not nominated.[183] Senator Charles Warren Fairbanks of Indiana, a favorite of conservatives, gained the nomination.[181] While Roosevelt followed the tradition of incumbents in not actively campaigning on the stump, he sought to control the campaign's message through specific instructions to Cortelyou. He also attempted to manage the press's release of White House statements by forming the Ananias Club. Any journalist who repeated a statement made by the president without approval was penalized by restriction of further access.[184] The Democratic Party's nominee in 1904 was Alton Brooks Parker. Democratic newspapers charged that Republicans were extorting large campaign contributions from corporations, putting ultimate responsibility on Roosevelt, himself.[185] Roosevelt denied corruption while at the same time he ordered Cortelyou to return $100,000 (equivalent to $2.8 million in 2019) of a campaign contribution from Standard Oil.[186] Parker said that Roosevelt was accepting corporate donations to keep damaging information from the Bureau of Corporations from going public.[186] Roosevelt strongly denied Parker's charge and responded that he would "go into the Presidency unhampered by any pledge, promise, or understanding of any kind, sort, or description...".[187] Allegations from Parker and the Democrats, however, had little impact on the election, as Roosevelt promised to give every American a "square deal".[187] Roosevelt won 56% of the popular vote, and Parker received 38%; Roosevelt also won the Electoral College vote, 336 to 140. Before his inauguration ceremony, Roosevelt declared that he would not serve another term.[188] Democrats afterwards would continue to charge Roosevelt and the Republicans of being influenced by corporate donations during Roosevelt's second term.[189] Second term[edit] Roosevelt family at Oyster Bay, circa 1903 As his second term progressed, Roosevelt moved to the left of his Republican Party base and called for a series of reforms, most of which Congress failed to pass.[190] In his last year in office, he was assisted by his friend Archibald Butt (who later perished in the sinking of RMS Titanic).[191] Roosevelt's influence waned as he approached the end of his second term, as his promise to forego a third term made him a lame duck and his concentration of power provoked a backlash from many Congressmen.[192] He sought a national incorporation law (at a time when all corporations had state charters), called for a federal income tax (despite the Supreme Court's ruling in Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co.), and an inheritance tax. In the area of labor legislation, Roosevelt called for limits on the use of court injunctions against labor unions during strikes; injunctions were a powerful weapon that mostly helped business. He wanted an employee liability law for industrial injuries (pre-empting state laws) and an eight-hour work day for federal employees. In other areas he also sought a postal savings system (to provide competition for local banks), and he asked for campaign reform laws.[193] The election of 1904 continued to be a source of contention between Republicans and Democrats. A Congressional investigation in 1905 revealed that corporate executives donated tens of thousands of dollars in 1904 to the Republican National Committee. In 1908, a month before the general presidential election, Governor Charles N. Haskell of Oklahoma, former Democratic Treasurer, said that Senators beholden to Standard Oil lobbied Roosevelt, in the summer of 1904, to authorize the leasing of Indian oil lands by Standard Oil subsidiaries. He said Roosevelt overruled his Secretary of Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock and granted a pipeline franchise to run through the Osage lands to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company. The New York Sun made a similar accusation and said that Standard Oil, a refinery who financially benefited from the pipeline, had contributed $150,000 to the Republicans in 1904 (equivalent to $4.3 million in 2019) after Roosevelt's alleged reversal allowing the pipeline franchise. Roosevelt branded Haskell's allegation as "a lie, pure and simple" and obtained a denial from Treasury Secretary Shaw that Roosevelt had neither coerced Shaw nor overruled him.[194] Post-presidency (1909–1914)[edit] Election of 1908[edit] Main article: 1908 United States presidential election Roosevelt shortly after leaving office, October 1910 Roosevelt enjoyed being president and was still relatively youthful, but felt that a limited number of terms provided a check against dictatorship. Roosevelt ultimately decided to stick to his 1904 pledge not to run for a third term. He personally favored Secretary of State Elihu Root as his successor, but Root's ill health made him an unsuitable candidate. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes loomed as potentially strong candidate and shared Roosevelt's progressivism, but Roosevelt disliked him and considered him to be too independent. Instead, Roosevelt settled on his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, who had ably served under Presidents Harrison, McKinley, and Roosevelt in various positions. Roosevelt and Taft had been friends since 1890, and Taft had consistently supported President Roosevelt's policies.[195] Roosevelt was determined to install the successor of his choice, and wrote the following to Taft: "Dear Will: Do you want any action about those federal officials? I will break their necks with the utmost cheerfulness if you say the word!". Just weeks later he branded as "false and malicious" the charge that he was using the offices at his disposal to favor Taft.[196] At the 1908 Republican convention, many chanted for "four years more" of a Roosevelt presidency, but Taft won the nomination after Henry Cabot Lodge made it clear that Roosevelt was not interested in a third term.[197] In the 1908 election, Taft easily defeated the Democratic nominee, three-time candidate William Jennings Bryan. Taft promoted a progressivism that stressed the rule of law; he preferred that judges rather than administrators or politicians make the basic decisions about fairness. Taft usually proved to be a less adroit politician than Roosevelt and lacked the energy and personal magnetism, along with the publicity devices, the dedicated supporters, and the broad base of public support that made Roosevelt so formidable. When Roosevelt realized that lowering the tariff would risk creating severe tensions inside the Republican Party by pitting producers (manufacturers and farmers) against merchants and consumers, he stopped talking about the issue. Taft ignored the risks and tackled the tariff boldly, encouraging reformers to fight for lower rates, and then cutting deals with conservative leaders that kept overall rates high. The resulting Payne-Aldrich tariff of 1909, signed into law early in President Taft's tenure, was too high for most reformers, and Taft's handling of the tariff alienated all sides. While the crisis was building inside the Party, Roosevelt was touring Africa and Europe, to allow Taft to be his own man.[198] Africa and Europe (1909–1910)[edit] Roosevelt standing next to the elephant he shot on safari In March 1909, shortly after the end of his presidency, Roosevelt left New York for the Smithsonian-Roosevelt African Expedition, a safari in east and central Africa.[199] Roosevelt's party landed in Mombasa, East Africa (now Kenya) and traveled to the Belgian Congo (now Democratic Republic of the Congo) before following the Nile to Khartoum in modern Sudan. Financed by Andrew Carnegie and by his own writings, Roosevelt's party hunted for specimens for the Smithsonian Institution and for the American Museum of Natural History in New York.[200] The group, led by the hunter-tracker RJ Cunninghame, included scientists from the Smithsonian, and was joined from time to time by Frederick Selous, the famous big game hunter and explorer. Participants on the expedition included Kermit Roosevelt, Edgar Alexander Mearns, Edmund Heller, and John Alden Loring.[201] Roosevelt and his companions killed or trapped approximately 11,400 animals,[200] from insects and moles to hippopotamuses and elephants. The 1,000 large animals included 512 big game animals, including six rare white rhinos. Tons of salted animals and their skins were shipped to Washington; it took years to mount them all, and the Smithsonian shared many duplicate specimens with other museums. Regarding the large number of animals taken, Roosevelt said, "I can be condemned only if the existence of the National Museum, the American Museum of Natural History, and all similar zoological institutions are to be condemned".[202] He wrote a detailed account of the safari in the book African Game Trails, recounting the excitement of the chase, the people he met, and the flora and fauna he collected in the name of science.[203] After his safari, Roosevelt traveled north to embark on a tour of Europe. Stopping first in Egypt, he commented favorably on British rule of the region, giving his opinion that Egypt was not yet ready for independence.[204] He refused a meeting with the Pope due to a dispute over a group of Methodists active in Rome, but met with Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary, Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, King George V of Great Britain, and other European leaders. In Oslo, Norway, Roosevelt delivered a speech calling for limitations on naval armaments, a strengthening of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the creation of a "League of Peace" among the world powers.[205] He also delivered the Romanes Lecture at Oxford, in which he denounced those who sought parallels between the evolution of animal life and the development of society.[206] Though Roosevelt attempted to avoid domestic politics during his time abroad, he met with Gifford Pinchot, who related his own disappointment with the Taft Administration.[207] Pinchot had been forced to resign as head of the forest service after clashing with Taft's Interior Secretary, Richard Ballinger, who had prioritized development over conservation.[208] Roosevelt returned to the United States in June 1910.[206] Republican Party schism[edit] Punch depicts no-holds-barred fight between Taft and Roosevelt Roosevelt had attempted to refashion Taft into a second version of himself, but as soon as Taft began to display his individuality, the former president expressed his disenchantment. He was offended on election night when Taft indicated that his success had been possible not just through the efforts of Roosevelt, but also his brother Charley. Roosevelt was further alienated when Taft, intent on becoming his own man, did not consult him about cabinet appointments.[209] Roosevelt and other progressives were ideologically dissatisfied over Taft's conservation policies and his handling of the tariff when he concentrated more power in the hands of conservative party leaders in Congress.[210] Regarding radicalism and liberalism, Roosevelt wrote a British friend in 1911: Fundamentally it is the radical liberal with whom I sympathize. He is at least working toward the end for which I think we should all of us strive; and when he adds sanity in moderation to courage and enthusiasm for high ideals he develops into the kind of statesman whom alone I can wholeheartedly support."[211] Roosevelt urged progressives to take control of the Republican Party at the state and local level and to avoid splitting the party in a way that would hand the presidency to the Democrats in 1912. Additionally, Roosevelt expressed optimism about the Taft Administration after meeting with the president in the White House in June 1910.[212] In August 1910, Roosevelt gained national attention with a speech at Osawatomie, Kansas, which was the most radical of his career and marked his public break with Taft and the conservative Republicans. Advocating a program of "New Nationalism", Roosevelt emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests, a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions.[213] Returning to New York, Roosevelt began a battle to take control of the state Republican party from William Barnes Jr., Tom Platt's successor as the state party boss, whom he would later confront in the Barnes vs. Roosevelt Libel Trial. Taft had pledged his support to Roosevelt in this endeavor, and Roosevelt was outraged when Taft's support failed to materialize at the 1910 state convention.[214] Roosevelt nonetheless campaigned for the Republicans in the 1910 elections, in which the Democrats gained control of the House for the first time since the 1890s. Among the newly elected Democrats was New York state senator Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who argued that he represented his distant cousin's policies better than his Republican opponent.[215] The Republican progressives interpreted the 1910 defeats as compelling argument for the complete reorganization of the party in 1911.[216] Senator Robert M. La Follette of Wisconsin joined with Pinchot, William White, and California Governor Hiram Johnson to create the National Progressive Republican League; their objectives were to defeat the power of political bossism at the state level and to replace Taft at the national level.[217] Despite skepticism of La Follette's new league, Roosevelt expressed general support for progressive principles. Between January and April 1911, Roosevelt wrote a series of articles for The Outlook, defending what he called "the great movement of our day, the progressive nationalist movement against special privilege, and in favor of an honest and efficient political and industrial democracy".[218] With Roosevelt apparently uninterested in running in 1912, La Follette declared his own candidacy in June 1911.[217] Roosevelt continually criticized Taft after the 1910 elections, and the break between the two men became final after the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against US Steel in September 1911; Roosevelt was humiliated by this suit because he had personally approved of an acquisition that the Justice Department was now challenging. However, Roosevelt was still unwilling to run against Taft in 1912; he instead hoped to run in 1916 against whichever Democrat beat Taft in 1912.[219] Dispute over arbitration treaties[edit] Taft was a major advocate of arbitration as a major reform of the Progressive Era. In 1911 Taft and his Secretary of State Philander C. Knox negotiated major treaties with Great Britain and with France providing that differences be arbitrated. Disputes had to be submitted to the Hague Court or other tribunal. These were signed in August 1911 but had to be ratified by a two-thirds vote of the Senate. Neither Taft nor Knox consulted with members of the Senate during the negotiating process. By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft, and the president felt that lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat. He made some speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing the agreements.[220] The arbitration issue opens a window on a bitter philosophical dispute among American progressives. Some, led by Taft looked to legal arbitration as the best alternative to warfare. Taft was a constitutional lawyer who later became Chief Justice; he had a deep understanding of the legal issues.[221] Taft's political base was the conservative business community which largely supported peace movements before 1914. However, his mistake in this case was a failure to mobilize that base. The businessmen believed that economic rivalries were cause of war, and that extensive trade led to an interdependent world that would make war a very expensive and useless anachronism.[222] However, an opposing faction of progressives, led by Roosevelt, ridiculed arbitration as foolhardy idealism, and insisted on the realism of warfare as the only solution to serious international disputes. Roosevelt worked with his close friend Senator Henry Cabot Lodge to impose those amendments that ruined the goals of the treaties. Lodge thought the treaties impinged too much on senatorial prerogatives.[223] Roosevelt, however, was acting to sabotage Taft's campaign promises.[224] At a deeper level, Roosevelt's truly believed that arbitration was a naïve solution and the great issues had to be decided by warfare. The Rooseveltian approach incorporated a near-mystical faith of the ennobling nature of war. It endorsed jingoistic nationalism as opposed to the businessmen's calculation of profit and national interest.[225][226] Election of 1912[edit] Main articles: 1912 United States presidential election and Progressive Party (United States, 1912) Republican primaries and convention[edit] Roosevelt campaigning for president, 1912 In November 1911, a group of Ohio Republicans endorsed Roosevelt for the party's nomination for president; the endorsers included James R. Garfield and Dan Hanna. This endorsement was made by leaders of President Taft's home state. Roosevelt conspicuously declined to make a statement—requested by Garfield—that he would flatly refuse a nomination. Soon thereafter, Roosevelt said, "I am really sorry for Taft... I am sure he means well, but he means well feebly, and he does not know how! He is utterly unfit for leadership and this is a time when we need leadership." In January 1912, Roosevelt declared "if the people make a draft on me I shall not decline to serve".[227] Later that year, Roosevelt spoke before the Constitutional Convention in Ohio, openly identifying as a progressive and endorsing progressive reforms—even endorsing popular review of state judicial decisions.[228] In reaction to Roosevelt's proposals for popular overrule of court decisions, Taft said, "Such extremists are not progressives—they are political emotionalists or neurotics".[229] Roosevelt began to envision himself as the savior of the Republican Party from defeat in the upcoming presidential election. In February 1912, Roosevelt announced in Boston, "I will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me. I hope that so far as possible the people may be given the chance through direct primaries to express who shall be the nominee.[230][231] Elihu Root and Henry Cabot Lodge thought that division of the party would lead to its defeat in the next election, while Taft believed that he would be defeated either in the Republican primary or in the general election.[232] The 1912 primaries represented the first extensive use of the presidential primary, a reform achievement of the progressive movement.[233] The Republican primaries in the South, where party regulars dominated, went for Taft, as did results in New York, Indiana, Michigan, Kentucky and Massachusetts. Meanwhile, Roosevelt won in Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska, South Dakota, California, Maryland and Pennsylvania; Roosevelt also won Taft's home state of Ohio. These primary elections, while demonstrating Roosevelt's continuing popularity with the electorate, were not pivotal. The final credentials of the state delegates at the national convention were determined by the national committee, which was controlled by the party leaders, headed by the incumbent president. Prior to the 1912 Republican National Convention in Chicago, Roosevelt expressed doubt about his prospects for victory, noting that Taft had more delegates and control of the credentials committee. His only hope was to convince party leaders that the nomination of Taft would hand the election to the Democrats, but party leaders were determined not to cede their leadership to Roosevelt.[234] The credentials committee awarded almost all contested delegates to Taft, and Taft won the nomination on the first ballot.[235] Black delegates from the South played a key role: they voted heavily for Taft and put him over the top.[236] La Follette also helped Taft's candidacy; he hoped that a deadlocked convention would result in his own nomination, and refused to release his delegates to support Roosevelt.[235] The Progressive ("Bull Moose") Party[edit] See also: New Nationalism (Theodore Roosevelt) and Progressive Party (United States, 1912) "The right of the people to rule" Excerpts from a speech given by Theodore Roosevelt at Carnegie Hall, March 12, 1912. Recorded August 1912 by Thomas Edison. Duration 4:07. Problems playing this file? See media help. Once his defeat at the Republican convention appeared probable, Roosevelt announced that he would "accept the progressive nomination on a progressive platform and I shall fight to the end, win or lose". At the same time, Roosevelt prophetically said, "My feeling is that the Democrats will probably win if they nominate a progressive".[237] Bolting from the Republican Party, Roosevelt and key allies such as Pinchot and Albert Beveridge created the Progressive Party, structuring it as a permanent organization that would field complete tickets at the presidential and state level. It was popularly known as the "Bull Moose Party", after Roosevelt told reporters, "I'm as fit as a bull moose".[238] At the 1912 Progressive National Convention, Roosevelt cried out, "We stand at Armageddon and we battle for the Lord." California Governor Hiram Johnson was nominated as Roosevelt's running mate. Roosevelt's platform echoed his 1907–1908 proposals, calling for vigorous government intervention to protect the people from the selfish interests: To destroy this invisible Government, to dissolve the unholy alliance between corrupt business and corrupt politics is the first task of the statesmanship of the day.[239][240] This country belongs to the people. Its resources, its business, its laws, its institutions, should be utilized, maintained, or altered in whatever manner will best promote the general interest. This assertion is explicit... Mr. Wilson must know that every monopoly in the United States opposes the Progressive party... I challenge him... to name the monopoly that did support the Progressive party, whether... the Sugar Trust, the US Steel Trust, the Harvester Trust, the Standard Oil Trust, the Tobacco Trust, or any other... Ours was the only program to which they objected, and they supported either Mr. Wilson or Mr. Taft.[241] Though many Progressive party supporters in the North were supporters of civil rights for blacks, Roosevelt did not give strong support to civil rights and ran a "lily-white" campaign in the South. Rival all-white and all-black delegations from four southern states arrived at the Progressive national convention, and Roosevelt decided to seat the all-white delegations.[242][243][244] Nevertheless, he won little support outside mountain Republican strongholds. Out of nearly 1100 counties in the South, Roosevelt won two counties in Alabama, one in Arkansas, seven in North Carolina, three in Georgia, 17 in Tennessee, two in Texas, one in Virginia, and none in Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, or South Carolina.[245] Assassination attempt[edit] Main article: Attempted assassination of Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt's medical x-ray on October 14, 1912, after the assassination attempt, showing the bullet that would remain inside his body for life The bullet-damaged speech and eyeglass case on display at the Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace On October 14, 1912, while campaigning in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Roosevelt was shot by a saloonkeeper named John Flammang Schrank.[246] The bullet lodged in his chest after penetrating his steel eyeglass case and passing through a thick (50 pages) single-folded copy of the speech titled "Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual", which he was carrying in his jacket.[247] Schrank was immediately disarmed (by Czech immigrant Frank Bukovsky), captured, and might have been lynched had Roosevelt not shouted for Schrank to remain unharmed.[248][249] Roosevelt assured the crowd he was all right, then ordered police to take charge of Schrank and to make sure no violence was done to him.[250] As an experienced hunter and anatomist, Roosevelt correctly concluded that since he was not coughing blood, the bullet had not reached his lung, and he declined suggestions to go to the hospital immediately. Instead, he delivered his scheduled speech with blood seeping into his shirt.[251] He spoke for 90 minutes before completing his speech and accepting medical attention. His opening comments to the gathered crowd were, "Ladies and gentlemen, I don't know whether you fully understand that I have just been shot, but it takes more than that to kill a Bull Moose."[252] Afterwards, probes and an x-ray showed that the bullet had lodged in Roosevelt's chest muscle, but did not penetrate the pleura. Doctors concluded that it would be less dangerous to leave it in place than to attempt to remove it, and Roosevelt carried the bullet with him for the rest of his life.[253][254] Both Taft and Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson suspended their own campaigning until Roosevelt recovered and resumed his. When asked if the shooting would affect his election campaign, he said to the reporter "I'm fit as a bull moose." The bull moose became a symbol of both Roosevelt and the Progressive Party, and it often was referred to as simply the Bull Moose Party. He spent two weeks recuperating before returning to the campaign trail. He later wrote a friend about the bullet inside him, "I do not mind it any more than if it were in my waistcoat pocket."[255] Farewell manifesto[edit] On October 20, Roosevelt spoke to a crowd of 16,000 at Madison Square Garden. The speech included: "Perhaps once in a generation, there comes a chance for the people of a country to play their part wisely and fearlessly in some great battle of the age-long warfare for human rights."[256] Election results[edit] After the Democrats nominated Governor Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey, Roosevelt did not expect to win the general election, as Wilson had compiled a record attractive to many progressive Democrats who might have otherwise considered voting for Roosevelt.[257] Roosevelt still campaigned vigorously, and the election developed into a two-person contest between Wilson and Roosevelt despite Taft's presence in the race. Roosevelt respected Wilson, but the two differed on various issues; Wilson opposed any federal intervention regarding women's suffrage or child labor (he viewed these as state issues), and attacked Roosevelt's tolerance of large businesses.[258] Roosevelt won 4.1 million votes (27%), compared to Taft's 3.5 million (23%). Wilson gained 6.3 million votes (42% of the total) and a massive landslide in the Electoral College, with 435 electoral votes; Roosevelt won 88 electoral votes, while Taft won 8. Pennsylvania was the only eastern state won by Roosevelt; in the Midwest, he carried Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota; in the West, California, and Washington.[259] Wilson's victory represented the first Democratic presidential election victory since Cleveland's 1892 campaign, and it was the party's best performance in the Electoral College since 1852. Roosevelt, meanwhile, garnered a higher share of the popular vote than any other third-party presidential candidate in history.[260] 1913–1914 South American expedition[edit] Main article: Roosevelt–Rondon Scientific Expedition A friend of Roosevelt's, Father John Augustine Zahm, persuaded Roosevelt to participate in an expedition to South America. To finance the expedition, Roosevelt received support from the American Museum of Natural History in return for promising to bring back many new animal specimens. Roosevelt's popular book, Through the Brazilian Wilderness[261] describes his expedition into the Brazilian jungle in 1913 as a member of the Roosevelt-Rondon Scientific Expedition, co-named after its leader, Brazilian explorer Cândido Rondon. From left to right (seated): Fr. John Augustine Zahm, Cândido Rondon, Kermit Roosevelt, Cherrie, Miller, four Brazilians, Roosevelt, Fiala. Only Roosevelt, Kermit, Cherrie, Rondon, and the Brazilians traveled down the River of Doubt. Once in South America, a new, far more ambitious goal was added: to find the headwaters of the Rio da Duvida (Portuguese for "River of Doubt"), and trace it north to the Madeira and thence to the Amazon River. It was later renamed Roosevelt River in honor of the former president. Roosevelt's crew consisted of his son Kermit, Colonel Rondon, naturalist George Kruck Cherrie (sent by the American Museum of Natural History), Brazilian Lieutenant João Lira, team physician Dr. José Antonio Cajazeira, and 16 skilled paddlers and porters. Roosevelt also identified Leo Miller (another AMNH recommendation), Anthony Fiala, Frank Harper, and Jacob Sigg as crew members.[262] The initial expedition started somewhat tenuously on December 9, 1913, at the height of the rainy season. The trip down the River of Doubt started on February 27, 1914.[263] During the trip down the river, Roosevelt suffered a minor leg wound after he jumped into the river to try to prevent two canoes from smashing against the rocks. The flesh wound he received, however, soon gave him tropical fever that resembled the malaria he had contracted while in Cuba fifteen years before.[264] Because the bullet lodged in his chest from the assassination attempt in 1912 was never removed, his health worsened from the infection.[265] This weakened Roosevelt so greatly that six weeks into the adventure, he had to be attended to day and night by the expedition's physician and his son Kermit. By then, he could not walk because of the infection in his injured leg and an infirmity in the other, which was due to a traffic accident a decade earlier. Roosevelt was riddled with chest pains, fighting a fever that soared to 103 °F (39 °C) and at times made him delirious, at one point constantly reciting the first two lines of Samuel Taylor Coleridge's poem "Kubla Khan": "In Xanadu did Kubla Khan / A stately pleasure dome decree". Regarding his condition as a threat to the survival of the others, Roosevelt insisted he be left behind to allow the poorly provisioned expedition to proceed as rapidly as it could, preparing to commit suicide with an overdose of morphine. Only an appeal by his son persuaded him to continue.[263] Despite Roosevelt's continued decline and loss of over 50 pounds (23 kg), Colonel Rondon reduced the pace of the expedition to allow for his commission's mapmaking and other geographical tasks, which required regular stops to fix the expedition's position by sun-based survey. Upon Roosevelt's return to New York, friends and family were startled by his physical appearance and fatigue. Roosevelt wrote, perhaps prophetically, to a friend that the trip had cut his life short by ten years. For the rest of his few remaining years, he would be plagued by flare-ups of malaria and leg inflammations so severe as to require surgery.[266] Before Roosevelt had even completed his sea voyage home, critics raised doubts over his claims of exploring and navigating a completely uncharted river over 625 miles (1,006 km) long. When he had recovered sufficiently, he addressed a standing-room-only convention organized in Washington, D.C., by the National Geographic Society and satisfactorily defended his claims.[263] Final years (1914–1918)[edit] See also: Roosevelt's World War I volunteers Former President Theodore Roosevelt in Allentown, Pennsylvania, 1914 Roosevelt returned to the United States in May 1914. Though he was outraged by the Wilson Administration's conclusion of a treaty that expressed "sincere regret" for the way in which the United States had acquired the Panama Canal Zone, he was impressed by many of the reforms passed under Wilson. Roosevelt made several campaign appearances for the Progressives, but the 1914 elections were a disaster for the fledgling third party.[267] Roosevelt began to envision another campaign for president, this time with himself at the head of the Republican Party, but conservative party leaders remained opposed to Roosevelt.[268] In hopes of engineering a joint nomination, the Progressives scheduled the 1916 Progressive National Convention at the same time as the 1916 Republican National Convention. When the Republicans nominated Charles Evans Hughes, Roosevelt declined the Progressive nomination and urged his Progressive followers to support the Republican candidate.[269] Though Roosevelt had long disliked Hughes, he disliked Wilson even more, and he campaigned energetically for the Republican nominee. However, Wilson won the 1916 election by a narrow margin.[270] The Progressives disappeared as a party following the 1916 election, and Roosevelt and many of his followers permanently re-joined the Republican Party.[271] League of Nations[edit] Further information: League to Enforce Peace Roosevelt was an early supporter of the modern view that there needs to be a global order. In his Nobel prize address of 1910, he said, "it would be a master stroke if those great Powers honestly bent on peace would form a League of Peace, not only to keep the peace among themselves, but to prevent, by force if necessary, its being broken by others."[272] It would have executive power such as the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 lacked. He called for American participation. When World War I broke out, Roosevelt proposed "a World League for the Peace of Righteousness", in September 1914, which would preserve sovereignty but limit armaments and require arbitration. He added that it should be "solemnly covenanted that if any nations refused to abide by the decisions of such a court, then others draw the sword in behalf of peace and justice."[273][274] In 1915 he outlined this plan more specifically, urging that nations guarantee their entire military force, if necessary, against any nation that refused to carry out arbitration decrees or violated rights of other nations. He insisted upon the participation of the United States as one of the "joint guarantors". Roosevelt referred to this plan in a 1918 speech as "the most feasible for...a league of nations."[275][276] By this time Wilson was strongly hostile to Roosevelt and Lodge, and developed his own plans for a rather different League of Nations. It became reality along Wilson's lines at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. Roosevelt denounced Wilson's approach but died before it was adopted at Paris. However, Lodge was willing to accept it with serious reservations. In the end, on March 19, 1920, Wilson had Democratic Senators vote against the League with the Lodge Reservations and the United States never joined the League of Nations.[277] World War I[edit] When the First World War began in 1914, Roosevelt strongly supported the Allies and demanded a harsher policy against Germany, especially regarding submarine warfare. Roosevelt angrily denounced the foreign policy of President Wilson, calling it a failure regarding the atrocities in Belgium and the violations of American rights.[278] In 1916, while campaigning for Hughes, Roosevelt repeatedly denounced Irish-Americans and German-Americans whom he described as unpatriotic, saying they put the interests of Ireland and Germany ahead of America's by supporting neutrality. He insisted that one had to be 100% American, not a "hyphenated American" who juggled multiple loyalties. In March 1917, Congress gave Roosevelt the authority to raise a maximum of four divisions similar to the Rough Riders, and Major Frederick Russell Burnham was put in charge of both the general organization and recruitment.[279][280] However, President Wilson announced to the press that he would not send Roosevelt and his volunteers to France, but instead would send an American Expeditionary Force under the command of General John J. Pershing.[281] Roosevelt never forgave Wilson, and quickly published The Foes of Our Own Household, an indictment of the sitting president.[282][283][284] Roosevelt's youngest son, Quentin, a pilot with the American forces in France, was shot down behind German lines on July 14, 1918, at the age of 20. It is said that Quentin's death distressed Roosevelt so much that he never recovered from his loss.[285] Roosevelt's attacks on Wilson helped the Republicans win control of Congress in the midterm elections of 1918. He declined a request from New York Republicans to run for another gubernatorial term, but attacked Wilson's Fourteen Points, calling instead for the unconditional surrender of Germany. He was cautiously optimistic about the proposed League of Nations, but had reservations about its impact on United States sovereignty.[286] Roosevelt was the leading contender for the 1920 Republican nomination, but insisted that, "If they take me, they'll have to take me without a single modification of the things that I have always stood for! [287] He wrote William Allen White, "I wish to do everything in my power to make the Republican Party the Party of sane, constructive radicalism, just as it was under Lincoln." Accordingly, he told the 1918 state convention of the Maine Republican Party that he stood for old-age pensions, insurance for sickness and unemployment, construction of public housing for low-income families, the reduction of working hours, aid to farmers, and more regulation of large corporations.[287] Roosevelt's physical condition was rapidly deteriorating due to the long-term effects of jungle diseases. He was hospitalized for seven weeks in late 1918, and never fully recovered.[288] Death[edit] Theodore and Edith Roosevelt's Grave at Youngs Memorial Cemetery On the night of January 5, 1919, Roosevelt suffered breathing problems. After receiving treatment from his physician, Dr. George W. Faller, he felt better and went to bed. Roosevelt's last words were "Please put out that light, James" to his family servant James E. Amos. Between 4:00 and 4:15 the next morning, Roosevelt died in his sleep at Sagamore Hill after a blood clot had detached from a vein and traveled to his lungs.[265] He was 60 years old. Upon receiving word of his death, his son Archibald telegraphed his siblings: "The old lion is dead."[285] Woodrow Wilson's vice president, Thomas R. Marshall, said that "Death had to take Roosevelt sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have been a fight."[289] Following a private farewell service in the North Room at Sagamore Hill, a simple funeral was held at Christ Episcopal Church in Oyster Bay.[290] Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, Charles Evans Hughes, Warren G. Harding, Henry Cabot Lodge, and William Howard Taft were among the mourners.[290] The snow-covered procession route to Youngs Memorial Cemetery was lined with spectators and a squad of mounted policemen who had ridden from New York City.[291] Roosevelt was buried on a hillside overlooking Oyster Bay.[292] Writer[edit] Main article: Theodore Roosevelt bibliography Address to the Boys Progressive League A speech by Roosevelt as a former President Problems playing this file? See media help. Part of the Works of Theodore Roosevelt Roosevelt was a prolific author, writing with passion on subjects ranging from foreign policy to the importance of the national park system. Roosevelt was also an avid reader of poetry. Poet Robert Frost said that Roosevelt "was our kind. He quoted poetry to me. He knew poetry."[293] As an editor of Outlook magazine, Roosevelt had weekly access to a large, educated national audience. In all, Roosevelt wrote about 18 books (each in several editions), including his autobiography,[294] The Rough Riders,[295] History of the Naval War of 1812,[296] and others on subjects such as ranching, explorations, and wildlife. His most ambitious book was the four volume narrative The Winning of the West, focused on the American frontier in the 18th and early 19th centuries. Roosevelt said that the American character—indeed a new "American race" (ethnic group) had emerged from the heroic wilderness hunters and Indian fighters, acting on the frontier with little government help.[297] Roosevelt also published an account of his 1909–10 African expedition entitled African Game Trails. In 1907, Roosevelt became embroiled in a widely publicized literary debate known as the nature fakers controversy. A few years earlier, naturalist John Burroughs had published an article entitled "Real and Sham Natural History" in the Atlantic Monthly, attacking popular writers of the day such as Ernest Thompson Seton, Charles G. D. Roberts, and William J. Long for their fantastical representations of wildlife. Roosevelt agreed with Burroughs's criticisms, and published several essays of his own denouncing the booming genre of "naturalistic" animal stories as "yellow journalism of the woods". It was the President himself who popularized the negative term "nature faker" to describe writers who depicted their animal characters with excessive anthropomorphism.[298] Character and beliefs[edit] Sagamore Hill, Roosevelt's Long Island estate Roosevelt intensely disliked being called "Teddy", despite the widespread public association with said moniker, and was quick to point out this to those who referred to him as such, though it would become widely used by newspapers during his political career. He was an active Freemason[299] and member of the Sons of the American Revolution.[300] British scholar Marcus Cunliffe evaluates the liberal argument that Roosevelt was an opportunist, exhibitionist, and imperialist. Cunliffe praises TR's versatility, his respect for law, and his sincerity. He argues that Roosevelt's foreign policy was better than his detractors allege. Cunliffe calls him "a big man in several respects," ranking him below Washington, Lincoln, and Jefferson, and on the same level as Franklin D. Roosevelt.[301] Strenuous life[edit] Roosevelt had a lifelong interest in pursuing what he called, in an 1899 speech, "The Strenuous Life". To this end, he exercised regularly and took up boxing, tennis, hiking, rowing, polo, and horseback riding. He also continued his habit of skinny-dipping in the Potomac River during the winter.[302][303] As governor of New York, he boxed with sparring partners several times each week, a practice he regularly continued as president until being hit so hard in the face he became blind in his left eye (a fact not made public until many years later). As president, he practiced judo for two 2-month periods in 1902 and 1904, not attaining any rank.[304] Roosevelt began to believe in the utility of jiu-jitsu training after training with Yoshitsugu Yamashita. Concerned that the United States would lose its military supremacy to rising powers like Japan, Roosevelt began to advocate for jiu-jitsu training for American soldiers.[305] Feminists annoyed by the posturing of men like Roosevelt, insisted that women were just as capable of learning jiu-jitsu. To prove their point, Martha Blow Wadsworth and Maria Louise ("Hallie") Davis Elkins hired Fude Yamashita, a highly skilled jiu-jitsu instructor and the wife of Yoshitsugu Yamashita, to teach a jiu-jitsu class for women and girls in Washington, DC in 1904. Women had already begun training in boxing in the United States as a means of personal and political empowerment. Jiu-jitsu training thus soon also became popular with American women, coinciding with the origins of a women's self-defense movement.[306] Roosevelt was an enthusiastic singlestick player and, according to Harper's Weekly, showed up at a White House reception with his arm bandaged after a bout with General Leonard Wood in 1905.[307] Roosevelt was an avid reader, reading tens of thousands of books, at a rate of several per day in multiple languages. Along with Thomas Jefferson, Roosevelt was the most well-read of all American presidents.[308] Warrior[edit] "The Man of the Hour" Roosevelt as Warrior in 1898 and Peacemaker in 1905 settling war between Russia and Japan Historians have often emphasized Roosevelt's warrior persona.[309] He took aggressive positions regarding war with Spain in 1898, Colombia in 1903,[310] and especially with Germany, from 1915 to 1917. As a demonstration of American naval might, he sent the "Great White Fleet" around the world in 1907–1909.[311] The implicit threat of the "big stick" of military power provided leverage to "speak softly" and quietly resolve conflict in numerous cases.[312] He boasted in his autobiography: When I left the Presidency I finished seven and a half years of administration, during which not one shot had been fired against a foreign foe. We were at absolute peace, and there was no nation in the world with whom a war cloud threatened, no nation in the world whom we had wronged, or from whom we had anything to fear. The cruise of the battle fleet was not the least of the causes which ensured so peaceful an outlook.[313] Richard D. White Jr states, "Roosevelt's warrior spirit framed his views of national politics, [and] international relations."[314] Historian Howard K. Beale has argued: He and his associates came close to seeking war for its own sake. Ignorant of modern war, Roosevelt romanticized war. ... Like many young men tamed by civilization into law-abiding but adventurous living, he needed an outlet for the pent-up primordial man in him and found it in fighting and killing, vicariously or directly, in hunting or in war. Indeed he had a fairly good time in war when war came. ... There was something dull and effeminate about peace. ... He gloried in war, was thrilled by military history, and placed warlike qualities high in his scale of values. Without consciously desiring it, he thought a little war now and then stimulated admirable qualities in men. Certainly preparedness for war did.[315] Religion[edit] Roosevelt attended church regularly and was a lifelong adherent of the Reformed Church in America, an American affiliate of the Dutch Reformed Church. In 1907, concerning the motto "In God We Trust" on money, he wrote, "It seems to me eminently unwise to cheapen such a motto by use on coins, just as it would be to cheapen it by use on postage stamps, or in advertisements." Roosevelt talked a great deal about religion. Biographer Edmund Morris states: When consoling bereaved people, he would awkwardly invoke 'unseen and unknown powers.' Aside from a few clichés of Protestant rhetoric, the gospel he preached had always been political and pragmatic. He was inspired less by the Passion of Christ than by the Golden Rule—that appeal to reason amounting, in his mind, to a worldly rather than heavenly law.[316] Roosevelt publicly encouraged church attendance, and was a conscientious churchgoer himself. When gas rationing was introduced during the First World War, he walked the three miles from his home at Sagamore Hill to the local church and back, even after a serious operation had made it difficult for him to travel by foot.[317] It was said that Roosevelt "allowed no engagement to keep him from going to church," and he remained a fervent advocate of the Bible throughout his adult life.[318][319] According to Christian F. Reisner, writing in 1922 shortly after Roosevelt's death, "Religion was as natural to Mr. Roosevelt as breathing,"[320] and when the travel library for Roosevelt's famous Smithsonian-sponsored African expedition was being assembled, the Bible was, according to his sister, "the first book selected."[321] In an address delivered in his home at Oyster Bay to the Long Island Bible Society in 1901, Roosevelt declared that: Every thinking man, when he thinks, realizes what a very large number of people tend to forget, that the teachings of the Bible are so interwoven and entwined with our whole civic and social life that it would be literally—I do not mean figuratively, I mean literally—impossible for us to figure to ourselves what that life would be if these teachings were removed. We would lose almost all the standards by which we now judge both public and private morals; all the standards toward which we, with more or less of resolution, strive to raise ourselves. Almost every man who has by his lifework added to the sum of human achievement of which the race is proud, has based his lifework largely upon the teachings of the Bible ... Among the greatest men a disproportionately large number have been diligent and close students of the Bible at first hand.[321] Political positions[edit] Main article: Political positions of Theodore Roosevelt When he assumed the presidency, Roosevelt reassured many conservatives, stating, "the mechanism of modern business is so delicate that extreme care must be taken not to interfere with it in a spirit of rashness or ignorance."[322] The following year, Roosevelt asserted the president's independence from business interests by opposing the merger which created the Northern Securities Company, and many were surprised that any president, much less an unelected one, would challenge powerful banker J.P. Morgan.[323] In his last two years as president, Roosevelt became increasingly distrustful of big business, despite its close ties to the Republican Party.[324] Roosevelt sought to replace the 19th-century laissez-faire economic environment with a new economic model which included a larger regulatory role for the federal government. He believed that 19th-century entrepreneurs had risked their fortunes on innovations and new businesses, and that these capitalists had been rightly rewarded. By contrast, he believed that 20th-century capitalists risked little but nonetheless reaped huge and, given the lack of risk, unjust, economic rewards. Without a redistribution of wealth away from the upper class, Roosevelt feared that the country would turn to radicals or fall to revolution.[325] His Square Deal domestic program had three main goals: conservation of natural resources, control of corporations, and consumer protection.[326] The Square Deal evolved into his program of "New Nationalism", which emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions.[213] Legacy[edit] Historians credit Roosevelt for changing the nation's political system by permanently placing the "bully pulpit" of the presidency at center stage and making character as important as the issues. His accomplishments include trust busting and conservationism. He is a hero to liberals and progressives for his proposals in 1907–1912 that presaged the modern welfare state of the New Deal Era, including direct federal taxation, labor reforms, and more direct democracy, while conservationists admire Roosevelt for putting the environment and selflessness towards future generations on the national agenda, and conservatives and nationalists respect his commitment to law and order, civic duty and military values, as well as his personality of individual self-responsibility and hardiness. Dalton says, "Today he is heralded as the architect of the modern presidency, as a world leader who boldly reshaped the office to meet the needs of the new century and redefined America's place in the world."[327] However, liberals and socialists have criticized him for his interventionist and imperialist approach to nations he considered "uncivilized". Conservatives and libertarians reject his vision of the welfare state and emphasis on the superiority of government over private action. Historians typically rank Roosevelt among the top five presidents in American history.[328][329] Persona and masculinity[edit] 1910 cartoon showing Roosevelt's many roles from 1899 to 1910 Dalton says Roosevelt is remembered as, "one of the most picturesque personalities who has ever enlivened the landscape".[330] His friend, historian Henry Adams, proclaimed: "Roosevelt, more than any other man... showed the singular primitive quality that belongs to ultimate matter—the quality that medieval theology assigned to God—he was pure act."[331] Roosevelt's biographers have stressed his personality. Henry F. Pringle, who won the Pulitzer Prize in biography for his Theodore Roosevelt (1931) stated: "The Theodore Roosevelt of later years was the most adolescent of men… Failure to receive the Medal of Honor for his exploits [in Cuba] had been a grief as real as any of those which swamp childhood in despair. 'You must always remember,' wrote Cecil Spring Rice in 1904, 'that the President is about six.'"[332] Cooper compared him with Woodrow Wilson, and argued that both of them played the roles of warrior and priest.[333] Dalton stressed Roosevelt's strenuous life.[334] Sarah Watts examined the desires of the "Rough Rider in the White House".[335] Brands calls Roosevelt "the last romantic", arguing that his romantic concept of life emerged from his belief that "physical bravery was the highest virtue and war the ultimate test of bravery".[336] Roosevelt as the exemplar of American masculinity has become a major theme.[337][338] As president, he repeatedly warned men that they were becoming too office-bound, too complacent, too comfortable with physical ease and moral laxity, and were failing in their duties to propagate the race and exhibit masculine vigor.[339] French historian Serge Ricard says, "the ebullient apostle of the Strenuous Life offers ideal material for a detailed psycho-historical analysis of aggressive manhood in the changing socio-cultural environment of his era; McKinley, Taft, or Wilson would perhaps inadequately serve that purpose".[340] He promoted competitive sports like boxing and jiu-jitsu for physically strengthening American men.[305] He also believed that organizations like the Boy Scouts of America, founded in 1910, could help mold and strengthen the character of American boys.[341] Brands shows that heroic displays of bravery were essential to Roosevelt's image and mission: What makes the hero a hero is the romantic notion that he stands above the tawdry give and take of everyday politics, occupying an ethereal realm where partisanship gives way to patriotism, and division to unity, and where the nation regains its lost innocence, and the people their shared sense of purpose.[342] Memorials and cultural depictions[edit] Main articles: Memorials to Theodore Roosevelt and Cultural depictions of Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt on Mount Rushmore (second from right) A close-up of Roosevelt's face Roosevelt was included with Presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln at the Mount Rushmore Memorial, designed in 1927 with the approval of Republican President Calvin Coolidge.[343][344] For his gallantry at San Juan Hill, Roosevelt's commanders recommended him for the Medal of Honor. However, the initial recommendation lacked any eyewitnesses, and the effort was eventually tainted by Roosevelt's own lobbying of the War Department.[345] In the late 1990s, Roosevelt's supporters again recommended the award, which was denied by the Secretary of the Army on basis that the decorations board determined "Roosevelt's bravery in battle did not rise to the level that would justify the Medal of Honor and, indeed, it did not rise to the level of men who fought in that engagement."[346] Nevertheless, politicians apparently convinced the secretary to reconsider the award a third time and reverse himself, leading to the charge that it was a "politically motivated award."[347] On January 16, 2001, President Bill Clinton awarded Theodore Roosevelt the Medal of Honor posthumously for his charge on San Juan Hill.[104] He is the only president to have received the Medal of Honor.[348] The United States Navy named two ships for Roosevelt: the USS Theodore Roosevelt (SSBN-600), a submarine that was in commission from 1961 to 1982, and the USS Theodore Roosevelt (CVN-71), an aircraft carrier that has been on active duty in the Atlantic Fleet since 1986. On November 18, 1956, the United States Postal Service released a 6¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Roosevelt. A 32¢ stamp was issued on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series.[349] In 2008, Columbia Law School awarded Roosevelt a Juris Doctor degree, posthumously making him a member of the class of 1882.[350] Roosevelt's "Speak Softly and Carry a Big Stick" ideology is still quoted by politicians and columnists in different countries—not only in English, but also in translations to various other languages.[351] Another lasting, popular legacy of Roosevelt is the stuffed toy bears—teddy bears—named after him following an incident on a hunting trip in Mississippi in 1902.[352] Roosevelt has been portrayed in films and television series such as Brighty of the Grand Canyon, The Wind and the Lion, Rough Riders, My Friend Flicka,[353] and Law of the Plainsman.[354] Robin Williams portrayed Roosevelt in the form of a wax mannequin that comes to life in Night at the Museum and its sequels Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian and Night at the Museum: Secret of the Tomb. In 2017, it was announced that Leonardo DiCaprio will portray Roosevelt in a biopic to be directed by Martin Scorsese.[355] Moreover, Theodore Roosevelt National Park in the state of North Dakota is named after him.[356] The America the Beautiful Quarters series features Roosevelt riding a horse on the national park's quarter. Asteroid 188693 Roosevelt, discovered by astronomers with the Catalina Sky Survey in 2005, was named after him.[357] The official naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center on November 8, 2019 (M.P.C. 118221).[358] Audiovisual media[edit] Theodore Roosevelt was one of the first presidents whose voice was recorded for posterity. Several of his recorded speeches survive.[359] A 4.6-minute voice recording,[360] which preserves Roosevelt's lower timbre ranges particularly well for its time, is among those available from the Michigan State University libraries (this is the 1912 recording of The Right of the People to Rule, recorded by Edison at Carnegie Hall). The audio clip sponsored by the Authentic History Center includes his defense[361] of the Progressive Party in 1912, wherein he proclaims it the "party of the people" – in contrast with the other major parties. Play media Parade for the school children of San Francisco, down Van Ness Avenue Play media Collection of film clips of Roosevelt Roosevelt goes for a ride in Arch Hoxsey's plane in October 1910[362] Theodore Roosevelt and pilot Hoxsey at St. Louis, October 11, 1910. See also[edit] Electoral history of Theodore Roosevelt First inauguration of Theodore Roosevelt List of famous big game hunters List of Presidents of the United States List of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experience List of United States political appointments across party lines Second inauguration of Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Digital Library US Presidents on US postage stamps Teddy bear Notes[edit] ^ He was vice president under William McKinley and became president upon McKinley's assassination on September 14, 1901. This was prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967, and a vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next election and inauguration. ^ His last name is, according to Roosevelt himself, "pronounced as if it was spelled 'Rosavelt.' That is in three syllables. The first syllable as if it was 'Rose.'"[1] References[edit] ^ Hart, Albert B.; Ferleger, Herbert R (1989). "Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia" (CD-ROM). Theodore Roosevelt Association. pp. 534–35. Retrieved June 10, 2007. ^ "Theodore Roosevelt". Empire State Plaza & New York State Capitol. Retrieved April 4, 2021. ^ "Theodore Roosevelt". The White House. Retrieved April 4, 2021. ^ McMillan, Joseph (October 1, 2010), Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 26th and 32nd Presidents of the United States, American Heraldry Society, archived from the original on December 30, 2008 ^ Morris 1979, p. 3. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris1979 (help) ^ "Anna Roosevelt - Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)". National Park Service. Retrieved April 4, 2021. ^ Schriftgiesser, Karl (1942). The Amazing Roosevelt Family, 1613–1942. Wildred Funk, Inc. ^ James Patrick Byrne; Philip Coleman; Jason Francis King. Ireland and the Americas: Culture, Politics, and History. p. 848. ^ Vought, Hans P. (2004). The Bully Pulpit and the Melting Pot: American Presidents and the Immigrant, 1897–1933. Macon, Georgia: Mercer University Press. p. 29. ISBN 0-86554-887-0. ^ Putnam 1958, ch 1–2. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ Genealogy of the Oyster Bay Roosevelts. Almanac of Theodore Roosevelt online Accessed March 14, 2015. ^ McCullough 1981, pp. 93–108. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMcCullough1981 (help) ^ Putnam 1958, pp. 23–27. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ TR's Legacy — The Environment, PBS, retrieved March 6, 2006. ^ Roosevelt 1913, p. 13. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRoosevelt1913 (help) ^ Putnam 1958, pp. 63–70. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ Thayer 1919, p. 20. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1919 (help) ^ Arnaldo Testi, "The gender of reform politics: Theodore Roosevelt and the culture of masculinity." Journal of American History 81.4 (1995): 1509–1533. online ^ Beschloss, Michael (May 21, 2014), "When T.R. Saw Lincoln", New York Times, retrieved January 6, 2019. ^ Sanabria, Santa (June 26, 2011). "Mounted in New Jersey" Archived May 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. The Hudson Reporter. ^ "Topics in History: Teddy Roosevelt". home / school / life. Retrieved April 4, 2021. ^ Brands (1998). T.R.: The Last Romantic. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-465-06959-0. ^ Edward P. Kohn (2013). Heir to the Empire City: New York and the Making of Theodore Roosevelt. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-465-06975-0. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 80–82. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 62. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Clark, Suzanne (2000). Cold Warriors: Manliness on Trial in the Rhetoric of the West. SIU Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-2302-9. ^ Henry F. Pringle (1931). Theodore Roosevelt. p. 27. ^ Mark Bulik (18 July 2014). "First Glimpses: 1878: Theodore Roosevelt Inherits a Fortune". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2020. ^ a b Brands 1997, pp. 110–12, 123–33. quote p. 126. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Roosevelt 1913, p. 35. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRoosevelt1913 (help) ^ Morris 1979, p. 565. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris1979 (help) ^ Crawford, Michael J. (April 2002). "The Lasting Influence of Theodore Roosevelt's Naval War of 1812" (PDF). International Journal of Naval History. 1 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 13, 2018. Retrieved October 6, 2017. ^ Karsten, Peter (1971). "The Nature of "Influence": Roosevelt, Mahan and the Concept of Sea Power". American Quarterly. 23 (4): 585–600. doi:10.2307/2711707. JSTOR 2711707. ^ Richard W. Turk, The Ambiguous Relationship: Theodore Roosevelt and Alfred Thayer Mahan (1987) online ^ Carl Cavanagh Hodge, "The Global Strategist: The Navy as the Nation's Big Stick", in Serge Ricard, ed., A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt (2011) pp 257–73 ^ Stephen G. Rabe, Theodore Roosevelt, the Panama Canal, and the Roosevelt Corollary: Sphere of Influence Diplomacy, in Ricard, ed., A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt (2011) pp 274–92. ^ "TR Center – ImageViewer". ^ "TR Center – ImageViewer". ^ a b Miller 1992. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 166. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Morris 1979, p. 232. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris1979 (help) ^ a b Edward P. Kohn, "Theodore Roosevelt's Early Political Career: The Making of an Independent Republican and Urban Progressive" in Ricard, A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt (2011) pp: 27–44. ^ Brands 1997, pp. 134–40. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 138–139. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 140–142. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ "Mr Sheard to be Speaker" (PDF), The New York Times, January 1, 1884. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 153. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Edward P. Kohn, "'A Most Revolting State of Affairs': Theodore Roosevelt's Aldermanic Bill and the New York Assembly City Investigating Committee of 1884", American Nineteenth Century History (2009) 10#1 pp: 71–92. ^ Putnam 1958, pp. 413–24. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 171. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Putnam 1958, pp. 445–50. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ Pringle 1956, p. 61. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPringle1956 (help) ^ Putnam 1958, p. 445. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ Putnam 1958, p. 467. sfn error: no target: CITEREFPutnam1958 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 161. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ "Theodore Roosevelt the Rancher - Theodore Roosevelt National Park (U.S. National Park Service)". National Park Service. Retrieved April 4, 2021. ^ "Theodore Roosevelt the Rancher". Theodore Roosevelt National Park, North Dakota. National Park Service. Retrieved November 27, 2019. ^ Brands 1997, p. 182. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1902). Ranch Life and the Hunting Trail. Century. pp. 55–56. ISBN 978-0-486-47340-6. ^ Morrisey, Will (2009). The Dilemma of Progressivism: How Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson Reshaped the American Regime of Self-Government. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-7425-6618-7. ^ Brands 1997, p. 191. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 189. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Morris 1979, p. 376. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris1979 (help) ^ "Theodore Roosevelt the Rancher". nps.gov. National Park Service. Retrieved January 13, 2015. The blow proved disastrous for Roosevelt, who lost over half of his $80,000 investment, the equivalent of approximately $1.7 million today. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 163–164. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Thayer 1919, pp. 4, 6. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1919 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 181–182. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Rice, Sir Cecil Spring (1929), Gwynn, S (ed.), The Letters and Friendships, London: Constable & Co, p. 121. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 193–194. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, pp. 183–185. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Sharp, Arthur G. (2011). The Everything Theodore Roosevelt Book: The Extraordinary Life of an American Icon. Adams Media. pp. 78–79. ISBN 978-1-4405-2729-6. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 197–200. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, p. 201. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 203. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 206–207. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Thayer 1919, ch. VI, pp. 1–2. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1919 (help) ^ a b Bishop 2007, p. 51. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBishop2007 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 216–221. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Bishop 2007, p. 53. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBishop2007 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 265–68. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ "A Chronology". Theodore Roosevelt Association online Accessed December 2, 2018 ^ Jay Stuart Berman, Police administration and progressive reform: Theodore Roosevelt as police commissioner of New York (1987) ^ Riis, Jacob A, "XIII", The Making of an American, Bartleby, p. 3. ^ Brands 1997, p. 277. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Goodwin, Delores Kerns (2013). The bully pulpit : Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and the Golden Age of journalism (First Simon & Schuster hardcoverition ed.). Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4165-4787-7. ^ Brands 1997, p. 293. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Kennedy, Robert C (September 6, 1902), "Cartoon of the Day", Harper's Weekly (explanation), archived from the original on August 2, 2007. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 242–243. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, p. 243–246. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Lemelin, David (2011), "Theodore Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of the Navy: Preparing America for the World Stage", History Matters: 13–34. ^ Miller 1992, p. 253. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 310–12. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Roosevelt 2001, pp. 157–58. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRoosevelt2001 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, p. 267–268. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 325–26. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, p. 261, 268. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, p. 271–272. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ "The World of 1989: The Spanish–American War; Rough Riders". Library of Congress. Retrieved February 7, 2015. ^ Miller 1992, p. 272-274. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Samuels 1997, p. 148. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSamuels1997 (help) ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (2014). Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography. Auckland, New Zealand: The Floating Press. p. 244. ISBN 978-1-77653-337-4. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1898), "III", The Rough Riders, Bartleby, p. 2. ^ Brands 1997, p. 356. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ a b Woodall, James R. (2010). Williams-Ford Texas A and M University Military History: Texas Aggie Medals of Honor: Seven Heroes of World War Ii. Texas A&M University Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-60344-253-4. ^ Samuels 1997, p. 266. sfn error: no target: CITEREFSamuels1997 (help) ^ Matuz, Roger (2004). The Handy Presidents Answer Book. Canton, MI: Visible Ink Press. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 308–310. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 310–311. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 318. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Morris 1979, pp. 674–87. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris1979 (help) ^ a b Chessman 1965, p. 6. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChessman1965 (help) ^ Morris 1979, p. 693. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris1979 (help) ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1908). The Roosevelt Policy: Speeches, Letters and State Papers, Relating to Corporate Wealth and Closely Allied Topics, of Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States. p. 2. ^ Brands 1997, pp. 378–79. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Chessman 1965, p. 79. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChessman1965 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 322. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 331–333. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 333–334. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 333–334, 338. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 338. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 340–341. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 342. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 388–405. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ John M. Hilpert, American Cyclone: Theodore Roosevelt and His 1900 Whistle-Stop Campaign (U Press of Mississippi, 2015). ^ Chessman, G Wallace (1952), "Theodore Roosevelt's Campaign Against the Vice-Presidency", Historian, 14 (2): 173–90, doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.1952.tb00132.x. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 346. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Woltman, Nick (August 31, 2015). "Roosevelt's 'big stick' line at State Fair stuck...later". Twin Cities Pioneer Press. Retrieved June 9, 2020. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 354–356. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 422–23. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Edmund Morris, Theodore Rex p58 ^ a b c Ruddy 2016. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuddy2016 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 365–366. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Schweikart, Larry (2009). American Entrepreneur: The Fascinating Stories of the People Who Defined Business in the United States. AMACOM Div American Mgmt Assn. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 378–381. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 552–53. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 553–56. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Harbaugh, William Henry (1963), Power and Responsibility: Theodore Roosevelt, pp. 165–79. ^ Brands 1997, pp. 450–83. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 509. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 376–377. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, p. 207. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, p. 208. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ a b Chambers 1974, p. 209. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 453–459. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ John Morton Blum, The Republican Roosevelt (2nd ed. 1977) pp 89–117 ^ Morris (2001) pp. 445–448 ^ Miller 1992, pp. 459–460. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Engs, Ruth C. (2003). The progressive era's health reform movement: a historical dictionary. Westport, CT: Praeger. pp. 20–22. ISBN 0-275-97932-6. ^ Bakari, Mohamed El-Kamel. "Mapping the 'Anthropocentric-ecocentric' Dualism in the History of American Presidency: The Good, the Bad, and the Ambivalent." Journal of Studies in Social Sciences 14, no. 2 (2016). ^ Miller 1992, p. 469–471. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Douglas Brinkley, The Wilderness Warrior: Theodore Roosevelt and the Crusade for America (2010) ^ Executing the Constitution: Putting the President Back Into the Constitution. State University of New York Press. 2006. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-7914-8190-5. ^ a b c Dodds, Graham (2013). Take up Your Pen. University of Pennsylvania. p. 144. ISBN 978-0-8122-4511-0. ^ a b Dodds, Graham (2013). Take up Your Pen. University of Pennsylvania. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-8122-4511-0. ^ "Executive Orders". UCSB. ^ William Michael Morgan, "The anti-Japanese origins of the Hawaiian Annexation treaty of 1897." Diplomatic History 6.1 (1982): 23–44. ^ James K. Eyre Jr, "Japan and the American Annexation of the Philippines." Pacific Historical Review 11.1 (1942): 55–71 online. ^ Michael J. Green, By More Than Providence: Grand Strategy and American Power in the Asia Pacific Since 1783 (2019) pp 78–113. ^ Charles E. Neu, An Uncertain Friendship: Theodore Roosevelt and Japan, 1906–1909 (1967) pp 310–319. ^ Brands 1997, pp. 530–39. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Neu, pp 263–80. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 382–383. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 450–451. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 387–388. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 399–400. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 397–398. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 615–16. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 384. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 464. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 527. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 482–86. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, pp. 209–210. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, pp. 213–214. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, p. 215. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 570. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Serge Ricard, "The State of Theodore Roosevelt Studies" "H-Diplo Essay #116", October 24, 2014 ^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006). "Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference—93 years young!". American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. ^ Weinberg, Arthur; Weinberg, Lila Shaffer (1961). The Muckrakers. University of Illinois Press. pp. 58–66. ISBN 978-0-252-06986-4. ^ Brands 1997, pp. 633–34. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, p. 436-437. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, p. 437–438. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 501–3. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 504. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 507. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, pp. 215–216. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ a b Chambers 1974, p. 216. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ a b Chambers 1974, pp. 216–217. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 513–14. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Chambers 1974, pp. 217–218. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Lewis L. Gould (2012). Theodore Roosevelt. Oxford UP. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-19-979701-1. ^ "Major Archibald Butt" (PDF). The New York Times. April 16, 1912. Retrieved June 2, 2018. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 463–464. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Ricard, ed. A companion to Theodore Roosevelt (2011) pp 160–66. ^ Chambers 1974, p. 219. sfn error: no target: CITEREFChambers1974 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 483–485. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 626. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 488–489. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Solvick, Stanley D. (1963). "William Howard Taft and the Payne-Aldrich Tariff". The Mississippi Valley Historical Review. 50 (3): 424–442. doi:10.2307/1902605. JSTOR 1902605. ^ "President Roosevelt's African Trip". Science. 28 (729): 876–77. December 18, 1908. Bibcode:1908Sci....28..876.. doi:10.1126/science.28.729.876. JSTOR 1635075. PMID 17743798. ^ a b "Roosevelt African Expedition Collects for SI". Smithsonian Institution Archives. Retrieved April 10, 2012. ^ George A. Cevasco & Richard P. Harmond (2009). Modern American Environmentalists: A Biographical Encyclopedia. JHU Press. p. 444. ISBN 978-0-8018-9524-1. ^ O'Toole 2005, p. 67. sfn error: no target: CITEREFO'Toole2005 (help) ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1910). African Game Trails. New York, C. Scribner's sons. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 505. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 505–509. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, pp. 511. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 506–507. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 503. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 665–66. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 502–503. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ letter to George Otto Trevelyan, October 1, 1911, in Albert Bushnell Hart, ed., Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia (1941) p 499. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 512–513. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Brands 1997, p. 675. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 515–516. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 517. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 683. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, pp. 518. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 684. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 519. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ David H. Burton, William Howard Taft: Confident Peacemaker (2004) pp. 82–83. ^ John E. Noyes, "William Howard Taft and the Taft Arbitration Treaties." Villanova Law Review 56 (2011): 535+ online. ^ Campbell, John P. (1966). "Taft, Roosevelt, and the Arbitration Treaties of 1911". The Journal of American History. 53 (2): 279–298. doi:10.2307/1894200. JSTOR 1894200. ^ Robert J. Fischer, "Henry Cabot Lodge and the Taft Arbitration Treaties." South Atlantic Quarterly 78 (Spring 1979): 244-58. ^ E. James Hindman, "The General Arbitration Treaties of William Howard Taft." Historian 36.1 (1973): 52-65. online ^ Melvin I. Urofsky (2004). The American Presidents: Critical Essays. Routledge. p. 323. ISBN 978-1-135-58137-4. ^ Campbell, 1996 ^ Brands 1997, p. 698. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 703. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 709. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. 705. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Lorant, Stefan (1968). The Glorious Burden: The American Presidency. New York: Harper & Row. p. 512. ISBN 0-06-012686-8. ^ Brands 1997, p. 706. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Norrander, Barbara (2015). My library My History Books on Google Play The Imperfect Primary: Oddities, Biases, and Strengths of U.S. Presidential Nomination Politics. Routledge. p. 14. ISBN 978-1-317-55332-8. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 524. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, pp. 524–526. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Omar H. Ali (2008). In the Balance of Power: Independent Black Politics and Third-Party Movements in the United States. Ohio UP. pp. 111–12. ISBN 978-0-8214-4288-3. ^ Brands 1997, p. 717. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Cannon, Carl M (2003), The Pursuit of Happiness in Times of War, Rowman & Littlefield, p. 142, ISBN 0-7425-2592-9. ^ O'Toole, Patricia (June 25, 2006). "The War of 1912". Time Magazine. Retrieved August 8, 2008. ^ Roosevelt 1913, XV. The Peace of Righteousness, Appendix B. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRoosevelt1913 (help) ^ Thayer 1919, Chapter XXII, pp. 25–31. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1919 (help) ^ Mowry, George E. (1940). "The South and the Progressive Lily White Party of 1912". The Journal of Southern History. 6 (2): 237–247. doi:10.2307/2191208. JSTOR 2191208. ^ Link, Arthur S. (1947). "The Negro as a Factor in the Campaign of 1912". The Journal of Negro History. 32 (1): 81–99. doi:10.2307/2715292. JSTOR 2715292. S2CID 150222134. ^ Link, Arthur S. (1946). "Theodore Roosevelt and the South in 1912". The North Carolina Historical Review. 23 (3): 313–324. JSTOR 23515317. ^ Edgar Eugene Robinson, The Presidential Vote 1896–1932 (1947), pp 65–127. ^ Stan Gores, "The attempted assassination of Teddy Roosevelt." Wisconsin Magazine of History (1970) 53#4: 269-277 online. ^ "Artifacts". Museum. Wisconsin Historical Society. Retrieved September 14, 2010. ^ "The Bull Moose and related media". history.com. A&E Networks. Archived from the original on March 8, 2010. Retrieved March 8, 2010. to make sure that no violence was done. ^ Congress, United States (1951). Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the ... Congress. U.S. Government Printing Office. ^ Remey, Oliver E.; Cochems, Henry F.; Bloodgood, Wheeler P. (1912). The Attempted Assassination of Ex-President Theodore Roosevelt. Milwaukee, Wisconsin: The Progressive Publishing Company. p. 192. ^ "Medical History of American Presidents". Doctor Zebra. Retrieved September 14, 2010. ^ "Excerpt", Detroit Free Press, History buff. ^ "Roosevelt Timeline". Theodore Roosevelt. Retrieved September 14, 2010. ^ Gerard Helferich, Theodore Roosevelt and the Assassin: Madness, Vengeance, and the Campaign of 1912 (2013) ^ The Works of Theodore Roosevelt (1926) – Volume 24 – Page 405. ^ Goodwin, Doris Kearns (2013). "Armageddon". The Bully Pulpit (Audiobook). Simon & Schuster Audio. ASIN B00DEKZDOG. ^ Miller 1992, pp. 529. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 529–530. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Lewis L. Gould, Four Hats in the Ring: The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics (Univ. Press of Kansas, 2008) ^ Dexter, Jim (March 10, 2010). "How third-party candidates affect elections". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2016. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1914), Through the Brazilian Wilderness (facsimile) (1st ed.), S4u languages, hdl:2027/nyp.33433081694915. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1914). "The Start" . Through the Brazilian Wilderness  – via Wikisource. ^ a b c Millard, The river of doubt: Theodore Roosevelt's darkest journey (2009). ^ Marx, Rudolph (October 31, 2011), The Health of The President: Theodore Roosevelt, Health guidance. ^ a b "Theodore Roosevelt Dies Suddenly at Oyster Bay Home; Nation Shocked, Pays Tribute to Former President; Our Flag on All Seas and in All Lands at Half Mast". The New York Times. January 1919. ^ Thayer 1919, pp. 4–7. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1919 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 539–540. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 548–549. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 550–551. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 552–553. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ McGeary, M. Nelson (July 1959). "Gifford Pinchot's Years of Frustration, 1917–1920". The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography. 83 (3): 327–342. JSTOR 20089210. ^ Henry F. Pringle, Theodore Roosevelt: A Biography (1931) p. 519 ^ J. Lee Thompson (2014). Never Call Retreat: Theodore Roosevelt and the Great War. pp. 32–34. ISBN 978-1-137-30653-1. ^ Richard M. Gamble (2014). The War for Righteousness: Progressive Christianity, the Great War, and the Rise of the Messianic Nation. pp. 97–98. ISBN 978-1-4976-4679-7. ^ William Clinton Olson, " Theodore Roosevelt's Conception of an International League" World Affairs Quarterly (1959) 29#3 pp. 329–353. ^ Stephen Wertheim, "The league that wasn't: American designs for a legalist-sanctionist league of nations and the intellectual origins of international organization, 1914–1920." Diplomatic History 35.5 (2011): 797–836. ^ David Mervin, "Henry Cabot Lodge and the League of Nations." Journal of American Studies 4#2 (1971): 201–214. online ^ Brands 1997, pp. 749–51, 806–9. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Roosevelt 1917, p. 347. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRoosevelt1917 (help) ^ "Enroll Westerners for Service in War; Movement to Register Men of That Region Begun at the Rocky Mountain Club. Headed by Major Burnham. John Hays Hammond and Others of Prominence Reported to be Supporting Plan" (PDF). New York Times. March 13, 1917. p. 11. Retrieved June 30, 2013. ^ "Will Not Send Roosevelt; Wilson Not to Avail Himself of Volunteer Authority at Present". New York Times. May 19, 1917. ISSN 0362-4331. ^ Roosevelt 1917. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRoosevelt1917 (help) ^ Brands 1997, pp. 781–4. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Cramer, CH (1961), Newton D. Baker, pp. 110–13. ^ a b Dalton 2002, p. 507. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDalton2002 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 562–564. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ a b Miller 1992, p. 559. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Miller 1992, pp. 564–566. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMiller1992 (help) ^ Manners, William (1969), TR and Will: A Friendship that Split the Republican Party, New York: Harcourt, Brace & World. ^ a b Morris 2010, p. 556. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris2010 (help) ^ Morris 2010, pp. 554, 556–557. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris2010 (help) ^ Morris 2010, pp. 554, 557. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMorris2010 (help) ^ ""Light gone out" – TR at the Library of Congress – Jefferson's Legacy: The Library of Congress Review". IgoUgo. Retrieved October 31, 2011. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (2006). An Autobiography. Echo Library. ISBN 978-1-4068-0155-2. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1904). The Rough Riders. New York: The Review of Reviews Company. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1900). The Naval War of 1812. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. ^ Richard Slotkin, "Nostalgia and progress: Theodore Roosevelt's myth of the frontier". American Quarterly (1981) 33#5 pp: 608–637. online ^ Carson, Gerald (February 1971), "Roosevelt and the 'nature fakers'", American Heritage Magazine, 22 (2). ^ "THEODORE ROOSEVELT". mdmasons.org. The Grand Lodge of Maryland. Retrieved 15 February 2021. ^ "The Origins of the SAR", About, SAR. ^ Marcus Cunliffe, "Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States 1901–1908" History Today (Sept 1955) 4#9 pp592-601. ^ Thayer 1919, Chapter XVII, pp. 22–24. sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1919 (help) ^ Shaw, KB; Maiden, David (2006), "Theodore Roosevelt", Biographies, Inc well, retrieved March 7, 2006. ^ ukemi (2019), "Theodore Roosevelt", Roosevelt's Judo experience, Stack Exchange, retrieved April 10, 2020. ^ a b Rouse, Wendy (2015-11-01). "Jiu-Jitsuing Uncle SamThe Unmanly Art of Jiu-Jitsu and the Yellow Peril Threat in the Progressive Era United States". Pacific Historical Review. 84 (4): 448–477. doi:10.1525/phr.2015.84.4.448. ISSN 0030-8684. ^ Rouse, Wendy (2017). Her Own Hero: The Origins of the Women's Self-Defense Movement. New York: New York University Press. ISBN 978-1-4798-0729-1. ^ Amberger, J Christoph (1998), Secret History of the Sword Adventures in Ancient Martial Arts, ISBN 1-892515-04-0. ^ Burton, David H (1988), The Learned Presidency, p. 12. ^ Kathleen Dalton notes that historians have preferred retelling the "oft-repeated accounts of warmongering." Dalton 2002, p. 522 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFDalton2002 (help). ^ Richard W. Turk, "The United States Navy and the 'Taking' of Panama, 1901–1903." Journal of Military History 38.3 (1974): 92+. ^ James R. Holmes, "'A Striking Thing' Leadership, Strategic Communications, and Roosevelt's Great White Fleet." Naval War College Review 61.1 (2008): 50–67. online ^ Kathleen M. Dalton, "Making Biographical Judgments: Was Theodore Roosevelt a Warmonger?" OAH Magazine of History (13#3) (1999) online ^ Theodore Roosevelt (1913). Theodore Roosevelt: an autobiography ... Macmillan and Co. p. 602. ^ Richard D. White Jr (2003). Roosevelt the Reformer: Theodore Roosevelt as Civil Service Commissioner, 1889–1895. U of Alabama Press. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-8173-1361-6. ^ Beale 1956, p. 48. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBeale1956 (help) ^ Edmund Morris (2010). Colonel Roosevelt. Random House. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-679-60415-0. ^ Reisner, Christian F. (1922). Roosevelt's Religion. The Abingdon Press. p. 355. ^ Reisner, Christian F. (1922). Roosevelt's Religion. The Abingdon Press. p. 357. ^ Reisner, Christian F. (1922). Roosevelt's Religion. The Abingdon Press. pp. 305–323. ^ Reisner, Christian F. (1922). Roosevelt's Religion. The Abingdon Press. p. 324. ^ a b Reisner, Christian F. (1922). Roosevelt's Religion. The Abingdon Press. p. 306. ^ Leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 30–31. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLeuchtenburg2015 (help) ^ Leuchtenburg 2015, pp. 32–33. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLeuchtenburg2015 (help) ^ Gary Murphy in "Theodore Roosevelt, Presidential Power and the Regulation of the Market" in Serge Ricard, ed. A companion to Theodore Roosevelt (2011) pp 154–72. ^ Morris (2001) pp. 430–431, 436 ^ Klopfenstein, Mark, The Progressive Era (1900–1920) (PDF), archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2013, retrieved January 18, 2019 ^ Dalton 2002, pp. 4–5. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDalton2002 (help) ^ "Theodore Roosevelt Biography: Impact and Legacy". American President. Miller Center of Public Affairs. 2003. Archived from the original on April 18, 2005. ^ "Legacy: Theodore Roosevelt". PBS. Archived from the original on April 17, 2004.. ^ Dalton 2002, p. 5. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDalton2002 (help) ^ Adams, Henry (1918). The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography. Houghton Mifflin Company. p. 417. ^ Pringle, Theodore Roosevelt: A Biography (1931) p 4. online ^ Cooper 1983. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCooper1983 (help) ^ Dalton 2002. sfn error: no target: CITEREFDalton2002 (help) ^ Watts 2003. sfn error: no target: CITEREFWatts2003 (help) ^ Brands 1997, p. x. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Testi 1995. sfn error: no target: CITEREFTesti1995 (help) ^ D. G. Daniels, "Theodore Roosevelt and Gender Roles" Presidential Studies Quarterly (1996) 26#3 pp 648–665 ^ Dorsey, Leroy G (2013), "Managing Women's Equality: Theodore Roosevelt, the Frontier Myth, and the Modern Woman", Rhetoric & Public Affairs, 16 (3): 425, doi:10.1353/rap.2013.0037, S2CID 144278936. ^ Ricard, Serge (2005), "Review", The Journal of Military History, 69 (2): 536–37, doi:10.1353/jmh.2005.0123, S2CID 153729793. ^ Boy Scouts Handbook (original ed.). Boy Scouts of America. 1911. pp. 374–6. ISBN 978-1-62636-639-8. ^ Brands 1997, p. 372. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBrands1997 (help) ^ Domek, Tom; Hayes, Robert E. (2006). Mt. Rushmore and Keystone. Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishing. ^ Fite, Gibert C. (2003). Mount Rushmore. Mount Rushmore History Association. ISBN 0-9646798-5-X. ^ Mears, The Medal of Honor, 153–154 ^ Mears, The Medal of Honor, 154 ^ Mears, The Medal of Honor, 155 ^ Dorr, Robert F. (July 1, 2015). "Theodore Roosevelt's Medal of Honor". Defense Media Network. Retrieved February 12, 2018. ^ "Up 1900s Celebrate The Century Issues". Smithsonian National Postal Museum. January 1, 1998. Retrieved June 18, 2015. ^ Kelly, Erin St. John (September 25, 2008). "Presidents Roosevelt Awarded Posthumous J.D.s". Columbia Law School. ^ Fung, Brian (September 24, 2012). "What Does Teddy Roosevelt's 'Big Stick' Line Really Mean, Anyway?". The Atlantic. Washington, DC: Emerson Collective. ^ Leuchtenburg 2015, p. 30. sfn error: no target: CITEREFLeuchtenburg2015 (help) ^ "My Friend Flicka". Classic Television Archives. Retrieved March 18, 2009. ^ "Law of the Plainsman". imdb.com. Retrieved May 22, 2017. ^ Fleming Jr, Mike (September 26, 2017). "Leonardo DiCaprio & Martin Scorsese Ride Again On Teddy Roosevelt Pic At Paramount". Deadline.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved September 27, 2017. ^ "Theodore Roosevelt National Park". Travel. National Geographic. November 5, 2009. Retrieved August 17, 2018. ^ "(188693) Roosevelt". Minor Planet Center. Retrieved November 21, 2019. ^ "MPC/MPO/MPS Archive". Minor Planet Center. Retrieved November 21, 2019. ^ Vincent Voice Library, Michigan State University, archived from the original (audio clips) on June 3, 2013, retrieved July 17, 2012. ^ "MSU". Retrieved September 14, 2010. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1913a). Youngman, Elmer H (ed.). Progressive Principles. New York: Progressive National Service. p. 215. Retrieved April 14, 2009. ^ Some rare photos of flight with Arch Hoxsey Bibliography[edit] Main article: Bibliography of Theodore Roosevelt Full biographies[edit] Brands, Henry William (1997), TR: The Last Romantic (full biography), New York: Basic Books, ISBN 978-0-465-06958-3, OCLC 36954615. Chessman, G Wallace (1965), Governor Theodore Roosevelt: The Albany Apprenticeship, 1898–1900 Cooper, John Milton (1983), The Warrior and the Priest: Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt (dual scholarly biography), ISBN 978-0-674-94751-1. Dalton, Kathleen (2002), Theodore Roosevelt: A Strenuous Life (full scholarly biography), ISBN 0-679-76733-9. Gould, Lewis L (2012), Theodore Roosevelt, 105 pp, very short biography by leading scholar. Harbaugh, William Henry (1963), The Life and Times of Theodore Roosevelt (full scholarly biography), Farrar, Straus And Cudahy.; also titled Power and responsibility; the life and times of Theodore Roosevelt online free to borrow Miller, Nathan (1992), Theodore Roosevelt: A Life, William Morrow & Co. Morris, Edmund (1979), The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt, 1. To 1901. Morris, Edmund (2001), Theodore Rex, 2. To 1909 Morris, Edmund (2010), Colonel Roosevelt, 3 Pringle, Henry F (1931), Theodore Roosevelt (full scholarly biography). Pringle, Henry F (1956), Theodore Roosevelt (2nd ed.) Putnam, Carleton (1958), Theodore Roosevelt (biography), I: The Formative Years, only volume published, to age 28. Samuels, Peggy (1997), Teddy Roosevelt at San Juan: The Making of a President, Texas A&M UP, ISBN 978-0-89096-771-3. Thayer, William Roscoe (1919), Theodore Roosevelt: an intimate biography, Houghton Mifflin. Personality and activities[edit] Bishop, Joseph Bucklin (2007), Theodore Roosevelt's Letters to His Children, Wildside Press, ISBN 978-1-434-48394-2. DiSilvestro, Roger (2011), Theodore Roosevelt in the Badlands: A Young Politician's Quest in the American West, Walker & Co, ISBN 978-0-8027-1721-4, archived from the original on March 26, 2011. Fehn, Bruce (2005), "Theodore Roosevelt and American Masculinity", Magazine of History, 19 (2): 52–59, doi:10.1093/maghis/19.2.52, ISSN 0882-228X Provides a lesson plan on TR as the historical figure who most exemplifies the quality of masculinity. Gluck, Sherwin (1999), TR's Summer White House, Oyster Bay. Chronicles the events of TR's presidency during the summers of his two terms. Greenberg, David (2011), "Beyond the Bully Pulpit", Wilson Quarterly, 35 (3): 22–29. The president's use of publicity, rhetoric and force of personality. Millard, Candice (2005), The River of Doubt: Theodore Roosevelt's Darkest Journey; his deadly 1913–14 trip to the Amazon. McCullough, David (1981), Mornings on Horseback: The Story of an Extraordinary Family, a Vanished Way of Life and the Unique Child Who Became Theodore Roosevelt, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-0-7432-1830-6, best seller; to 1886. ——— (2001) [1981], Mornings on Horseback, The Story of an Extraordinary Family, a Vanished Way of Life, and the Unique Child Who Became Theodore Roosevelt (popular biography), to 1884. O'Toole, Patricia (2005), When Trumpets Call: Theodore Roosevelt after the White House, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-684-86477-0. 494 pp. Renehan, Edward J (1998), The Lion's Pride: Theodore Roosevelt and His Family in Peace and War, Oxford University Press, examines TR and his family during the World War I period. Testi, Arnaldo (1995), "The Gender of Reform Politics: Theodore Roosevelt and the Culture of Masculinity", Journal of American History, 81 (4): 1509–33, doi:10.2307/2081647, JSTOR 2081647. Thompson, J Lee (2010), Theodore Roosevelt Abroad: Nature, Empire, and the Journey of an American President, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-0-230-10277-4, 240 pp. TR in Africa & Europe, 1909–10 Watts, Sarah (2003), Rough Rider in the White House: Theodore Roosevelt and the Politics of Desire. 289 pp. Yarbrough, Jean M (2012), Theodore Roosevelt and the American Political Tradition, University Press of Kansas, 337 pp; TR's political thought and its significance for republican self-government. Domestic policies[edit] Brinkley, Douglas (2009). The Wilderness Warrior: Theodore Roosevelt and the Crusade for America. New York: HarperCollins.online review; another online review Cutright, P.R. (1985) Theodore Roosevelt: The making of a Modern Conservationist (U of Illinois Press.) Dorsey, Leroy G (1997), "The Frontier Myth and Teddy Roosevelt's Fight for Conservation", in Gerster, Patrick; Cords, Nicholas (eds.), Myth America: A Historical Anthology, II, St. James, NY: Brandywine Press, ISBN 1-881089-97-5. Gould, Lewis L (2011), The Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt (2nd ed.), standard history of his domestic and foreign policy as president. Bakari, Mohamed El-Kamel. "Mapping the 'Anthropocentric-ecocentric'Dualism in the History of American Presidency: The Good, the Bad, and the Ambivalent." Journal of Studies in Social Sciences 14, no. 2 (2016). Keller, Morton, ed. (1967), Theodore Roosevelt: A Profile (excerpts from TR and from historians). Murphey, William (March 2013), "Theodore Roosevelt and the Bureau of Corporation: Executive-Corporate Cooperation and the Advancement of the Regulatory State", American Nineteenth Century History, 14 (1): 73–111, doi:10.1080/14664658.2013.774983, S2CID 146629376. Redekop, Benjamin. (2015). "Embodying the Story: The Conservation Leadership of Theodore Roosevelt". Leadership (2015) DOI:10.1177/1742715014546875 online Swanson, Ryan A (2011), "'I Never Was a Champion at Anything': Theodore Roosevelt's Complex and Contradictory Record as America's 'Sports President'", Journal of Sport History, 38 (3): 425–46. Zacks, Richard (2012), Island of Vice: Theodore Roosevelt's Doomed Quest to Clean Up Sin-Loving New York. Politics[edit] Blum, John Morton (1954), The Republican Roosevelt, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, OCLC 310975. How TR did politics. Chace, James (2004), 1912: Wilson, Roosevelt, Taft, and Debs: The Election That Changed the Country, ISBN 978-0-7432-0394-4, 323 pp. Chambers, John W. (1974), Woodward, C. Vann (ed.), Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct, New York, New York: Delacorte Press, pp. 207–237, ISBN 0-440-05923-2 Gould, Lewis L (2008), Four Hats in the Ring: The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics (by a leading scholar), ISBN 978-0-7006-1564-3. Haverkamp, Michael (2001), "Rossevelt and Taft: How the Republican Vote Split in Ohio in 1912", Ohio History, 110 (1): 121–35, archived from the original on March 5, 2008. Kohn, Edward P (Spring 2006), "A Necessary Defeat: Theodore Roosevelt and the New York Mayoral Election of 1886", New York History, 87: 205–27. ——— (2006), "Crossing the Rubicon: Theodore Roosevelt, Henry Cabot Lodge, and the 1884 Republican National Convention", Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era, 5 (1): 18–45, doi:10.1017/s1537781400002851, hdl:11693/48372, S2CID 163282993. Leuchtenburg, William E. (2015), The American President: From Teddy Roosevelt to Bill Clinton, Oxford University Press Milkis, Sidney M (2009), Theodore Roosevelt, the Progressive Party, and the Transformation of American Democracy, Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. 361 pp. Mowry, George E (1939), "Theodore Roosevelt and the Election of 1910", The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 25 (4): 523–34, doi:10.2307/1892499, JSTOR 1892499. ——— (1946), Theodore Roosevelt and the Progressive Movement. Focus on 1912; online free ——— (1954), The Era of Theodore Roosevelt and the Birth of Modern America, 1900–1912 (general survey of era). online free Powell, Jim (2006), Bully Boy: The Truth About Theodore Roosevelt's Legacy, Crown Forum, ISBN 0-307-23722-2. Attacks TR policies from conservative/libertarian perspective. Ruddy, Daniel (2016), Theodore the Great: Conservative Crusader, Washington D.C.: Regnery History, ISBN 978-1-62157-441-5 Foreign and military policies[edit] Beale, Howard K (1956), Theodore Roosevelt and the Rise of America to World Power (standard history of his foreign policy). online Hattendorf, John B., and William P. Leeman (2020), Forging the Trident: Theodore Roosevelt and the United States Navy. Hendrix, Henry J (2009), Theodore Roosevelt's Naval Diplomacy: The US Navy & the Birth of the American Century. Holmes, James R (2006), Theodore Roosevelt and World Order: Police Power in International Relations. 328 pp. Jones, Gregg (2012), Honor in the Dust: Theodore Roosevelt, War in the Philippines, and the Rise and Fall of America's Imperial Dream Marks III, Frederick W (1979), Velvet on Iron: The Diplomacy of Theodore Roosevelt. McCullough, David (1977), The Path between the Seas: The Creation of the Panama Canal, 1870–1914. Mears, Dwight S. (2018). The Medal of Honor: The Evolution of America's Highest Military Decoration. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-2665-6. OCLC 1032014828. Oyos, Matthew (2011), "Courage, Careers, and Comrades: Theodore Roosevelt and the United States Army Officer Corps", Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era, 10 (1): 23–58, doi:10.1017/s1537781410000022, S2CID 155074242. Oyos, Matthew M. In Command: Theodore Roosevelt and the American Military (2018) online review Pietrusza, David (2018). TR's Last War: Theodore Roosevelt, the Great War, and a Journey of Triumph and Tragedy Ricard, Serge (2006), "The Roosevelt Corollary", Presidential Studies Quarterly, 36 (1): 17–26, doi:10.1111/j.1741-5705.2006.00283.x. ——— (2008), "Theodore Roosevelt: Imperialist or Global Strategist in the New Expansionist Age?", Diplomacy and Statecraft, 19 (4): 639–57, doi:10.1080/09592290802564379, S2CID 154317468. Rofe, J Simon (2008), "'Under the Influence of Mahan': Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt and their Understanding of American National Interest", Diplomacy and Statecraft, 19 (4): 732–45, doi:10.1080/09592290802564536, S2CID 154454947. ———; Thompson, John M (2011), "Internationalists in Isolationist times – Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt and a Rooseveltian Maxim", Journal of Transatlantic Studies, 9 (1): 46–62, doi:10.1080/14794012.2011.550773, S2CID 143650928. Tilchin, William N (1997), Theodore Roosevelt and the British Empire: A Study in Presidential Statecraft Tilchin, William N; Neu, Charles E, eds. (2006), Artists of Power: Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, and Their Enduring Impact on US Foreign Policy, Praeger. 196 pp. Historiography[edit] Cullinane, Michael Patrick (2017). Theodore Roosevelt's Ghost: The History and Memory of an American Icon. LSU Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-6672-7. Cunliffe, Marcus. "Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States 1901–1908" History Today (Sept 1955) 4#9 pp 592–601, online. Dalton, Kathleen (2017). "Changing interpretations of Theodore Roosevelt and the Progressive era". In Nichols, Christopher M.; Unger, Nancy C. (eds.). A Companion to the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. pp. 296–307. Grantham, Dewey W., Jr. (January 1961). "Theodore Roosevelt in American Historical Writing, 1945–1960". Mid-America. 43 (1): 3–35. Ricard, Serge. "The State of Theodore Roosevelt Studies" H-Diplo Essay No. 116 24 October 2014 online Ricard, Serge, ed. (2011). A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt. ISBN 978-1-4443-3140-0., excerpt and text search, 28 new essays by scholars; focus on historiography. online Tilchin, William (Summer 1989). "The Rising Star of Theodore Roosevelt's Diplomacy: Major Studies from Beale to the Present". Theodore Roosevelt Association Journal. 15 (3): 2–24. Primary sources[edit] Kohn, Edward P., ed. A Most Glorious Ride: The Diaries of Theodore Roosevelt, 1877–1886 (State University of New York Press, 2015), 284 pp. Bishop, Joseph Bucklin, ed. (1920), Theodore Roosevelt and His Time Shown in His Own Letters vol. 1; vol 2 Roosevelt, Theodore; Roosevelt, Kermit (1926), East of the Sun and West of the Moon, New York: Scribner Roosevelt, Theodore (1889), The Winning of the West, I, New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons ——— (1913), Autobiography, New York: Macmillan. ——— (1916), Fear God and Take Your Own Part, New York: George H. Doran, LCCN 16003624 ——— (1917), The Foes of Our Own Household, New York: George H. Doran, LCCN 17025965 ——— (1926), The Works (National ed.), 20 vol.; 18,000 pages containing most of TR's speeches, books and essays, but not his letters; a CD-ROM edition is available; some of TR's books are available online through Project Bartleby ——— (1941), Hart, Albert Bushnell; Ferleger, Herbert Ronald (eds.), Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia, Roosevelt's opinions on many issues; online version at Theodore Roosevelt. ——— (1951–1954), Morison, Elting E; Blum, John Morton; Chandler, Alfred D jr (eds.), The Letters (annotated ed.), 8 vols. Very large collection. vol 1 1868-1898 online free ——— (1967), Harbaugh, William (ed.), The Writings (one-volume selection of speeches and essays). online free ——— (1968), Roosevelt, Archibald (ed.), Theodore Roosevelt on Race, Riots, Reds, Crime, Probe ——— (1999) [1913], An Autobiography, Bartleby. ——— (1999) [1882], The Naval War of 1812 Or the History of the United States Navy during the Last War with Great Britain to Which Is Appended an Account of the Battle of New Orleans, New York: The Modern Library, ISBN 0-375-75419-9. ——— (2001), Brands, HW (ed.), The Selected Letters online free to borrow ——— (2004), Auchincloss, Louis (ed.), Theodore Roosevelt, The Rough Riders and an Autobiography, Library of America, ISBN 978-1-931082-65-5. ——— (2004), Auchincloss, Louis (ed.), Letters and Speeches, Library of America, ISBN 978-1-931082-66-2. ———. "Books and speeches". Project Gutenberg. Retrieved October 5, 2010. ———, Original Handwritten and Typed Letters, Notes, and Documents, Shapell Manuscript Foundation. External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Wikisource has the text of the 1922 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Roosevelt, Theodore". Official[edit] White House biography Organizations[edit] Boone and Crockett Club Theodore Roosevelt Association Libraries and collections[edit] Theodore Roosevelt Center at Dickinson State University Theodore Roosevelt Collection, at the Houghton Library, Harvard University Julian L. Street Papers on Theodore Roosevelt, at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library, Princeton University Doris A. and Lawrence H. Budner Collection on Theodore Roosevelt at the DeGolyer Library, Southern Methodist University Theodore Roosevelt's journalism at The Archive of American Journalism Theodore Roosevelt American Museum of Natural History Works by API at Project Gutenberg Works by or about API at Internet Archive Works by API at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Roosevelt Papers, at the Library of Congress Guide to the Herbert R. Strauss Collection of Theodore Roosevelt Papers 1884–1919 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center Media[edit] "API collected news and commentary". The New York Times. "Life Portrait of Theodore Roosevelt", from C-SPAN's American Presidents: Life Portraits, September 3, 1999 "Writings of Theodore Roosevelt" from C-SPAN's American Writers: A Journey Through History Other[edit] United States Congress. "API (id: R000429)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Almanac of Theodore Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt: A Resource Guide – Library of Congress {{Nobelprize}} template missing ID and not present in Wikidata. Theodore Roosevelt at Curlie Henderson, Daniel. Great-heart; The Life Story of Theodore Roosevelt (1919) at Project Gutenberg API at IMDb v t e Theodore Roosevelt 26th President of the United States (1901–1909) 25th Vice President of the United States (1901) 33rd Governor of New York (1899–1900) Assistant Secretary of the Navy, (1897–1898) New York City Police Commissioner (1895–1897) New York State Assemblyman (1882) 106th New York State Legislature (1883) 107th New York State Legislature (1884) Presidency First inauguration historic site Second inauguration "Square Deal" Booker T. Washington dinner Conservation Newlands Reclamation Act Transfer Act of 1905 Antiquities Act Pelican Island Devils Tower National Monument Muir Woods National Monument Other National Monuments United States Forest Service, United States Reclamation Service National Wildlife Refuge System Roosevelt Arch Conference of Governors Northern Securities Company breakup court case Coal strike of 1902 Pure Food and Drug Act Food and Drug Administration Meat Inspection Act Expediting Act Elkins Act Hepburn Act Aldrich–Vreeland Act Federal Employers Liability Act Kinkaid Act Big Stick ideology Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty Panama Canal Zone Panama Canal Venezuelan crisis Roosevelt Corollary Occupation of Cuba Russo-Japanese War Treaty of Portsmouth 1906 Nobel Peace Prize Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 Army War College Roosevelt Hall College football meetings Bureau of Investigation Department of Commerce and Labor Bureau of Corporations Keep Commission Inland Waterways Commission Bureau of the Census Great White Fleet Perdicaris affair Cabinet White House West Wing State of the Union Address, 1901 1906 1908 White House desk Federal judiciary appointments Other events Spanish–American War Rough Riders Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill "Bull Moose" Progressive Party New Nationalism Assassination attempt Boone and Crockett Club Smithsonian–Roosevelt African Expedition "River of Doubt" Amazonian expedition Life and homes Birthplace, boyhood home replica Sagamore Hill Home and Museum Oyster Bay Maltese Cross Cabin Elkhorn Ranch Pine Knot cabin Gravesite Writings and speeches Theodore Roosevelt bibliography The Naval War of 1812 (1882 book) "The Strenuous Life" (1899 speech) "Citizenship in a Republic" (1910 speech) "Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual" (1912 post-assassination-attempt speech) Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography (1913 book) The Forum magazine articles Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia Archival collections Elections 1898 New York state election Republican National Convention: 1900 1904 1912 1916 United States presidential elections: 1900 1904 1912 Legacy Mount Rushmore Theodore Roosevelt Center and Digital Library White House Roosevelt Room Theodore Roosevelt National Park Theodore Roosevelt Wilderness Theodore Roosevelt Island Roosevelt National Forest Roosevelt Study Center Theodore Roosevelt Association Statues New York City Portland, Oregon Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Park Monument Assemblage Roosevelt Memorial, Portland, Oregon Proposed presidential library Theodore Roosevelt United States Courthouse Roosevelt River Theodore Roosevelt Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Award Roosevelt Road U.S. postage stamps Popular culture Teddy bear "Speak softly, and carry a big stick" Books Films Terrible Teddy, the Grizzly King, 1901 film Roosevelt in Africa, 1910 documentary Teddy, the Rough Rider, 1940 film Rough Riders, 1997 miniseries The Roosevelts, 2014 documentary Related Political positions "Bully pulpit" Ananias Club "Nature fakers" A Guest of Honor "Muckraker" "Roosevelt Republican" Barnes vs. Roosevelt libel trial Family Alice Hathaway Lee (first wife) Edith Kermit Carow (second wife) Alice Lee Roosevelt (daughter) Theodore Roosevelt III (son) Kermit Roosevelt (son) Ethel Carow Roosevelt (daughter) Archibald Roosevelt (son) Quentin Roosevelt (son) Theodore Roosevelt IV (grandson) Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt III (grandson) Quentin Roosevelt II (grandson) Kermit Roosevelt Jr. (grandson) Joseph Willard Roosevelt (grandson) Edith Roosevelt Derby (granddaughter) Theodora Roosevelt (granddaughter) Theodore Roosevelt Sr. (father) Martha Bulloch Roosevelt (mother) Anna Bamie Roosevelt (sister) Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (brother) Corinne Roosevelt (sister) Cornelius Roosevelt (grandfather) James Stephens Bulloch (grandfather) James Alfred Roosevelt (uncle) Robert Barnhill Roosevelt Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (niece) Gracie Hall Roosevelt (nephew) ← William McKinley William Howard Taft → Category Offices and distinctions New York State Assembly Preceded by William J. Trimble Member of the New York Assembly from the 21st district 1882–1884 Succeeded by Henry A. Barnum Preceded by Thomas G. Alvord Minority Leader of the New York Assembly 1883 Succeeded by Frank Rice Civic offices Unknown Last known title holder:William Farrar Smith Superintendent of the New York City Police Department 1895–1897 Succeeded by John McCullagh Government offices Preceded by William McAdoo Assistant Secretary of the Navy 1897–1898 Succeeded by Charles Herbert Allen Party political offices Preceded by Frank S. Black Republican nominee for Governor of New York 1898 Succeeded by Benjamin Odell Preceded by Garret Hobart Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1900 Succeeded by Charles W. Fairbanks Preceded by William McKinley Republican nominee for President of the United States 1904 Succeeded by William Howard Taft New political party Progressive nominee for President of the United States 1912 Party dissolved Political offices Preceded by Frank S. Black Governor of New York 1899–1900 Succeeded by Benjamin Barker Odell Jr. Preceded by Garret Hobart Vice President of the United States 1901 Succeeded by Charles W. Fairbanks Preceded by William McKinley President of the United States 1901–1909 Succeeded by William Howard Taft Awards and achievements Preceded by Bertha von Suttner Laureate of the Nobel Peace Prize 1906 Succeeded by Ernesto Teodoro Moneta Louis Renault Articles related to Theodore Roosevelt v t e Presidents of the United States George Washington (1789–1797) John Adams (1797–1801) Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809) James Madison (1809–1817) James Monroe (1817–1825) John Quincy Adams (1825–1829) Andrew Jackson (1829–1837) Martin Van Buren (1837–1841) William Henry Harrison (1841) John Tyler (1841–1845) James K. Polk (1845–1849) Zachary Taylor (1849–1850) Millard Fillmore (1850–1853) Franklin Pierce (1853–1857) James Buchanan (1857–1861) Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865–1869) Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877) Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881) James A. Garfield (1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885) Grover Cleveland (1885–1889) Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893) Grover Cleveland (1893–1897) William McKinley (1897–1901) Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909) William Howard Taft (1909–1913) Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921) Warren G. Harding (1921–1923) Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929) Herbert Hoover (1929–1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945–1953) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961) John F. Kennedy (1961–1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969) Richard Nixon (1969–1974) Gerald Ford (1974–1977) Jimmy Carter (1977–1981) Ronald Reagan (1981–1989) George H. W. Bush (1989–1993) Bill Clinton (1993–2001) George W. Bush (2001–2009) Barack Obama (2009–2017) Donald Trump (2017–2021) Joe Biden (2021–present) Presidency timelines Washington T. Roosevelt Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy* L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford* Carter* Reagan G. H. W. Bush* Clinton* G. W. Bush* Obama* Trump* Biden* * Denotes link to list of related timelines Category Commons List v t e Vice presidents of the United States John Adams (1789–1797) Thomas Jefferson (1797–1801) Aaron Burr (1801–1805) George Clinton (1805–1812) Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814) Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825) John C. Calhoun (1825–1832) Martin Van Buren (1833–1837) Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841) John Tyler (1841) George M. Dallas (1845–1849) Millard Fillmore (1849–1850) William R. King (1853) John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861) Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865) Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873) Henry Wilson (1873–1875) William A. Wheeler (1877–1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881) Thomas A. Hendricks (1885) Levi P. Morton (1889–1893) Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897) Garret Hobart (1897–1899) Theodore Roosevelt (1901) Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) James S. Sherman (1909–1912) Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921) Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Charles Curtis (1929–1933) John N. Garner (1933–1941) Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945) Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953) Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969) Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977) Walter Mondale (1977–1981) George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Dan Quayle (1989–1993) Al Gore (1993–2001) Dick Cheney (2001–2009) Joe Biden (2009–2017) Mike Pence (2017–2021) Kamala Harris (2021–present) Category Commons List v t e Governors and lieutenant governors of New York Governors G. Clinton Jay G. Clinton Lewis Tompkins Tayler D. Clinton Yates D. Clinton Pitcher Van Buren Throop Marcy Seward Bouck Wright Young Fish Hunt Seymour Clark King Morgan Seymour Fenton Hoffman J. Adams Dix Tilden Robinson Cornell Cleveland Hill Flower Morton Black T. Roosevelt Odell Higgins Hughes White J. Alden Dix Sulzer Glynn Whitman Smith Miller Smith F. Roosevelt Lehman Poletti Dewey Harriman Rockefeller Wilson Carey M. Cuomo Pataki Spitzer Paterson A. Cuomo Lieutenant governors Van Cortlandt S. Van Rensselaer J. Van Rensselaer Broome Tayler Clinton Tayler Swift Tayler Root Tallmadge Pitcher P. Livingston Dayan Throop Stebbins Oliver E. Livingston Tracy Bradish Dickinson Gardiner Lester Fish Patterson Church Raymond Selden Campbell Floyd-Jones Alvord Woodford Beach Robinson Dorsheimer Hoskins Hill McCarthy Jones Sheehan Saxton Woodruff Higgins Bruce Raines Chanler White Cobb Conway Glynn Wagner Schoeneck Walker Wood Lusk Lunn Lowman Corning Lehman Bray Poletti Hanley Wallace Hanley Moore Wicks Mahoney DeLuca Wilson Anderson Krupsak M. Cuomo DelBello Anderson Lundine McCaughey Donohue Paterson Bruno Skelos Smith Espada Ravitch Duffy Hochul Italics indicate acting officeholders v t e United States Secretaries of the Navy Secretaries Cabinet-level Stoddert Smith Hamilton Jones Crowninshield S Thompson Southard Branch L. Woodbury Dickerson Paulding Badger Upshur Henshaw Gilmer Mason Bancroft Mason Preston Graham Kennedy Dobbin Toucey Welles Borie Robeson R Thompson Goff Hunt Chandler Whitney Tracy Herbert Long Moody Morton Bonaparte Metcalf Newberry Meyer Daniels Denby Wilbur Adams Swanson Edison Knox Forrestal Dept. of Defense Sullivan Matthews Kimball Anderson Thomas T. Gates Franke Connally Korth Nitze Ignatius Chafee Warner Middendorf Claytor Hidalgo Lehman Webb Ball Garrett O'Keefe Dalton Danzig England Winter Mabus Spencer Braithwaite Under Secretaries Forrestal Bard A. Gates Sullivan Kenney Kimball Whitehair Thomas T. Gates Franke Bantz Fay BeLieu Baldwin Baird Warner Sanders Middendorf Potter Macdonald Woolsey Murray Goodrich Garrett Howard Danzig Hultin Pirie Livingstone Aviles Work Davidson Modly Assistant Secretaries Pre–1954 Fox Faxon Soley McAdoo T. Roosevelt Sr. Allen Hackett Darling Newberry Satterlee Winthrop F. Roosevelt G. Woodbury T. Roosevelt Jr. Robinson Jahncke H. Roosevelt Edison Compton Bard Hensel Kenney Andrews Koehler Askins Fogler Post–1954 Financial Management and Comptroller Installations and Environment Manpower and Reserve Affairs Research, Development and Acquisitions General Counsel of the Navy defunct: Air Installations and Logistics Material Research and Development Research, Engineering and Systems Shipbuilding and Logistics v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets and national conventions 1856 (Philadelphia): Frémont/Dayton 1860 (Chicago): Lincoln/Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore): Lincoln/Johnson 1868 (Chicago): Grant/Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia): Grant/Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati): Hayes/Wheeler 1880 (Chicago): Garfield/Arthur 1884 (Chicago): Blaine/Logan 1888 (Chicago): Harrison/Morton 1892 (Minneapolis): Harrison/Reid 1896 (Saint Louis): McKinley/Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia): McKinley/Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago): Roosevelt/Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman 1912 (Chicago): Taft/Sherman/Butler 1916 (Chicago): Hughes/Fairbanks 1920 (Chicago): Harding/Coolidge 1924 (Cleveland): Coolidge/Dawes 1928 (Kansas City): Hoover/Curtis 1932 (Chicago): Hoover/Curtis 1936 (Cleveland): Landon/Knox 1940 (Philadelphia): Willkie/McNary 1944 (Chicago): Dewey/Bricker 1948 (Philadelphia): Dewey/Warren 1952 (Chicago): Eisenhower/Nixon 1956 (San Francisco): Eisenhower/Nixon 1960 (Chicago): Nixon/Lodge 1964 (San Francisco): Goldwater/Miller 1968 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew 1972 (Miami Beach): Nixon/Agnew 1976 (Kansas City): Ford/Dole 1980 (Detroit): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush 1984 (Dallas): Reagan/G. H. W. Bush 1988 (New Orleans): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle 1992 (Houston): G. H. W. Bush/Quayle 1996 (San Diego): Dole/Kemp 2000 (Philadelphia): G. W. Bush/Cheney 2004 (New York): G. W. Bush/Cheney 2008 (St. Paul): McCain/Palin 2012 (Tampa): Romney/Ryan 2016 (Cleveland): Trump/Pence 2020 (Charlotte/other locations): Trump/Pence Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump (2017–2021) U.S. Senate leaders J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–present) U.S. House leaders Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–present) Chairs of the RNC Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt/Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez/Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus Romney McDaniel Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Fundraising groups National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Governors Association Sectional groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans Republican Jewish Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life Republican Study Committee ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Tuesday Group Related Primaries Debates 2009 chairmanship election 2011 chairmanship election 2013 chairmanship election 2015 chairmanship election 2017 chairmanship election Bibliography International Democrat Union Timeline of modern American conservatism v t e Historical left-wing third party U.S. presidential tickets Presidential tickets that won at least one percent of the national popular vote Greenback Peter Cooper/Samuel F. Cary (1876) James B. Weaver/Barzillai J. Chambers (1880) Benjamin Butler/Absolom M. West (1884) Union Labor Alson Streeter/Charles E. Cunningham (1888) Populist James B. Weaver/James G. Field (1892) William Jennings Bryan/Thomas E. Watson (1896) Socialist Eugene V. Debs/Ben Hanford (1904 and 1908) Eugene V. Debs/Emil Seidel (1912) Allan L. Benson/George R. Kirkpatrick (1916) Eugene V. Debs/Seymour Stedman (1920) Norman Thomas/James H. Maurer (1932) Progressive (1912) Theodore Roosevelt/Hiram Johnson (1912) Progressive (1924) Robert M. La Follette/Burton K. Wheeler (1924) Union William Lemke/Thomas C. O'Brien (1936) Progressive (1948) Henry A. Wallace/Glen H. Taylor (1948) Other notable left-wing parties Socialist Labor Party of America Social Democratic Party of America Independence Party Farmer–Labor Party Communist Party USA Socialist Workers Party Liberty Party People's Party Citizens Party New Alliance Party Third party performances in presidential elections Labor history of the United States Liberalism in the United States Progressivism in the United States Socialism in the United States v t e Cabinet of President William McKinley (1897–1901) Secretary of State John Sherman (1897–1898) William R. Day (1898) John Hay (1898–1901) Secretary of the Treasury Lyman J. Gage (1897–1901) Secretary of War Russell A. Alger (1897–1899) Elihu Root (1899–1901) Attorney General Joseph McKenna (1897–1898) John W. Griggs (1898–1901) Philander C. Knox (1901) Postmaster General James Albert Gary (1897–1898) Charles Emory Smith (1898–1901) Secretary of the Navy John Davis Long (1897–1901) Secretary of the Interior Cornelius Newton Bliss (1897–1899) Ethan A. Hitchcock (1899–1901) Secretary of Agriculture James Wilson (1897–1901) v t e Cabinet of President Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909) Secretary of State John Hay (1901–1905) Elihu Root (1905–1909) Robert Bacon (1909) Secretary of the Treasury Lyman J. Gage (1901–1902) L. M. Shaw (1902–1907) George B. Cortelyou (1907–1909) Secretary of War Elihu Root (1901–1904) William Howard Taft (1904–1908) Luke Edward Wright (1908–1909) Attorney General Philander C. Knox (1901–1904) William Henry Moody (1904–1906) Charles Joseph Bonaparte (1906–1909) Postmaster General Charles Emory Smith (1901–1902) Henry Clay Payne (1902–1904) Robert Wynne (1904–1905) George B. Cortelyou (1905–1907) George von Lengerke Meyer (1907–1909) Secretary of the Navy John Davis Long (1901–1902) William Henry Moody (1902–1904) Paul Morton (1904–1905) Charles Joseph Bonaparte (1905–1906) Victor H. Metcalf (1906–1908) Truman Handy Newberry (1908–1909) Secretary of the Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock (1901–1907) James Rudolph Garfield (1907–1909) Secretary of Agriculture James Wilson (1901–1909) Secretary of Commerce and Labor George B. Cortelyou (1903–1904) Victor H. Metcalf (1904–1906) Oscar Straus (1906–1909) v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 1901–1925 1901: Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Léon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes 1926–1950 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Söderblom 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 1951–1975 1951: Léon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies 1964: Martin Luther King Jr. 1965: UNICEF 1966 1967 1968: René Cassin 1969: International Labour Organization 1970: Norman Borlaug 1971: Willy Brandt 1972 1973: Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō 1975: Andrei Sakharov 1976–2000 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles 1983: Lech Wałęsa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Óscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama) 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchú 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams 1998: John Hume / David Trimble 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001–present 2001: United Nations / Kofi Annan 2002: Jimmy Carter 2003: Shirin Ebadi 2004: Wangari Maathai 2005: International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei 2006: Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus 2007: Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008: Martti Ahtisaari 2009: Barack Obama 2010: Liu Xiaobo 2011: Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman 2012: European Union 2013: Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014: Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai 2015: Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016: Juan Manuel Santos 2017: International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018: Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad 2019: Abiy Ahmed 2020: World Food Programme v t e 1906 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Henri Moissan (France) Literature Giosuè Carducci (Italy) Peace Theodore Roosevelt (United States) Physics J. J. Thomson (Great Britain) Physiology or Medicine Camillo Golgi (Italy) Santiago Ramón y Cajal (Spain) Nobel Prize recipients 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Presidents of the American Historical Association 1884–1900 Andrew Dickson White (1884–1885) George Bancroft (1886) Justin Winsor (1887) William Frederick Poole (1888) Charles Kendall Adams (1889) John Jay (1890) William Wirt Henry (1891) James Burrill Angell (1892–1893) Henry Adams (1893–1894) George Frisbie Hoar (1895) Richard Salter Storrs (1896) James Schouler (1897) George Park Fisher (1898) James Ford Rhodes (1899) Edward Eggleston (1900) 1901–1925 Charles Francis Adams Jr. (1901) Alfred Thayer Mahan (1902) Henry Charles Lea (1903) Goldwin Smith (1904) John Bach McMaster (1905) Simeon Eben Baldwin (1906) J. Franklin Jameson (1907) George Burton Adams (1908) Albert Bushnell Hart (1909) Frederick Jackson Turner (1910) William Milligan Sloane (1911) Theodore Roosevelt (1912) William Archibald Dunning (1913) Andrew C. McLaughlin (1914) H. Morse Stephens (1915) George Lincoln Burr (1916) Worthington C. Ford (1917) William Roscoe Thayer (1918–1919) Edward Channing (1920) Jean Jules Jusserand (1921) Charles Homer Haskins (1922) Edward Potts Cheyney (1923) Woodrow Wilson (1924) Charles McLean Andrews (1924–1925) 1926–1950 Dana Carleton Munro (1926) Henry Osborn Taylor (1927) James Henry Breasted (1928) James Harvey Robinson (1929) Evarts Boutell Greene (1930) Carl L. Becker (1931) Herbert Eugene Bolton (1932) Charles A. Beard (1933) William Dodd (1934) Michael Rostovtzeff (1935) Charles Howard McIlwain (1936) Guy Stanton Ford (1937) Laurence M. Larson (1938) William Scott Ferguson (1939) Max Farrand (1940) James Westfall Thompson (1941) Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr. (1942) Nellie Neilson (1943) William Linn Westermann (1944) Carlton J. H. Hayes (1945) Sidney Bradshaw Fay (1946) Thomas J. Wertenbaker (1947) Kenneth Scott Latourette (1948) Conyers Read (1949) Samuel Eliot Morison (1950) 1951–1975 Robert Livingston Schuyler (1951) James G. Randall (1952) Louis R. Gottschalk (1953) Merle Curti (1954) Lynn Thorndike (1955) Dexter Perkins (1956) William L. Langer (1957) Walter Prescott Webb (1958) Allan Nevins (1959) Bernadotte Everly Schmitt (1960) Samuel Flagg Bemis (1961) Carl Bridenbaugh (1962) Crane Brinton (1963) Julian P. Boyd (1964) Frederic C. Lane (1965) Roy Franklin Nichols (1966) Hajo Holborn (1967) John K. Fairbank (1968) C. Vann Woodward (1969) Robert Roswell Palmer (1970) David M. Potter (1971) Joseph Strayer (1971) Thomas C. Cochran (1972) Lynn Townsend White Jr. (1973) Lewis Hanke (1974) Gordon Wright (1975) 1976–2000 Richard B. Morris (1976) Charles Gibson (1977) William J. Bouwsma (1978) John Hope Franklin (1979) David H. Pinkney (1980) Bernard Bailyn (1981) Gordon A. Craig (1982) Philip D. Curtin (1983) Arthur S. Link (1984) William H. McNeill (1985) Carl Neumann Degler (1986) Natalie Zemon Davis (1987) Akira Iriye (1988) Louis R. Harlan (1989) David Herlihy (1990) William Leuchtenburg (1991) Frederic Wakeman (1992) Louise A. Tilly (1993) Thomas C. Holt (1994) John Henry Coatsworth (1995) Caroline Walker Bynum (1996) Joyce Appleby (1997) Joseph C. Miller (1998) Robert Darnton (1999) Eric Foner (2000) 2001–present Wm. Roger Louis (2001) Lynn Hunt (2002) James M. McPherson (2003) Jonathan Spence (2004) James J. Sheehan (2005) Linda K. Kerber (2006) Barbara Weinstein (2007) Gabrielle M. Spiegel (2008) Laurel Thatcher Ulrich (2009) Barbara D. Metcalf (2010) Anthony Grafton (2011) William Cronon (2012) Kenneth Pomeranz (2013) Jan E. Goldstein (2014) Vicki L. Ruiz (2015) Patrick Manning (2016) Tyler E. Stovall (2017) Mary Beth Norton (2018) J. R. McNeill (2019) Mary Lindemann (2020) Rough Riders Officers Leonard Wood Theodore Roosevelt Alexander Oswald Brodie James H. McClintock Buckey O'Neill Seth Bullock John Campbell Greenway John Avery McIlhenny Allyn K. Capron Jr. Allyn K. Capron Sr. George Curry Woodbury Kane Thomas H. Rynning Enlisted men George G. McMurtry Chris Madsen Hamilton Fish Thomas Grindell Henry Barrett Billy McGinty Juan Alamia Frank Frantz Craig Wadsworth Henry Nash Ben Daniels Frank Knox Robert Wrenn Engagements Spanish–American War Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Siege of Santiago Memorials Rough Riders Memorial Buckey O'Neill Cabin Bucky O'Neill Monument Bronco Buster Theodore Roosevelt Monument Assemblage Film The Rough Riders (1927 film) Teddy, the Rough Rider (1940 film) Rough Riders (1997 mini-series) See also Buckhorn Saloon Arizona Rangers Three Guardsmen Canyon Diablo Train Robbery Tiburón Island Tragedy Roosevelt's World War I volunteers The Lost Battalion v t e Teddy bears Manufacturers Build-A-Bear Workshop Chad Valley J. K. Farnell Gund Ideal Toy Company Margarete Steiff GmbH Merrythought Teddy Atelier Stursberg Teddy-Hermann Ty Inc. Vermont Teddy Bear Company Types AG Bear Beanie Babies Boyds Bears Care Bears Coffee Bean Bears Forever Friends Furskin Bears Gund Snuffles Holiday Beanie Babies Me to You Bears Punkinhead WereBears Museums Dorset Teddy Bear Museum Teddy bear museum Teddy Bear Museum of Naples Famous teddies Aloysius Archibald Ormsby-Gore Bamse Berlino Big Ted & Little Ted Corduroy Costco bear Duffy the Disney Bear Fozzie Bear Freddy Fazbear Grizzly Teddy Lotso Microsoft Bear Misha Uszatek Monokuma Mr Whoppit Nassur Nev Pink teddy bear (Breaking Bad) Pooky Pudsey Bear Rilakkuma Rupert (Family Guy) Smokey Sooty SuperTed Teddy (The Forgotten Toys) Teddy (Mr. Bean) Teddy Ruxpin Benjamin Bear Roosevelt Winnie-the-Pooh Film and television The Adventures of Teddy Ruxpin Bear Behaving Badly Becky and Barnaby Bear Boonie Bears C Bear and Jamal Charley and Mimmo Corduroy Colargol Disney's Adventures of the Gummi Bears Hey Mister, Let's Play! Issi Noho Kooky Misery Bear Old Bear Stories Rilakkuma and Kaoru The Secret World of Benjamin Bear Special Agent Oso SuperTed The Tangerine Bear Ted Ted 2 Teddybears The Teddy Bear Master Teddy Edward Teddy Trucks The Upstairs Downstairs Bears Books A Pocket for Corduroy Corduroy Little Bear Old Bear and Friends The Berenstain Bears Polar the Titanic Bear Uppo-Nalle Winkie Winnie-the-Pooh Music "(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear" "Psycho Teddy" "Teddy Bears' Picnic" "The Teddy Bear Song" Video games Ah Diddums Bear With Me Build-A-Bear Workshop Hubert the Teddy Bear: Winter Games Opération Teddy Bear Teddy Together Naughty Bear Related topics Peter Bull Gummy bears Round and Round the Garden SGUL Teddy Bear Hospital Richard Steiff Stuffed toys Sudanese blasphemy case Teddybear Airdrop Minsk 2012 Teddy bear parachuting Teddy Bear Review Teddy bear toss Teddy Grahams v t e Eleanor Roosevelt Chairwoman, Presidential Commission on the Status of Women (1961–1962) 34th First Lady of the United States (1933–1945) United Nations United States delegate, United Nations General Assembly (1946–1952) United Nations Commission on Human Rights (1947–1953, Chairperson 1946–1951) Universal Declaration of Human Rights Drafting committee Human Rights Day First Lady of the United States "My Day" daily newspaper column, 1935–1962 Co-Chair, Office of Civilian Defense Marian Anderson Lincoln Memorial Concert Tuskegee Airmen flight Arthurdale and Eleanor, West Virginia American Youth Congress National Youth Administration Black Cabinet 1940 Democratic National Convention speech Women in Defense Freedom House Other events First Lady of New York Presidential Commission on the Status of Women National Organization for Women Encampment for Citizenship Life and homes Val-Kill National Historic Site Val-Kill Industries Campobello home Franklin D. Roosevelt's paralytic illness Hyde Park home and gravesite Legacy Roosevelt Institute Roosevelt Institute Campus Network Roosevelt Study Center Eleanor Roosevelt Monument Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights Statue at the Franklin Roosevelt Memorial Eleanor Roosevelt College USS Roosevelt Marian Anderson: the Lincoln Memorial Concert (1939 film) Sunrise at Campobello (1958 play, 1960 film) The Eleanor Roosevelt Story (1965 film) Eleanor and Franklin (1976 film) Eleanor and Franklin: The White House Years (1977 film) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) The Roosevelts (2014 documentary) Related United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights International Bill of Human Rights International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Morgenthau Plan Roosevelt family Franklin D. Roosevelt (husband presidency 1933–1941 presidency 1941–1945) Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (daughter) James Roosevelt II (son) Elliott Roosevelt (son) Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr. (son) John Roosevelt II (son) Eleanor Roosevelt Seagraves (granddaughter) Curtis Roosevelt (grandson) Sara Delano Roosevelt (granddaughter) Franklin Delano Roosevelt III (grandson) John Roosevelt Boettiger (grandson) James Roosevelt III (grandson) Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (father) Anna Hall Roosevelt (mother) Hall Roosevelt (brother) Theodore Roosevelt Sr. (grandfather) Martha Stewart Bulloch (grandmother) Theodore Roosevelt (uncle presidency) Bamie Roosevelt (aunt) Fala (family dog) v t e (1896 ←) 1900 United States presidential election (→ 1904) Democratic Party Convention Nominee William Jennings Bryan VP nominee Adlai Stevenson I Candidates George Dewey Republican Party Convention Nominee William McKinley VP nominee Theodore Roosevelt Third party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee John G. Woolley VP nominee Henry B. Metcalf Social Democratic Party Nominee Eugene V. Debs VP nominee Job Harriman Populist Party Nominee Wharton Barker VP nominee Ignatius L. Donnelly Socialist Labor Party Nominee Joseph Francis Malloney VP nominee Valentine Remmel Other 1900 elections: House Senate v t e (1900 ←) 1904 United States presidential election (→ 1908) Democratic Party Convention Nominee Alton B. Parker VP nominee Henry G. Davis Candidates William Randolph Hearst Republican Party Convention Nominee Theodore Roosevelt VP nominee Charles W. Fairbanks Candidates Mark Hanna Third party and independent candidates Socialist Party Nominee Eugene V. Debs VP nominee Ben Hanford Prohibition Party Nominee Silas C. Swallow VP nominee George W. Carroll Populist Party Nominee Thomas E. Watson VP nominee Thomas Tibbles Socialist Labor Party Nominee Charles Hunter Corregan VP nominee William Wesley Cox Other 1904 elections: House Senate v t e (1908 ←) 1912 United States presidential election (→ 1916) Democratic Party Convention Nominee Woodrow Wilson VP nominee Thomas R. Marshall Candidates Champ Clark Judson Harmon Oscar Underwood Thomas R. Marshall Eugene Foss Republican Party Convention Nominee William Howard Taft VP nominee Nicholas Murray Butler James S. Sherman Candidates Theodore Roosevelt Robert M. La Follette Progressive Party Convention Nominee Theodore Roosevelt VP nominee Hiram Johnson Socialist Party Nominee Eugene V. Debs VP nominee Emil Seidel Third party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee Eugene W. Chafin VP nominee Aaron S. Watkins Socialist Labor Party Nominee Arthur E. Reimer VP nominee August Gillhaus Other 1912 elections: House Senate Biography portal Ecology portal Environment portal Politics portal New York City portal New York (state) portal United States portal North America portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125