They Nest Directed by Ellory Elkayem Written by John Claflin Daniel Zelman Starring Thomas Calabro Dean Stockwell John Savage Kristen Dalton Production company The Kushner-Locke Company Distributed by The Kushner-Locke Company Release date 2000 (2000) Running time 92 minutes Country United States Language English This article consists almost entirely of a plot summary. It should be expanded to provide more balanced coverage that includes real-world context. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (January 2021) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) They Nest (also known as Creepy Crawlers) is a 2000 American science fiction horror film directed by Ellory Elkayem and starring Thomas Calabro, Dean Stockwell, John Savage, and Kristen Dalton.[1] Plot[edit] Stressed by marital and alcohol problems, Dr. Ben Cahill freezes up under pressure in the emergency room. He decides to unwind for a few months in the house he and his ex bought on Orr island, a fishing community off the coast of Maine. Here he starts examining, at the request of Sheriff Hobbs, some animal and human corpses with strange internal as well as external injuries. The doctor observes that one of the red cockroaches which recently infested the island has pincers, which is most unusual. He reads up and contacts the university entomology department, where this African species is considered obscure. He discovers that these cockroach-like insects burrow into people and nest inside them. At first, some of townspeople began to suspect that Cahill was responsible for the deaths of their friends, until they see a swarm of the mutant insects fly overhead. Now believing Cahill's story, the townspeople decide to fight back against the deadly invaders, resulting in more deaths. Cahill, his girlfriend, Nell, and two others get in a boat and try to reach the mainland, until the military is called in to deal with the problem. However, it is revealed that one of the bugs had made it to the mainland, ending the film ambiguously. References[edit] ^ Fries, Laura. "They Nest - Review". Variety. Retrieved 8 September 2020. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] They Nest at IMDb v t e Films directed by Ellory Elkayem They Nest (2000) Eight Legged Freaks (2002) Return of the Living Dead: Necropolis (2005) Return of the Living Dead: Rave to the Grave (2005) Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling (2009) This article about a science-fiction horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e