Remote camera. Top shows several LED flash lights, centre are the lens and PIR sensors. A remote camera, also known as a trail camera or game camera, is a camera placed by a photographer in areas where the photographer generally cannot be at the camera to snap the shutter. This includes areas with limited access, tight spaces where a person is not allowed, or just another angle so that the photographer can simultaneously take pictures of the same moment from different locations. Remote cameras are most widely used in sports photography.[1] 35 mm digital or film, and medium format cameras are the most common types of cameras that are used. Contents 1 Uses and practices 2 Placement 3 Triggering 4 Game camera 5 See also 6 References Uses and practices[edit] Professor A.N. Kudaktin examines remote camera for implementation of monitoring of wild animals within the Persian Leopard Reintroduction Program in the Caucasus. Remote cameras are used by photographers to take more pictures from different angles. Remotes are very popular in sports and wildlife photography.[2] Cameras are often placed in angles that a photographer cannot physically be during a shoot. Sport use examples include behind the backboard at a basketball game or overhead in the rafters of an arena during a hockey game. Placement[edit] Remote cameras placed in suspended positions[3] usually are mounted with clamps and arms such as the Bogen Super Clamp and Variable Friction Arm, often referred to as "Magic Arms".[4] The camera and lens are connected to the variable friction arm which is attached to the Super Clamp which in turn is secured to a fixed item such as a basketball post, hand railing, or rafter. Ground plates or tripods are typically used for remote cameras placed on the ground.[5] Triggering[edit] Remote cameras can be fired via hand triggers, sound triggers, proximity sensation, radio transmitters (mainly Bluetooth shutters), or the self-timer built into the camera.[6] For remotes that are in close proximity to the photographer, hand or sound triggers can be used. A hand trigger consists of a button or switch that is connected to the camera via a wire that is set to fire the camera's shutter. For remotes that are placed away from the photographer, radio triggering systems such as the Bluetooth shutter button, Pocket Wizards or Flash Wizards are used. A radio trigger consists of a button or switch that is connected to a radio triggering transmitter or transceiver which is set to fire a radio triggering receiver or transceiver that is connected to the camera via a wire that is set to fire the camera's shutter. For rocket launches, including the Space Shuttle, remote cameras are triggered by the sound of the launch.[7] Game camera[edit] See also: Camera trap Photo of a Chihuahuan raven catching a snake, taken using a remote motion-sensor camera located in the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge. A game camera is a rugged and weatherproof camera designed for extended and unsupervised use outdoors. The images they produce, taken automatically when motion is sensed, are used for game surveillance by hunters, farmers, ranchers, and wildlife professionals. They are also used by people endeavouring to take photographs of the non-existent creature Bigfoot.[8] [9] They can also be helpful for animal loss/rescue in documenting the presence and species of animals, such as determining whether a runaway dog is returning to its home at night or verifying the species actually eating the food left for a stray/feral cat.[10] See also[edit] Camera trap Digital camera Film format Infrared photography Movie camera Selfie stick Video camera References[edit] ^ Peter Read Miller (31 August 2013). Peter Read Miller on Sports Photography: A Sports Illustrated photographer's tips, tricks, and tales on shooting football, the Olympics, and portraits of athletes. p. 140. ISBN 978-0133087079. Retrieved 1 March 2015. ^ O'Connell, Allan F.; Nichols, James D.; Karanth, K. Ullas (2010-10-05). Camera Traps in Animal Ecology: Methods and Analyses. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 21. ISBN 9784431994954. ^ Byrne, Robert J. (1968-01-01). Aerodynakic roughness criteria in aeolian sand transport. ^ Busch, David D. (2006-12-18). Digital Photography All-in-One Desk Reference For Dummies. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470085998. ^ Bigelow, Ron (2010-12-27). Comprehensive Guide to Mastering Digital Photography. Ron Bigelow Photography. ISBN 9780983225706. ^ Rich, Jason R. (2015-04-08). My GoPro Hero Camera. Que Publishing. ISBN 9780134190815. ^ "Lift Off! Covering the Launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery". ^ "Bigfoot Field Researchers Organization". www.bfro.net. Retrieved 2017-04-10. ^ $1,000,000 dollar Sasquatch photo challenge Field & Stream 05-29-08 Archived 2009-12-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Feeding Stations and Wildlife Cameras – Missing Pet Partnership". www.missingpetpartnership.org. Retrieved 2017-04-10. v t e Photography Equipment Camera light-field digital field instant pinhole press rangefinder SLR still TLR toy view Darkroom enlarger safelight Film base format holder stock available films discontinued films Filter Flash beauty dish cucoloris gobo hot shoe lens hood monolight Reflector snoot Softbox Lens Prime lens Zoom lens Wide-angle lens Telephoto lens Manufacturers Monopod Movie projector Slide projector Tripod head Zone plate Terminology 35 mm equivalent focal length Angle of view Aperture Black and white Chromatic aberration Circle of confusion Color balance Color temperature Depth of field Depth of focus Exposure Exposure compensation Exposure value Zebra patterning F-number Film format Large Medium Film speed Focal length Guide number Hyperfocal distance Lens flare Metering mode Orb (optics) Perspective distortion Photograph Photographic printing Photographic processes Reciprocity Red-eye effect Science of photography Shutter speed Sync Zone System Genres Abstract Aerial Aircraft Architectural Astrophotography Banquet Conceptual Conservation Cloudscape Documentary Ethnographic Erotic Fashion Fine-art Fire Forensic Glamour High-speed Landscape Lomography Nature Neues Sehen Nude Photojournalism Pictorialism Pornography Portrait Post-mortem Selfie Social documentary Sports Still life Stock Straight photography Street Vernacular Underwater Wedding Wildlife Techniques Afocal Bokeh Brenizer Burst mode Contre-jour Cyanotype ETTR Fill flash Fireworks Harris shutter HDRI High-speed Holography Infrared Intentional camera movement Kirlian Kite aerial Long-exposure Macro Mordançage Multiple exposure Night Panning Panoramic Photogram Print toning Redscale Rephotography Rollout Scanography Schlieren photography Sabattier effect Slow motion Stereoscopy Stopping down Strip Slit-scan Sun printing Tilt–shift Miniature faking Time-lapse Ultraviolet Vignetting Xerography Composition Diagonal method Framing Headroom Lead room Rule of thirds Simplicity Golden triangle (composition) History Timeline of photography technology Analog photography Autochrome Lumière Box camera Calotype Camera obscura Daguerreotype Dufaycolor Heliography Painted photography backdrops Photography and the law Glass plate Visual arts Digital photography Digital camera D-SLR comparison MILC camera back Digiscoping Comparison of digital and film photography Film scanner Image sensor CMOS APS CCD Three-CCD camera Foveon X3 sensor Image sharing Pixel Color photography Color Print film Chromogenic print Reversal film Color management color space primary color CMYK color model RGB color model Photographic processing Bleach bypass C-41 process Cross processing Developer Digital image processing Dye coupler E-6 process Fixer Gelatin silver process Gum printing Instant film K-14 process Print permanence Push processing Stop bath Lists Most expensive photographs Photographers Norwegian Polish street women  Category  Outline