British video game developer Traveller's Tales Type Subsidiary Industry Video games Founded 1989; 32 years ago (1989) Founders Jon Burton Andy Ingram Headquarters Knutsford, England Key people David Dootson (studio manager) Products Lego series Parent TT Games (2005–present) Traveller's Tales is a British video game developer and a subsidiary of TT Games. Traveller's Tales was founded in 1989 by Jon Burton and Andy Ingram. Initially a small company focused on its own content, it grew in profile through developing games with larger companies such as Sega and Disney Interactive Studios. In 2004, development on Lego Star Wars: The Video Game started with Giant Interactive Entertainment, the exclusive rights holder to Lego video games. Traveller's Tales bought the company in 2005, and the two merged to create TT Games, with Traveller's Tales becoming the new company's development arm.[1][2] Contents 1 History 2 Games developed 3 References 4 External links History[edit] Logo of Traveller's Tales from 1995 to 2005; created by Rodney Matthews in 1994[3] Traveller's Tales started developing games with Psygnosis, which were most notable for creating 3D effects. Their first game was Leander, also known as The Legend of Galahad.[4] With Psygnosis they developed a video game adaption of Bram Stoker's Dracula, as well as other original productions like Puggsy. Thanks to an agreement between Psygnosis, Sony Imagesoft and Disney Interactive Studios, Traveller's Tales could produce several games based on Disney's properties, such as the Mickey Mouse game Mickey Mania: The Timeless Adventures of Mickey Mouse and other games based on Pixar movies like Toy Story, A Bug's Life, Toy Story 2: Buzz Lightyear to the Rescue and Finding Nemo (the latter two thanks to agreements with Activision and THQ). However, Traveller's Tales was best known in the 1990s and early 2000s for their second-party collaboration with Sega to develop games based on the Sonic the Hedgehog franchise, resulting in Sonic 3D Blast and Sonic R, which were produced in close effort with Sega's Sonic Team. Both games were regarded as technical achievements in the Mega Drive (Sonic 3D Blast) and the Sega Saturn (Sonic R), adding to the high-tech development status they already had with games like Puggsy, Mickey Mania and Toy Story. They were also responsible for Crash Twinsanity, under the Vivendi label. They developed Lego Star Wars: The Video Game as well as its follow-ups. Outside of the Lego games, their work includes the franchise Crash Bandicoot, The Chronicles of Narnia, Super Monkey Ball Adventure, and World Rally Championship and F1 Grand Prix for the PlayStation Portable. The company was purchased by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment at the end of 8 November 2007,[5] but continued to operate independently with the development of Lego Batman: The Videogame, which was released in September 2008. Thereafter they continued their work on licensed titles such as Lego Indiana Jones 2: The Adventure Continues, Lego Harry Potter: Years 5–7, Lego The Lord of the Rings, Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes, Lego Marvel Super Heroes, Lego The Hobbit, Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham, Lego Jurassic World, Lego Marvel's Avengers, Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2, Lego The Incredibles, Lego DC Super-Villains and Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga. The company has also produced games based on existing and new Lego properties such as a trilogy of Lego games based on the Chima universe and Lego City Undercover, the first Lego game to be published by Nintendo for Wii U. The Lego Movie Videogame was released on 7 February 2014, together with The Lego Movie. In 2015, Traveller's Tales entered the toys-to-life business with Lego Dimensions, which used a toy pad to enter physical Lego minifigures and Lego models into the game, as well as interact with gameplay. The game included existing Lego themes like DC Comics, The Lego Movie, and Lord of the Rings, as well as completely new properties such as Portal 2 and Wizard of Oz. The game was discontinued in October 2017.[6] Traveller's Tales has won two BAFTAs, one for Gameplay with Lego Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy, and one for Children's Videogame of the Year for Lego Batman: The Videogame.[7][8] Games developed[edit] Year Title Publisher(s) 1991 Leander Psygnosis 1993 Bram Stoker's Dracula Sony Imagesoft Puggsy Psygnosis 1994 Mickey Mania: The Timeless Adventures of Mickey Mouse Sony Imagesoft/Sony Computer Entertainment Europe 1995 Toy Story Disney Interactive 1996 Sonic 3D Blast Sega 1997 Sonic R 1998 Rascal Psygnosis A Bug's Life Sony Computer Entertainment/Activision 1999 Toy Story 2: Buzz Lightyear to the Rescue Activision 2000 Muppet RaceMania Midway Games/Sony Computer Entertainment Europe Buzz Lightyear of Star Command Activision 2001 Toy Story Racer Weakest Link Crash Bandicoot: The Wrath of Cortex Vivendi Universal Games 2002 Haven: Call of the King Midway Games 2003 Finding Nemo THQ 2004 Crash Twinsanity Vivendi Universal Games 2005 Lego Star Wars: The Video Game Eidos Interactive/Giant Interactive Entertainment F1 Grand Prix Sony Computer Entertainment The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe Buena Vista Games World Rally Championship Sony Computer Entertainment 2006 Super Monkey Ball Adventure Sega Lego Star Wars II: The Original Trilogy LucasArts Bionicle Heroes Eidos Interactive 2007 Transformers: The Game Activision Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga LucasArts 2008 Lego Indiana Jones: The Original Adventures Lego Batman: The Videogame Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian Disney Interactive Studios 2009 Lego Indiana Jones 2: The Adventure Continues LucasArts 2010 Lego Harry Potter: Years 1–4 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment 2011 Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars LucasArts Lego Pirates of the Caribbean: The Video Game Disney Interactive Studios Lego Harry Potter: Years 5–7 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment 2012 Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes Lego The Lord of the Rings 2013 Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2014 Lego The Hobbit Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham 2015 Lego Dimensions 2016 Lego Marvel's Avengers 2017 Lego Worlds Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2 2018 Lego DC Super-Villains 2019 The Lego Movie 2 Videogame[9] TBA[10] Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga References[edit] ^ Wallis, Alistair (9 November 2006). "Playing Catch Up: Traveller's Tales' Jon Burton". Gamasutra. UBM TechWeb. Retrieved 12 February 2016. ^ Feddy, Kevin (18 January 2013). "The £100m 'geek'". Manchester Evening News. M.E.N Media. Retrieved 12 February 2016. ^ Burton, Jon; GameHut (30 August 2018). "Original TT Logo Painting Removed from Frame – GameHut is ONE YEAR OLD!". YouTube. ^ "Travellers Tales: Sonic R Programmer Speaks!". Sega Saturn Magazine. No. 24. Emap International Limited. October 1997. p. 25. Retrieved November 11, 2019. ^ Martin, Matt (8 November 2007). "Warner Bros. swoops for Traveller's Tales". GamesIndustry.biz. Gamer Network. Retrieved 17 February 2016. ^ https://www.forbes.com/sites/mitchwallace/2017/10/23/lego-dimensions-officially-cancelled/#4acd3cff9678 ^ "LEGO Batman: The Videogame". gamesindustry.biz. 1 December 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2016. ^ "GRAW grabs BAFTA top award". Eurogamer. Gamer Network. 6 October 2006. Retrieved 30 October 2016. ^ Santangelo, Nick (2018-11-27). "The LEGO Movie 2 Videogame Announced for 2019". IGN. Retrieved 2018-11-27. ^ "LEGO Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga Gets Delayed". GAMING. Retrieved 2021-04-02. External links[edit] Official website v t e Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Franchises Asheron's Call Batman: Arkham Blood Condemned Defender F.E.A.R. Game Party Gauntlet Harry Potter Injustice Joust Lego Middle-earth Mortal Kombat Rampage Scribblenauts Spy Hunter TouchMaster Subsidiaries Avalanche Software Monolith Productions NetherRealm Studios Portkey Games Rocksteady Studios TT Games Traveller's Tales WB Games Boston WB Games Montréal Former subsidiaries Midway Games Snowblind Studios Surreal Software Related articles Eidos Interactive List of Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment video games Time Warner Warner Bros. Ed Boon Sefton Hill Jon Burton Diane Nelson v t e Warner Bros. Pictures Group Warner Bros. Pictures New Line Cinema Castle Rock Entertainment DC Films Warner Animation Group Flagship Entertainment (49%) Spyglass Media Group (minor) Television Studios Domestic Alloy Entertainment Telepictures TMZ A Very Good Production International UK Ricochet Twenty Twenty Wall to Wall Media Nordics LTS Garðbær Studios Interactive Entertainment Avalanche Software Monolith Productions NetherRealm Studios Portkey Games Rocksteady Studios TT Games Traveller's Tales WB Games Boston WB Games Montréal WB Games San Francisco Global Brands and Franchises DC Entertainment DC Comics WildStorm DC Black Label Mad Warner Bros. Consumer Products Warner Bros. Studio Store Wizarding World Themed Entertainment Warner Bros. Movie World Incidents Parque Warner Madrid Warner Bros. World Abu Dhabi Warner Bros. Studio Tours Hollywood London The Wizarding World of Harry Potter Harry Potter: The Exhibition Former Jungle Habitat Incidents Movie Park Germany Kids, Young Adults and Classics Cartoon Network Adult Swim Toonami Boomerang Turner Classic Movies Production Cartoon Network Studios Warner Bros. Animation Hanna-Barbera Williams Street Other units Turner Entertainment Co. Wang Film Productions Co., Ltd. (50%) De Lane Lea Studios Warner Bros. Digital Networks DC Universe Warner Bros. Theatre Ventures Warner Bros. Museum Warner Bros. Studios Burbank Leavesden Sunset Productions WaterTower Music Former/defunct DramaFever eleveneleven HOOQ (17.5%) Shed Productions New Line Home Entertainment Infinifilm Snowblind Studios Surreal Software Midway Games Warner Premiere Raw Feed Warner Bros. Family Entertainment Warner Independent Pictures Warner Max v t e Crash Bandicoot List of games Platform games Console Crash Bandicoot Cortex Strikes Back Warped The Wrath of Cortex Twinsanity Crash of the Titans Mind over Mutant N. Sane Trilogy It's About Time Handheld The Huge Adventure N-Tranced Ripto's Rampage Racing games Team Racing Nitro-Fueled Nitro Kart Tag Team Racing Nitro Kart 3D Nitro Kart 2 Party games Bash Boom Bang! Mobile games On the Run! Characters Crash Bandicoot Doctor Neo Cortex Other media Skylanders Academy Related Games Skylanders: Imaginators Uncharted 4: A Thief's End Activision Naughty Dog Radical Entertainment Sony Interactive Entertainment Toys for Bob Traveller's Tales Vicarious Visions Vivendi Games