This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A travel channel filming the Yosemite Valley A travel documentary is a documentary film, television program, or online series that describes travel in general or tourist attractions without recommending particular package deals or tour operators. A travelogue film is an early type of travel documentary, serving as an exploratory ethnographic film. The genre has been represented by television shows such as Across the Seven Seas, which showcased travelogues produced by third parties, and by occasional itinerant presentations of travelogues in theaters and other venues. The British comedian and actor Michael Palin has made several series in this genre beginning with Around the World in 80 Days (1989). PBS has several travel shows including those hosted by Rick Steves and Burt Wolf. Contents 1 History 1.1 Travelogues 1.2 Modern 2 Content 3 Shooting techniques and targeting audiences 4 Key figures 5 Notable examples 6 Broadcast stations 7 See also 8 References 8.1 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links History[edit] Travelogues[edit] Travelogues were used to provide the general public with a means of observing different countries and cultures since the late 19th century. Travelogues are considered to be a form of virtual tourism or travel documentary and were often presented as lectures narrating accompanying films and photos.[1] Travelogues are defined as nonfiction films that use a place as their primary subject.[2] They often display the cinematic apparatus and have an open narration. Travelogues were usually about eighty minutes in length, consisting of two 1000-foot reels of 16mm film, with an intermission in-between to change reels. The travelogue film speaker, often but not always the filmmaker, would usually introduce each reel, ask for the lights to be dimmed, and then narrate the film live from an onstage lectern. Travelogue series were usually offered during the winter months and were often sold on subscription basis in small and medium-sized towns. Patrons could then meet the speaker in-person after the show. As cinema progress, the standard film program provided by the most theaters consisted of a feature-length film accompanied by a newsreel and at least one additional short subject, which might take the form of a travelogue, a comedy, a cartoon, or a film about a topical novelty subject matter.[3] Travelogues further developed to incorporate movie rides which were coordinated sounds, motion pictures and mechanical movement to simulate virtual travel.[4] Cinéorama, which simulates a ride in a hot air balloon and Mareorama, which simulates voyages of the sea, became major attractions at world fairs and expositions.[4] Today's travelogues may be shown with either live or recorded voice-over narration, often with an in-sync audio soundtrack featuring music and location sound. The shows are often performed in school gymnasiums, civic auditoriums, senior center multi-purpose rooms, private clubs, and theatrical venues. Travelogues have been a popular source of fundraising for local, non-profit community-service organizations, such as Kiwanis, Lions Clubs, and Rotary Clubs, among others, with many such clubs hosting travelogue series for decades. Travelogues stem from the work of American writer and lecturer, John Lawson Stoddard who began traveling around the world in 1874. He went on to publish books about his adventures and gave lectures across North America. The original lectures were accompanied by black and white lantern slides printed from his photographs. In 1892, John Lawson Stoddard recruited Burton Holmes as his junior associate. When Stoddard was ready to retire in 1897, he arranged for Holmes to take over the rest of his speaking arrangements. Holmes went on to become the premier travel lecturer of his day and coined the term, "travelogues," in 1904 when he introduced film clips to lecture series making them wildly popular. After World War II, Lowell Thomas created popular Movietone News Reel travelogues shown in movie theaters across the U.S. During the 1950s and 1960s, more independent film producers created travelogues, which were shown in towns and schools across the U.S. and Canada. In the 1970s and 1980s, the popularity of traditional travelogues declined but the advent of cable television channels and the availability of small, high quality, digital video equipment has renewed the popularity of travel films. Though travelogues have enjoyed much popularity historically, these films have been criticized for culturally insensitive representations since the films were not made by anthropologists. A famous example is the film about a family in the Canadian Arctic, Nanook of the North, where much of the scenes were staged.[5] Modern[edit] Travelogues are credited with helping cultivating the interest in the travel industry at the same time transportation infrastructure was being developed to make it possible.[citation needed] As railways and steamships became more accessible, more people became willing and eager to travel to distant places because of what was displayed in the popular travelogues of the day.[6] Today, travelogues are most often seen in IMAX Theaters and play a role in fiction film cinematography. IMAX was invented more than 40 years ago by Graeme Ferguson, Roman Kroiter, and Robert Kerr who pioneered the technology and debuted it at the EXPO 67 in Montreal, Canada and later again at EXPO 70 in Osaka, Japan. Since then, IMAX and travelogues have latched onto each other.[7] In the 1970s and 1980s, the popularity of traditional travelogues declined. But the advent of cable television channels, such as the Discovery Channel and the Travel Channel and the availability of small, high quality, digital video equipment has renewed the popularity of travel films. Amateur films of an individual's travels can be considered travelogues as well.[8] The Flavor of Kolkata (2015), a short travel documentary shot in the Indian city Kolkata, was India's first 3D short travel documentary. Content[edit] Travel documentary is a kind of documentary. Travel documentaries generally tell stories about travel or introduce travel destinations. In general, there will be a leading figure in the documentary. This figure will lead the audience to play and introduce the audience to the local cultural landscape, food and customs. From these documentaries, viewers can understand where these places are worth playing and eating. Therefore, travel documentaries can also be described as human geography documentaries. They can lead the audience to better understand a place This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (April 2018) Shooting techniques and targeting audiences[edit] It takes a lot of energy to shoot a travel documentary. There are many things to worry about. The production process of travel documentaries is very complicated. First, the director needs to place a large number of staff and allocate all the equipment. In addition, they have to be responsible for formulating travel plans. They also need to book hotels and foods in advance. And they may have to prepare for many unexpected situations. The documentary filming method is different from many other films. In the process of documentary filming, it is often necessary to interview other people. So the quality of the interview is very important for the documentary. The details of the documentary are also very important. Take tourism documentaries as an example. Only by making every appealing place in the tourist destination clear, can we attract more people to travel there. There are also some questions about the shooting angle. Because documentaries have a higher requirement for authenticity, they must have the most reasonable shooting angle.[citation needed] In the opinion of director Lydia B. Smith, the most valuable part of the travel documentary encourages people to walk out of the comfort zone and into the world, to experience a variety of different cultures and to further enhance themselves. He also believes that his people should understand how people in other countries think of their own country. This is the significance of travel documentary.[citation needed] How can such a complicated and tedious process be always interested in shooting travel documentaries? Smith gave his own answer: “Only do it if you are 100% passionate about your subject matter and that it will fuel you as well during the process."[9] Key figures[edit] Burton Holmes was an American traveler, photographer and filmmaker, who coined the term "travelogue". Each summer for over fifty years Holmes would travel the world and then tour American auditoriums in the winter; during the 1945-46 season alone he gave 157 two-hour lectures. By the end of his life, Holmes's had given over 8000 travelogue lectures which were known to draw large audiences in cities like New York, Boston, and Philadelphia. (Travel Film Archive). André de la Varre bought a motion picture camera and went to Europe at the age of 17. In 1924, he became Burton Holmes' cameraman. Starting in the 1930s, De La Varre became an independent film maker making shorts for major Hollywood Studios. He traveled and filmed constantly for the next 40 years. (Travel Film Archive). James A. Fitzpatrick has made 225 travelogues and traveled around the world 25 times in the process. In 1923, he formed Fitzpatrick Pictures and provided a stock set of images about the world at a time when hardly any international films were available to American audiences.[10] Carl Dudley made 300 travel adventure films. It all started in 1935 when he traveled to Tahiti, Australia, and India working on film crews. In 1944, he started Dubley Pictures Corp. He is best known for Cinerama's South Seas Adventure. (Travel Film Archive). Robert Flaherty was an American film maker who directed and produced the first commercial successful feature documentary, Nanook of the North, in 1922.[11] Eugene Castle was not a travel filmmaker but his company Castle Films was the largest distributor of films for the home and a contributing factor to the raise of popularity of travelogues. Castle went on to sell his company to Universal for $3 million in 1947. (Travel Film Archive). Bill Burrud produced the 1958 Treasure TV series and The Open Road. He coined the phrase "traventure." Edward M. Newman produced many travelogues for Warner Brothers studio in the 1930s. Sky Gaven is an American entrepreneur who in 2015 created and produced one of the most prolific digital travel series, "Shaycation" starring actress Shay Mitchell. The series changed the way YouTube formats were crafted and cemented itself as a pioneer in the travel genre. Notable examples[edit] The Amazing Race An Idiot Abroad - presented by Karl Pilkington Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations - travel and food documentary Around the World in 80 Treasures - with Dan Cruickshank. First broadcast by the BBC in 2005. Big Crazy Family Adventure Brazil with Michael Palin Bump! By Any Means The Coolest Places on Earth Departures Developing Destinations Don't Tell My Mother - presented by Diego Buñuel. Extreme Treks Extreme Vacations Full Circle with Michael Palin Getaway Getaway to Paradise Get Outta Town Globe Trekker Glutton for Punishment The Great Outdoors Holiday Himalaya with Michael Palin Intrepid Journeys Let's Shop Lonely Planet: Roads Less Travelled Lonely Planet Six Degrees Long Way Down Long Way Round Madventures Around the World in 80 Days with Michael Palin Michael Palin's Hemingway Adventure Michael Palin's New Europe MyDestination.TV The Moaning of Life - also presented by Karl Pilkington On Hannibal's Trail first broadcast by BBC in 2010 Passport to Europe Pole to Pole Rick Steves' Europe Sahara with Michael Palin Sancharam (Santosh George Kulangara) Scam City Shaycation The Story of God with Morgan Freeman Stranded With Cash Peters Traceroute Up Up and Away Whicker's World World on Wheels World's Most Dangerous Roads - BBC series in which two celebrities journey by 4x4 on roads considered among the world's most dangerous. Word Travels - presented by Robin Esrock and Julia Dimon. First broadcast by OLN in 2008. Xtreme Tourist Xtreme Travel Vague Direction[12][13] Broadcast stations[edit] The following are TV stations that air primarily travel based content: Discover Barbados TV Évasion Russian Travel Guide Travel Channel Travel Channel (International) Travel + Escape Travelxp Voyages Television See also[edit] Journalism portal Film portal Television portal Digital storytelling Docudrama Ethnofiction Ethnographic film IMAX Mondo film Nature documentary Newsreel Reality film Realism (arts) Semidocumentary Travel Channel Travel literature Visual sociology Visual anthropology References[edit] ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 1. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 17. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 178. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ a b Ruoff 2006, p. 42. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 30. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 28. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 238. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 157. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ "What it Takes to Produce a Travel Documentary. Interview With @CaminoDoc Director Lydia B. Smith - Mapping Megan". Mapping Megan. 2015-11-01. Retrieved 2018-04-04. ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 13. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ Ruoff 2006, p. 127. sfn error: no target: CITEREFRuoff2006 (help) ^ CBC.ca | Airplay | Cyclist learning how the other half lives ^ Vague Direction – A Bicycle Powered Project about People | Bibliography[edit] Ruoff, Jeffrey (2006). Virtual Voyages: Cinema and Travel. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-3713-3 – via Google Books. Further reading[edit] Caldwell, Genoa, Editor. (1980). The Man Who Photographed the World: Burton Holmes : Travelogues, 1886-1938. Harry N Abrams. ISBN 0-8109-1059-4 Caldwell, Genoa, Editor. (2006). Burton Holmes Travelogues: The Greatest Traveler of His Time, 1892-1952. Tacshen. ISBN 3-8228-4815-8 Soule, Thayer. (2003). On the Road With Travelogues: 1935 - 1995 A Sixty-Year Romp. Authorhouse. ISBN 1-4107-9971-9 External links[edit] The Travel Film Archive GeoCinema Travel Filmmaker Federation Travel Adventure Cinema Society Wild Film History The Industry Film Archive The Newsreel Archive The Burton Holmes Archive Burton Holmes website Musee Albert Kahn The Explorers Club Windoes Travelogues website v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie