4th episode of the thirtieth season of The Simpsons "Treehouse of Horror XXIX" The Simpsons episode Promotional poster Episode no. Season 30 Episode 4 Directed by Matthew Faughnan Written by Joel H. Cohen Production code XABF16 Original air date October 21, 2018 (2018-10-21) Episode chronology ← Previous "My Way or the Highway to Heaven" Next → "Baby You Can't Drive My Car" The Simpsons (season 30) List of The Simpsons episodes "Treehouse of Horror XXIX" is the fourth episode of The Simpsons thirtieth season, the 643rd episode overall and the twenty-ninth "Treehouse of Horror" episode.[1] It was released on October 21, 2018. Contents 1 Plot 1.1 Opening sequence 1.2 Intrusion of the Pod-y Switchers 1.3 Multiplisa-ty 1.4 Geriatric Park 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Plot[edit] Opening sequence[edit] The episode starts in Fogburyport, birthplace of Green Clam Chowder. The Simpson family arrive there because a book stated it's a place to visit before they mysteriously disappear. However, it was revealed to be a trap and that they will be devoured by Cthulhu. However, Homer states that he was promised an oyster eating contest against Cthulhu, and Homer beats him. Cthulhu pukes and asks what Homer wants as a reward. Homer whispers "I want to eat you." Cthulhu is seen in a giant cooking pot and the Simpsons (except Lisa) enjoy a hot dog made of Cthulhu's tentacles. Intrusion of the Pod-y Switchers[edit] The segment begins at the underwater base of Mapple, where Steve Mobbs (on a screen) tells about the new Myphone and the new unfunny version of himself to an excited audience. When everyone is on their phone, the unfunny Steve is revealed to be a plant alien on a mission. Now on the plant planet, they shoot spores to Earth (going right next to the Futurama ship with a cloth saying "BRING BACK FUTURAMA" and then getting blown up by The Orville). In Springfield, everyone turns into plant versions of themselves. The transformed citizens are transported to a utopian plant planet with no technology. The Plant People see the citizens with pods (Mapple products) and ask where they found those. Bart says they found it under the living Christmas tree. Multiplisa-ty[edit] After a sleepover at Milhouse's, Milhouse, Nelson, and Bart find themselves in a cell, trapped by Lisa, suffering from dissociative identity disorder (similar to James McAvoy's character from Split), then closes them in again after they do not ask for an encore on her performance. Lisa attacks and kills Milhouse and Nelson, before Bart asks her what happened to her to which Lisa tells the story: Bart grabbed Lisa's spelling test, changing her answers, mocking Miss Hoover and granting her a F. Lisa has a last change and gives Bart a last chance to save himself and he redeems himself, saving himself from being killed by trash, while Milhouse was transformed into a "paper boy". Geriatric Park[edit] In a parody of Jurassic Park, Mr. Burns opens up a Jurassic-themed retirement home, a park filled with elders rejuvenated mixing their DNA with dinosaurs. He brings Springfielders to the park, showing them the new "retirement home". At first they are all human, healthy and feeling young again, with incredible strength too. Once Homer raises the temperature after Grandpa complains about the temperature being too cold with Homer also quoting "I can't read, I'm on vacation" after seeing the warning sign, they transform into dinosaur versions of themselves. Visitors and Mr. Burns are killed by the elders, Agnes Skinner as a Ludodactylus eats off Principal Skinner's arm, Jasper as a Dilophosaurus bites off Kirk Van Houten's head, and the Simpson family are threatened by Grandpa and Jacqueline Bouvier (turned into an Indominus rex-like theropod and a Parasaurolophus respectively). Lisa courageously confronts Grandpa and find out they all just needed to be cherished and respected. In the end, the Simpson family escape alive and unharmed, though their helicopter is being flown on the back of the transformed Agnes. Reception[edit] Tony Sokol of Den of Geek gave the episode 3 out of 5 points ranking, stating "Ultimately this is a disappointing Halloween installment, not horrifyingly though. We rely on The Simpsons' 'Treehouse of Horror' stories to be the high point of any season. They have consistently been immediate classics. But "XXIX" is only lukewarm. The series has been edging closer to the "clever" side of humor over the irreverently silly, and the laughs are increasingly muted. This episode hosts some of the largest creatures of the world of terror, dinosaurs and Cthulhu. It's a shame the laughs aren't bigger.[2] Dennis Perkins of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C+ ranking, stating "It’s tempting after a dully serviceable outing like this to say it’s time to bury the ‘Treehouse of Horror’ concept as an unnecessary annual disappointment. But then you’d have to say that of the series itself, which, okay, some of you do. I’d maintain that The Simpsons’ decades-long role as pop cultural ‘not as good as it used to be’ punching bag could be reversed with some new creative blood in the form of those writers raised on The Simpsons who want nothing better than to jolt the lumbering comedy behemoth back to life. But, as the show plods on, it seems that that’s the one thing those in charge of the shambling enterprise are truly afraid of."[3] Jess Scheden of IGN gave the episode a 5.6 out of 10 points ranking, stating "It almost never feels like there's enough room for the writers to really take advantage of these horror parodies. The result is a lot of easy, surface level gags. More and more I find myself wondering if the series would be better off switching to an hour-long format or, better yet, devoting the entire special to one story."[4] “Treehouse of Horror XXIX” scored a 1.3 rating with a 6 share and was watched by 2.95 million viewers, making “The Simpsons” Fox’s highest rated show of the night. References[edit] ^ Pedersen, Erik (2018-07-21). "'The Simpsons Treehouse Of Horror XXIX' Trailer: Spores? We Wanted S'mores! – Comic-Con". Deadline. Retrieved 2018-10-21. ^ Sokol, Tony. "The Simpsons Season 30 Episode 4 Review: Treehouse Of Horror XXIX". Den of Geek. Retrieved 2019-01-08. ^ Perkins, Dennis. ""Treehouse Of Horror XXIX" sees The Simpsons ladle out some tepid horrors". The A.V. Club. Retrieved 2018-10-22. ^ Scheden, Jess. "Treehouse Of Horror XXIX review". IGN. Retrieved 2018-10-24. External links[edit] "API" at IMDb v t e The Simpsons episodes Seasons 1–20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Seasons 21–present 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 Season 30 "Bart's Not Dead" "Heartbreak Hotel" "My Way or the Highway to Heaven" "Treehouse of Horror XXIX" "Baby You Can't Drive My Car" "From Russia Without Love" "Werking Mom" "Krusty the Clown" "Daddicus Finch" "'Tis the 30th Season" "Mad About the Toy" "The Girl on the Bus" "I'm Dancing as Fat as I Can" "The Clown Stays in the Picture" "101 Mitigations" "I Want You (She's So Heavy)" "E My Sports" "Bart vs. Itchy & Scratchy" "Girl's in the Band" "I'm Just a Girl Who Can't Say D'oh" "D'oh Canada" "Woo-Hoo Dunnit?" "Crystal Blue-Haired Persuasion" Themed episodes Treehouse of Horror list See also Itchy and Scratchy episodes The Simpsons episode guides Category Book v t e The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror Episodes I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX XX XXI XXII XXIII XXIV XXV XXVI XXVII XXVIII XXIX XXX XXXI See also "Halloween of Horror" "Thanksgiving of Horror" Kang and Kodos Category