For demon from the Ramayana, see Trishira. API Devanagari त्रिशिरस् Sanskrit transliteration Triśiras Affiliation Asura Texts Devi-Bhagavata Purana, Bhagavata Purana, Matsya Purana Personal information Parents Tvastar or Vishwakarma (father) Virocanā (mother) Siblings Saranyu (twin sister) Trisiras (Sanskrit: त्रिशिरस्, IAST: Triśiras) is an Asura in Hinduism. He is the three-headed son of Tvaṣṭā and grandson of Prahlada, as well as the twin of Saraṇyū.[1] In the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, he is referred to as Viśvarūpa. Triśiras was created by Tvaṣṭā to dethrone Indra. His three heads were each named Somapīṭḥa, Surāpīṭḥa, and Annāda. Each head consumed Soma, Sura, and food, respectively. It is also told that one head was responsible for drinking; with another head, he observed his surroundings; and with his last head, he read the Vedas. Triśiras grew so powerful that Indra became frightened of him, especially after he scorned the women Indra sent to seduce him. Indra killed him and Triśiras' father, Tvaṣṭā, created Vṛtra to exact his revenge. Indra was concerned about the possibility of Triśiras reviving, so he sent a carpenter to cut off each of his heads. From the head that chanted Vedic mantras rose the Kapiñjala birds; from the head used for drinking soma rose the Kalapiṅga birds and from the third head rose the Tittiri birds. This was evidence of the Asura's final demise. References[edit] ^ Brahmanda Purana, III.59 External links[edit] Bhaktivedanta VedaBase: Śrīmad Bhāgavatam v t e Hindu deities and texts Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Rama Krishna Ganesha Kartikeya Hanuman Indra Surya Agni Varuna Vayu Kamadeva Yama more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Durga Kali Sati Sita Rukmini Radha Shakti Adi Parashakti Matrikas Mahavidya more Other deities Apsaras Asuras Gandharvas Grāmadevatās Rakshasas Vahanas Yakshas Texts Vedas Rig Sama Yajur Atharva Upanishads Puranas Ramayana Mahabharata Bhagavad Gita Yoga Sutras of Patanjali more Hinduism Hindu mythology This Hindu mythology-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e