Triton First appearance Greyhawk (1975) Information Type Outsider Tritons are a fictional species in the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game. Contents 1 Publication history 2 Description 3 Society 4 References Publication history[edit] The tritons were introduced to the Dungeons & Dragons game in its first supplement, Greyhawk (1975),[1] and also appeared in the Eldritch Wizardry supplement.[2] The triton appeared in the first edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons in the original Monster Manual (1977).[3] The triton appeared in the Dungeons & Dragons adventure module The War Rafts of Kron (1984). The triton also appeared in the Creature Catalogue (1986),[4] and reprinted in the Creature Catalog (1993).[5] The triton appeared as a player character class in The Sea People (1990).[6] The triton appeared in the second edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons in the Monstrous Compendium Volume Two (1989),[7] and reprinted in the Monstrous Manual (1993).[8] The triton appeared as a playable character race for the Forgotten Realms setting in Sea of Fallen Stars (1999).[9] The triton appeared in the third edition Monster Manual (2000),[10] and in the 3.5 revised Monster Manual (2003). The triton appeared as a player character race in Savage Species (2003),[11] The triton was added as a playable race for Dungeons & Dragons 5th Edition in Volo's Guide to Monsters (2016). Description[edit] Tritons are aquatic humanoid creatures, loosely based on the merman god Triton from Greek mythology.[citation needed] Tritons resemble aquatic elves in their upper half, but their lower halves are more fish-like, with scaly legs and webbed feet. They favor tridents over other weapons. Tritons are of the outsider type but native to the Material Plane, though they are thought to originate from the Elemental Plane of Water. Tritons are able to magically summon water elementals and other creatures of the sea to come to their aid. A triton is usually neutral in alignment. They are the natural enemies of the sahuagin. Society[edit] Tritons worship the deity Persana. References[edit] ^ Gygax, Gary and Robert Kuntz. Supplement I: Greyhawk (TSR, 1975) ^ Gygax, Gary; Blume, Brian (1976), Eldritch Wizardry (1 ed.), Lake Geneva, WI: TSR ^ Gygax, Gary. Monster Manual (TSR, 1977) ^ Morris, Graeme, Phil Gallagher and Jim Bambra. Creature Catalogue (TSR, 1986) ^ Nephew, John. Creature Catalog (TSR, 1993) ^ Bambra, Jim. Creature Crucible: The Sea People (TSR, 1990) ^ Cook, David, et al. Monstrous Compendium Volume Two (TSR, 1989) ^ Stewart, Doug, ed. Monstrous Manual (TSR, 1993) ^ Schend, Steven E. Sea of Fallen Stars (TSR, 1999) ^ Williams, Skip, Jonathan Tweet, and Monte Cook. Monster Manual. Wizards of the Coast, 2000 ^ Eckelberry, David, Rich Redman, and Jennifer Clarke Wilkes. Savage Species (Wizards of the Coast, 2003) v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond This Dungeons & Dragons article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e