1950 film by Norman Dawn This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Two Lost Worlds Theatrical poster Directed by Norman Dawn Produced by Boris Petroff Written by Tom Hubbard/Phyllis Parker/Boris Petroff (story)/Bill Shaw Starring James Arness Kasey Rogers Music by Alex Alexander Cinematography Harry Neumann Edited by Fred R. Feitshans Jr. Distributed by Sterling Productions Inc. Eagle-Lion films Release date January 5, 1951 (1951-01-05) Running time 61 minutes Language English Two Lost Worlds is a 1951 science fiction/adventure film directed by Norman Dawn and starring James Arness and Laura Elliott. The film was produced independently by Boris Petroff (dba Sterling Productions Inc.) from his original story. The film was scripted by Phyllis Parker (with later, added scenes written by Tom Hubbard and voice-over narrative by Bill Shaw), and distributed by Eagle-Lion Classics Inc., with a 1952 reissue by Classic Pictures Inc.. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 See also 5 External links Plot[edit] The year is 1830. The American clipper ship, the Queen, is attacked by pirates in the New Hebrides (present day Vanuatu). The ship's mate Kirk Hamilton (Arness) is wounded and heads to Queensland, Australia for medical treatment. While at the hospital, he meets and falls in love with Elaine Jeffries (Rogers), the fiancée of Martin Shannon (Bill Kennedy) a rancher. A romantic rivalry develops and the pirates, who attacked Kirk and his ship kidnap her along with her friend, Nancy Holden (Jane Harlan). Kirk and Shannon pursue the pirates and they soon wind up on a volcanic island inhabited by dinosaurs. Cast[edit] Kasey Rogers (as Laura Elliott) - Elaine Jeffries James Arness (as Jim Aurness) - Kirk Hamilton Bill Kennedy - Martin Shannon Gloria Petroff - Janice Jeffries Pierre Watkin - Magistrate Jeffries Tom Hubbard - John Hartley Jane Harlan - Nancy Holden Tom Monroe - Captain Tallman Michael Rye - Captain Hackett Fred Kohler, Jr. - Nat Mercer - Sailor Production[edit] There are no original dinosaur effects in the film. The dinosaurs appear 58 minutes into the film. They were taken from stock footage recycled from the film One Million B.C. (1940). The film was shot in Red Rock Canyon State Park (California) in Cantil, California. See also[edit] 1950 in film External links[edit] API at IMDb