"USN" redirects here. For other uses, see USN (disambiguation). Maritime service branch of the U.S. Armed Forces For civilian military department for naval forces, see United States Department of the Navy. United States Navy Emblem of the United States Navy Founded 27 March 1794 (227 years) (As current service) 13 October 1775 (245 years, 6 months) (As Continental Navy)[1] Country  United States Type Navy Role Sea control Power projection Deterrence Maritime security Sealift Size 347,042 active duty personnel (As of November 2020[update])[2] 279,471 civilian employees[3] 101,583 ready reserve personnel[3] 480 total ships, of which 290 deployable (As of 2019[update])[3] 3,900+[3] Dept. of Navy manned aircraft combined (U.S. Navy operates 2,623 manned aircraft and the U.S. Marine Corps operates 1,304 manned aircraft)[4] Part of Department of the Navy Headquarters The Pentagon Arlington County, Virginia, U.S. Motto(s) "Semper Fortis" (English: "Always Courageous"), (unofficial). "Non sibi sed patriae" (English: "Not for self but for country") (unofficial). Colors Blue and gold[5][6]      March "Anchors Aweigh" Play (help·info) Anniversaries 13 October Equipment List of U.S. Navy equipment Engagements See list American Revolutionary War Quasi-War First Barbary War War of 1812 Second Barbary War West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations Seminole Wars African Anti-Slavery Operations Aegean Sea Anti-Piracy Operations First Sumatran expedition United States exploration expedition Patriot War Second Sumatran expedition Ivory Coast Expedition Capture of Monterey Mexican–American War Bombardment of Greytown Battle of Ty-ho Bay First Fiji Expedition Filibuster War Second Opium War Second Fiji Expedition Reform War Paraguay expedition American Civil War Bombardment of Qui Nhon Shimonoseki Campaign Formosa Expedition United States expedition to Korea Egyptian Expedition (1882) Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Kingdom of Hawaii overthrowal Second Samoan Civil War Banana Wars Spanish–American War Negro Rebellion Occupation of Nicaragua Occupation of Haiti Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916) Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion World War I Bombardment of Samsun World War II Korean War First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1958 Lebanon crisis 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis Vietnam War Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965) Iranian Hostage Rescue Multinational Force in Lebanon Invasion of Grenada Bombing of Libya (1986) Tanker War Earnest Will Prime Chance Eager Glacier Nimble Archer Praying Mantis Invasion of Panama Gulf War Iraqi no-fly zones Somali Civil War Bosnian War Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Kosovo War International Force for East Timor Operation Enduring Freedom Afghanistan (2001–2014) Philippines Horn of Africa Pankisi Gorge Trans Sahara Caribbean and Central America Iraq War Operation Burnt Frost Operation Odyssey Dawn 2014 Intervention against ISIL Operation Inherent Resolve War in Afghanistan (2015–present) 2017 Shayrat missile strike Decorations Presidential Unit Citation Navy Unit Commendation Meritorious Unit Commendation Website www.navy.mil Commanders Commander-in-Chief President Joe Biden Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin Secretary of the Navy Thomas Harker (acting) Chief of Naval Operations ADM Michael M. Gilday Vice Chief of Naval Operations ADM William K. Lescher Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy MCPON Russell L. Smith Insignia Flag Jack Pennant Anchor, Constitution, and Eagle Logo United States Armed Forces Executive departments Department of Defense Department of Homeland Security Staff Joint Chiefs of Staff Military departments Department of the Army Department of the Navy Department of the Air Force Military service branches United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Unified combatant commands Geographic combatant commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Indo-Pacific Command Northern Command Southern Command Space Command Functional combatant commands Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command v t e The United States Navy (USN) is the maritime service branch of the United States Armed Forces and one of the eight uniformed services of the United States. It is the largest and most powerful navy in the world, with the estimated tonnage of its active battle fleet alone exceeding the next 13 navies combined, including 11 U.S. allies or partner nations.[7][8][9][10] It has the highest combined battle fleet tonnage[11][7] and the world's largest aircraft carrier fleet, with eleven in service, two new carriers under construction, and five other carriers planned. With 336,978 personnel on active duty and 101,583 in the Ready Reserve, the U.S. Navy is the third largest of the U.S. military service branches in terms of personnel. It has 290 deployable combat vessels and more than 3,700 operational aircraft as of June 2019[update].[3] The U.S. Navy traces its origins to the Continental Navy, which was established during the American Revolutionary War and was effectively disbanded as a separate entity shortly thereafter. After suffering significant loss of goods and personnel at the hands of the Barbary pirates from Algiers, the U.S. Congress passed the Naval Act of 1794 for the construction of six heavy frigates, the first ships of the U.S. Navy. The U.S. Navy played a major role in the American Civil War by blockading the Confederacy and seizing control of its rivers. It played the central role in the World War II defeat of Imperial Japan. The U.S. Navy emerged from World War II as the most powerful navy in the world. The 21st century U.S. Navy maintains a sizable global presence, deploying in strength in such areas as the Western Pacific, the Mediterranean, and the Indian Ocean. It is a blue-water navy with the ability to project force onto the littoral regions of the world, engage in forward deployments during peacetime and rapidly respond to regional crises, making it a frequent actor in U.S. foreign and military policy. The U.S. Navy is part of the Department of the Navy, alongside the U.S. Marine Corps, which is its coequal sister service. The Department of the Navy is headed by the civilian Secretary of the Navy. The Department of the Navy is itself a military department of the Department of Defense, which is headed by the Secretary of Defense. The Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) is the most senior Navy officer serving in the Department of the Navy.[12] Contents 1 Mission 2 History 2.1 Origins 2.2 From re-establishment to the Civil War 2.3 20th century 2.3.1 World War I and interwar years 2.3.2 World War II 2.3.3 Cold War 2.4 21st century 3 Organization 3.1 Operating forces 3.2 Shore establishments 3.3 Relationships with other service branches 3.3.1 United States Marine Corps 3.3.2 United States Coast Guard 4 Personnel 4.1 Uniforms 4.1.1 Commissioned officers 4.1.1.1 Warrant officers 4.1.2 Enlisted 4.1.3 Badges of the United States Navy 5 Bases 5.1 Eastern United States 5.2 Western United States and Hawaii 5.3 United States territories 5.4 Foreign countries 6 Equipment 6.1 Ships 6.1.1 Aircraft carriers 6.1.2 Amphibious warfare vessels 6.1.3 Cruisers 6.1.4 Destroyers 6.1.5 Frigates and Littoral combat ships 6.1.6 Mine countermeasures ships 6.1.7 Patrol boats 6.1.8 Submarines 6.2 Aircraft 6.3 Weapons 7 Naval jack 8 Notable sailors 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 External links Mission[edit] To recruit, train, equip, and organize to deliver combat ready Naval forces to win conflicts and wars while maintaining security and deterrence through sustained forward presence. — Mission statement of the United States Navy.[13] The U.S. Navy is a seaborne branch of the military of the United States. The Navy's three primary areas of responsibility:[14] The preparation of naval forces necessary for the effective prosecution of war. The maintenance of naval aviation, including land-based naval aviation, air transport essential for naval operations, and all air weapons and air techniques involved in the operations and activities of the Navy. The development of aircraft, weapons, tactics, technique, organization, and equipment of naval combat and service elements. U.S. Navy training manuals state that the mission of the U.S. Armed Forces is "to be prepared to conduct prompt and sustained combat operations in support of the national interest." The Navy's five enduring functions are sea control, power projection, deterrence, maritime security, and sealift.[15] History[edit] Main article: History of the United States Navy Origins[edit] It follows then as certain as that night succeeds the day, that without a decisive naval force we can do nothing definitive, and with it, everything honorable and glorious. — George Washington 15 November 1781, to Marquis de Lafayette[16] Would to Heaven we had a navy able to reform those enemies to mankind or crush them into non-existence. — George Washington 15 August 1786, to Marquis de Lafayette[17] Naval power . . . is the natural defense of the United States. — John Adams[18] The Navy was rooted in the colonial seafaring tradition, which produced a large community of sailors, captains, and shipbuilders.[19] In the early stages of the American Revolutionary War, Massachusetts had its own Massachusetts Naval Militia. The rationale for establishing a national navy was debated in the Second Continental Congress. Supporters argued that a navy would protect shipping, defend the coast, and make it easier to seek support from foreign countries. Detractors countered that challenging the British Royal Navy, then the world's preeminent naval power, was a foolish undertaking. Commander in Chief George Washington resolved the debate when he commissioned the ocean-going schooner USS Hannah to interdict British merchantmen and reported the captures to the Congress. On 13 October 1775, the Continental Congress authorized the purchase of two vessels to be armed for a cruise against British merchantmen; this resolution created the Continental Navy and is considered the first establishment of the U.S. Navy.[20] The Continental Navy achieved mixed results; it was successful in a number of engagements and raided many British merchant vessels, but it lost twenty-four of its vessels[21] and at one point was reduced to two in active service.[22] In August 1785, after the Revolutionary War had drawn to a close, Congress had sold Alliance, the last ship remaining in the Continental Navy due to a lack of funds to maintain the ship or support a navy.[23][24] In 1972, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Elmo Zumwalt, authorized the Navy to celebrate its birthday on 13 October to honor the establishment of the Continental Navy in 1775.[25][20] From re-establishment to the Civil War[edit] See also: Union Navy USS Constellation vs L'Insurgente during the Quasi-War The United States was without a navy for nearly a decade, a state of affairs that exposed U.S. maritime merchant ships to a series of attacks by the Barbary pirates. The sole armed maritime presence between 1790 and the launching of the U.S. Navy's first warships in 1797 was the U.S. Revenue-Marine, the primary predecessor of the U.S. Coast Guard. Although the USRCS (United States Revenue Cutter Service) conducted operations against the pirates, the pirates' depredations far outstripped its abilities and Congress passed the Naval Act of 1794 that established a permanent standing navy on 27 March 1794.[26] The Naval Act ordered the construction and manning of six frigates and, by October 1797,[21] the first three were brought into service: USS United States, USS Constellation, and USS Constitution. Due to his strong posture on having a strong standing Navy during this period, John Adams is "often called the father of the American Navy".[27] In 1798–99 the Navy was involved in an undeclared Quasi-War with France.[28] From 1801 to 1805, in the First Barbary War, the U.S. Navy defended U.S. ships from the Barbary pirates, blockaded the Barbary ports and executed attacks against the Barbary' fleets. The U.S. Navy saw substantial action in the War of 1812, where it was victorious in eleven single-ship duels with the Royal Navy. It proved victorious in the Battle of Lake Erie and prevented the region from becoming a threat to American operations in the area. The result was a major victory for the U.S. Army at the Niagara Frontier of the war, and the defeat of the Native American allies of the British at the Battle of the Thames. Despite this, the U.S. Navy could not prevent the British from blockading its ports and landing troops.[29] But after the War of 1812 ended in 1815, the U.S. Navy primarily focused its attention on protecting American shipping assets, sending squadrons to the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, where it participated in the Second Barbary War that ended piracy in the region, South America, Africa, and the Pacific.[21] From 1819 to the outbreak of the Civil War, the Africa Squadron operated to suppress the slave trade, seizing 36 slave ships, although its contribution was smaller than that of the much larger British Royal Navy. USS Constitution vs HMS Guerriere during the War of 1812 During the Mexican–American War the U.S. Navy blockaded Mexican ports, capturing or burning the Mexican fleet in the Gulf of California and capturing all major cities in Baja California peninsula. In 1846–1848 the Navy successfully used the Pacific Squadron under Commodore Robert Stockton and its marines and blue-jackets to facilitate the capture of California with large-scale land operations coordinated with the local militia organized in the California Battalion. The Navy conducted the U.S. military's first large-scale amphibious joint operation by successfully landing 12,000 army troops with their equipment in one day at Veracruz, Mexico. When larger guns were needed to bombard Veracruz, Navy volunteers landed large guns and manned them in the successful bombardment and capture of the city. This successful landing and capture of Veracruz opened the way for the capture of Mexico City and the end of the war.[29] The U.S. Navy established itself as a player in United States foreign policy through the actions of Commodore Matthew Perry in Japan, which resulted in the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854. A carte de visite of a U.S. Navy lieutenant during the Civil War Naval power played a significant role during the American Civil War, in which the Union had a distinct advantage over the Confederacy on the seas.[29] A Union blockade on all major ports shut down exports and the coastal trade, but blockade runners provided a thin lifeline. The Brown-water navy components of the U.S. navy control of the river systems made internal travel difficult for Confederates and easy for the Union. The war saw ironclad warships in combat for the first time at the Battle of Hampton Roads in 1862, which pitted USS Monitor against CSS Virginia.[30] For two decades after the war, however, the U.S. Navy's fleet was neglected and became technologically obsolete.[31] 20th century[edit] The Great White Fleet demonstrating U.S. naval power in 1907; it was proof that the U.S. Navy had blue-water capability. Our ships are our natural bulwarks. — Woodrow Wilson[16] A modernization program beginning in the 1880s when the first steel-hulled warships stimulated the American steel industry, and "the new steel navy" was born.[32] This rapid expansion of the U.S. Navy and its easy victory over the Spanish Navy in 1898 brought a new respect for American technical quality. Rapid building of at first pre-dreadnoughts, then dreadnoughts brought the U.S. in line with the navies of countries such as Britain and Germany. In 1907, most of the Navy's battleships, with several support vessels, dubbed the Great White Fleet, were showcased in a 14-month circumnavigation world. Ordered by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was a mission designed to demonstrate the Navy's capability to extend to the global theater.[21] By 1911, the U.S. had begun building the super-dreadnoughts at a pace to eventually become competitive with Britain.[33] The 1911 also saw the first naval aircraft with the navy[34] which would lead to the informal establishment of United States Naval Flying Corps to protect shore bases. It was not until 1921 US naval aviation truly commenced. Columbia, personification of the United States, wearing a warship bearing the words "World Power" as her "Easter bonnet" on the cover of Puck, 6 April 1901 World War I and interwar years[edit] During World War I, the U.S. Navy spent much of its resources protecting and shipping hundreds of thousands of Soldiers and Marines of the American Expeditionary Force and war supplies across the Atlantic in U-boat infested waters with the Cruiser and Transport Force. It also concentrated on laying the North Sea Mine Barrage. Hesitation by the senior command meant that naval forces were not contributed until late 1917. Battleship Division Nine was dispatched to Britain and served as the Sixth Battle Squadron of the British Grand Fleet. Its presence allowed the British to decommission some older ships and reuse the crews on smaller vessels. Destroyers and U.S. Naval Air Force units like the Northern Bombing Group contributed to the anti-submarine operations. The strength of the United States Navy grew under an ambitious ship building program associated with the Naval Act of 1916. Naval construction, especially of battleships, was limited by the Washington Naval Conference of 1921–22. The aircraft carriers USS Saratoga (CV-3) and USS Lexington (CV-2) were built on the hulls of partially built battle cruisers that had been canceled by the treaty. The New Deal used Public Works Administration funds to build warships, such as USS Yorktown (CV-5) and USS Enterprise (CV-6). By 1936, with the completion of USS Wasp (CV-7), the U.S. Navy possessed a carrier fleet of 165,000 tonnes displacement, although this figure was nominally recorded as 135,000 tonnes to comply with treaty limitations. Franklin Roosevelt, the number two official in the Navy Department during World War I, appreciated the Navy and gave it strong support. In return, senior leaders were eager for innovation and experimented with new technologies, such as magnetic torpedoes, and developed a strategy called War Plan Orange for victory in the Pacific in a hypothetical war with Japan that would eventually become reality.[35] World War II[edit] Main articles: United States Navy in World War II and Naval history of World War II Further information: Pacific Crucible: War at Sea in the Pacific, 1941–1942; The Conquering Tide: War in the Pacific Islands, 1942–1944; and Twilight of the Gods: War in the Western Pacific, 1944-1945 Battleship USS Idaho shelling Okinawa on 1 April 1945. The U.S. Navy grew into a formidable force in the years prior to World War II, with battleship production being restarted in 1937, commencing with USS North Carolina (BB-55). Though ultimately unsuccessful, Japan tried to neutralize this strategic threat with the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941. Following American entry into the war, the U.S. Navy grew tremendously as the United States was faced with a two-front war on the seas. It achieved notable acclaim in the Pacific Theater, where it was instrumental to the Allies' successful "island hopping" campaign.[22] The U.S. Navy participated in many significant battles, including the Battle of the Coral Sea, the Battle of Midway, the Solomon Islands Campaign, the Battle of the Philippine Sea, the Battle of Leyte Gulf, and the Battle of Okinawa. By 1943, the navy's size was larger than the combined fleets of all the other combatant nations in World War II.[36] By war's end in 1945, the U.S. Navy had added hundreds of new ships, including 18 aircraft carriers and 8 battleships, and had over 70% of the world's total numbers and total tonnage of naval vessels of 1,000 tons or greater.[37][38] At its peak, the U.S. Navy was operating 6,768 ships on V-J Day in August 1945.[39] Doctrine had significantly shifted by the end of the war. The U.S. Navy had followed in the footsteps of the navies of Great Britain and Germany which favored concentrated groups of battleships as their main offensive naval weapons.[40] The development of the aircraft carrier and its devastating utilization by the Japanese against the U.S. at Pearl Harbor, however, shifted U.S. thinking. The Pearl Harbor attack destroyed or took out of action a significant number of U.S. Navy battleships. This placed much of the burden of retaliating against the Japanese on the small number of aircraft carriers.[41] During World War II some 4,000,000 Americans served in the United States Navy.[42] Cold War[edit] USS George Washington (SSBN-598), a ballistic missile submarine The potential for armed conflict with the Soviet Union during the Cold War pushed the U.S. Navy to continue its technological advancement by developing new weapons systems, ships, and aircraft. U.S. naval strategy changed to that of forward deployment in support of U.S. allies with an emphasis on carrier battle groups.[43] The navy was a major participant in the Vietnam War, blockaded Cuba during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and, through the use of ballistic missile submarines, became an important aspect of the United States' nuclear strategic deterrence policy. The U.S. Navy conducted various combat operations in the Persian Gulf against Iran in 1987 and 1988, most notably Operation Praying Mantis. The Navy was extensively involved in Operation Urgent Fury, Operation Desert Shield, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Deliberate Force, Operation Allied Force, Operation Desert Fox and Operation Southern Watch. The U.S. Navy has also been involved in search and rescue/search and salvage operations, sometimes in conjunction with vessels of other countries as well as with U.S. Coast Guard ships. Two examples are the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash incident and the subsequent search for missing hydrogen bombs, and Task Force 71 of the Seventh Fleet's operation in search for Korean Air Lines Flight 007, shot down by the Soviets on 1 September 1983. 21st century[edit] When a crisis confronts the nation, the first question often asked by policymakers is: 'What naval forces are available and how fast can they be on station?' — Admiral Carlisle A. H. Trost[44] U.S. Navy officers aboard the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln monitor defense systems during early 2010s maritime security operations exercises The U.S. Navy continues to be a major support to U.S. interests in the 21st century. Since the end of the Cold War, it has shifted its focus from preparations for large-scale war with the Soviet Union to special operations and strike missions in regional conflicts.[45] The navy participated in Operation Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and is a major participant in the ongoing War on Terror, largely in this capacity. Development continues on new ships and weapons, including the Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier and the Littoral combat ship. Because of its size, weapons technology, and ability to project force far from U.S. shores, the current U.S. Navy remains an asset for the United States. Moreover, it is the principal means through which the U.S. maintains international global order, namely by safeguarding global trade and protecting allied nations.[46] In 2007, the U.S. Navy joined with the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Coast Guard to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raises the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war. The strategy was presented by the Chief of Naval Operations, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, and Commandant of the Coast Guard at the International Sea Power Symposium in Newport, RI on 17 October 2007.[47] U.S. Navy patrol boat near Kuwait Naval Base in 2009 The strategy recognized the economic links of the global system and how any disruption due to regional crises (man-made or natural) can adversely impact the U.S. economy and quality of life. This new strategy charts a course for the Navy, Coast Guard, and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent these crises from occurring or reacting quickly should one occur to prevent negative impacts on the U.S. In 2010, Admiral Gary Roughead, Chief of Naval Operations, noted that demands on the Navy have grown as the fleet has shrunk and that in the face of declining budgets in the future, the U.S. Navy must rely even more on international partnerships.[48] The amphibious assault ship USS America, launched in 2012. In its 2013 budget request, the navy focused on retaining all eleven big deck carriers, at the expense of cutting numbers of smaller ships and delaying the SSBN replacement.[49] By the next year the USN found itself unable to maintain eleven aircraft carriers in the face of the expiration of budget relief offered by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 and CNO Jonathan Greenert said that a ten ship carrier fleet would not be able to sustainably support military requirements.[50] The British First Sea Lord George Zambellas said that[51] the USN had switched from "outcome-led to resource-led" planning.[52] One significant change in U.S. policymaking that is having a major effect on naval planning is the Pivot to East Asia. In response, the Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus stated in 2015 that 60 percent of the total U.S. fleet will be deployed to the Pacific by 2020.[53] The Navy's most recent 30-year shipbuilding plan, published in 2016, calls for a future fleet of 350 ships in order to meet the challenges of an increasingly competitive international environment.[51] A provision of the 2018 National Defense Authorization Act called for expanding the naval fleet to 355 ships "as soon as practicable", but did not establish additional funding nor a timeline.[54] Organization[edit] Main article: Structure of the United States Navy Organization of the United States Navy within the Department of Defense Simplified flowchart of the U.S. Navy command structure The U.S. Navy falls under the administration of the Department of the Navy, under civilian leadership of the Secretary of the Navy (SECNAV). The most senior naval officer is the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO), a four-star admiral who is immediately under and reports to the Secretary of the Navy. At the same time, the Chief of Naval Operations is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which is the second-highest deliberative body of the armed forces after the United States National Security Council, although it only plays an advisory role to the President and does not nominally form part of the chain of command. The Secretary of the Navy and Chief of Naval Operations are responsible for organizing, recruiting, training, and equipping the Navy so that it is ready for operation under the commanders of the unified combatant commands. Operating forces[edit] Main article: List of units of the United States Navy Further information: Structure of the United States Navy § Numbered_fleets Areas of responsibility for each of the United States Navy fleets. Tenth Fleet serves as the numbered fleet for U.S. Fleet Cyber Command and therefore is not shown. There are nine components in the operating forces of the U.S. Navy: the United States Fleet Forces Command (formerly United States Atlantic Fleet), United States Pacific Fleet, United States Naval Forces Central Command, United States Naval Forces Europe, Naval Network Warfare Command, Navy Reserve, United States Naval Special Warfare Command, Operational Test and Evaluation Force, and Military Sealift Command. Fleet Forces Command controls a number of unique capabilities, including Military Sealift Command, Naval Expeditionary Combat Command, and Navy Cyber Forces. The United States Navy has seven active numbered fleets – Second, Third, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh Fleet and Tenth Fleets are each led by a vice admiral, and the Fourth Fleet is led by a rear admiral. These seven fleets are further grouped under Fleet Forces Command (the former Atlantic Fleet), Pacific Fleet, Naval Forces Europe-Africa, and Naval Forces Central Command, whose commander also doubles as Commander Fifth Fleet; the first three commands being led by four-star admirals. The United States First Fleet existed after the Second World War from 1947, but it was redesignated the Third Fleet in early 1973. The United States Second Fleet was deactivated in September 2011 but reestablished in August 2018 amid heightened tensions with Russia.[55] It is headquartered in Norfolk, Virginia, with responsibility over the East Coast and North Atlantic.[56] In early 2008, the Navy reactivated the United States Fourth Fleet to control operations in the area controlled by Southern Command, which consists of US assets in and around Central and South America.[57] Other number fleets were activated during World War II and later deactivated, renumbered, or merged. Shore establishments[edit] USS Kitty Hawk (CV-63) docking at the U.S. Navy base in Yokosuka, Japan Shore establishments exist to support the mission of the fleet through the use of facilities on land. Among the commands of the shore establishment, as of April 2011[update], are the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command, the Naval Information Warfare Systems Command, the Naval Facilities Engineering Command, the Naval Supply Systems Command, the Naval Air Systems Command, the Naval Sea Systems Command, the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, the Bureau of Naval Personnel, the United States Naval Academy, the Naval Safety Center, the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center, and the United States Naval Observatory.[58] Official Navy websites list the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the Chief of Naval Operations as part of the shore establishment, but these two entities effectively sit superior to the other organizations, playing a coordinating role.[59] Relationships with other service branches[edit] United States Marine Corps[edit] Main article: United States Marine Corps A Marine F/A-18 from VMFA-451 preparing to launch from USS Coral Sea (CV-43) In 1834, the United States Marine Corps came under the Department of the Navy.[60] Historically, the Navy has had a unique relationship with the USMC, partly because they both specialize in seaborne operations. Together the Navy and Marine Corps form the Department of the Navy and report to the Secretary of the Navy. However, the Marine Corps is a distinct, separate service branch[61] with its own uniformed service chief – the Commandant of the Marine Corps, a four-star general. The Marine Corps depends on the Navy for medical support (dentists, doctors, nurses, medical technicians known as corpsmen) and religious support (chaplains). Thus Navy officers and enlisted sailors fulfill these roles. When attached to Marine Corps units deployed to an operational environment they generally wear Marine camouflage uniforms, but otherwise, they wear Navy dress uniforms unless they opt to conform to Marine Corps grooming standards.[59] In the operational environment, as an expeditionary force specializing in amphibious operations, Marines often embark on Navy ships to conduct operations from beyond territorial waters. Marine units deploying as part of a Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) operate under the command of the existing Marine chain of command. Although Marine units routinely operate from amphibious assault ships, the relationship has evolved over the years much as the Commander of the Carrier Air Group/Wing (CAG) does not work for the carrier commanding officer, but coordinates with the ship's CO and staff. Some Marine aviation squadrons, usually fixed-wing assigned to carrier air wings train and operate alongside Navy squadrons; they fly similar missions and often fly sorties together under the cognizance of the CAG. Aviation is where the Navy and Marines share the most common ground since aircrews are guided in their use of aircraft by standard procedures outlined in a series of publications known as NATOPS manuals. United States Coast Guard[edit] Main article: United States Coast Guard A U.S. Coast Guard helicopter preparing to land on the flight deck of the amphibious assault ship USS Wasp (LHD-1) The United States Coast Guard, in its peacetime role with the Department of Homeland Security, fulfills its law enforcement and rescue role in the maritime environment. It provides Law Enforcement Detachments (LEDETs) to Navy vessels, where they perform arrests and other law enforcement duties during naval boarding and interdiction missions. In times of war, the Coast Guard operates as a service in the Navy.[62] At other times, Coast Guard Port Security Units are sent overseas to guard the security of ports and other assets. The Coast Guard also jointly staffs the Navy's naval coastal warfare groups and squadrons (the latter of which were known as harbor defense commands until late-2004), which oversee defense efforts in foreign littoral combat and inshore areas. Personnel[edit] Main article: Personnel of the United States Navy Navy SEALs at one of the entrances to the Zhawar Kili cave complex The United States Navy has over 400,000 personnel, approximately a quarter of whom are in ready reserve. Of those on active duty, more than eighty percent are enlisted sailors and around fifteen percent are commissioned officers; the rest are midshipmen of the United States Naval Academy and midshipmen of the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps at over 180 universities around the country and officer candidates at the Navy's Officer Candidate School.[3] Enlisted sailors complete basic military training at boot camp and then are sent to complete training for their individual careers.[63] Sailors prove they have mastered skills and deserve responsibilities by completing Personnel Qualification Standards (PQS) tasks and examinations. Among the most important is the "warfare qualification", which denotes a journeyman level of capability in Surface Warfare, Aviation Warfare, Information Dominance Warfare, Naval Aircrew, Special Warfare, Seabee Warfare, Submarine Warfare or Expeditionary Warfare. Many qualifications are denoted on a sailor's uniform with U.S. Navy badges and insignia. Uniforms[edit] See also: Uniforms of the United States Navy The uniforms of the U.S. Navy have evolved gradually since the first uniform regulations for officers were issued in 1802 on the formation of the Navy Department. The predominant colors of U.S. Navy uniforms are navy blue and white. U.S. Navy uniforms were based on Royal Navy uniforms of the time, and have tended to follow that template.[64] Commissioned officers[edit] See also: United States Navy officer rank insignia and Ranks and insignia of NATO navies officers The commissioned officer ranks of the U.S. Navy are divided into three categories: junior officers, senior officers, and flag officers. Junior officers are those officers in pay grades O-1 to O-4, while senior officers are those in pay grades O-5 and O-6, and flag officers are those in pay grades of O-7 and above. Uniformed services pay grade Special grade O-10 O-9 O-8 O-7 O-6 O-5 O-4 O-3 O-2 O-1 Officer candidate  United States Navy v t e No equivalent Fleet admiral Admiral Vice admiral Rear admiral Rear admiral (lower half) Captain Commander Lieutenant commander Lieutenant Lieutenant (junior grade) Ensign Midshipman / officer candidate (Various insignia) Abbreviation FADM ADM VADM RADM RDML CAPT CDR LCDR LT LTJG ENS NATO code OF-10 OF-9 OF-8 OF-7 OF-6 OF-5 OF-4 OF-3 OF-2 OF-1 OF(D) Student officer Navy officers serve either as a line officer or as a staff corps officer. Line officers wear an embroidered gold star above their rank of the naval service dress uniform while staff corps officers and commissioned warrant officers wear unique designator insignias that denotes their occupational specialty.[65][66] Type Line officer Medical Corps Dental Corps Nurse Corps Medical Service Corps Judge Advocate General's Corps Insignia Designator1 1XXX 210X 220X 290X 230X 250X Chaplain Corps (Christian Faith) Chaplain Corps (Jewish Faith) Chaplain Corps (Muslim Faith) Chaplain Corps (Buddhist Faith) Supply Corps Civil Engineer Corps Law Community (Limited Duty Officer) 410X 410X 410X 410X 310X 510X 655X Warrant officers[edit] Main article: Warrant officer (United States) U.S. Navy warrant officer specialty insignias Warrant and chief warrant officer ranks are held by technical specialists who direct specific activities essential to the proper operation of the ship, which also require commissioned officer authority.[67] Navy warrant officers serve in 30 specialties covering five categories. Warrant officers should not be confused with the limited duty officer (LDO) in the Navy. Warrant officers perform duties that are directly related to their previous enlisted service and specialized training. This allows the Navy to capitalize on the experience of warrant officers without having to frequently transition them to other duty assignments for advancement.[68] Most Navy warrant officers are accessed from the chief petty officer pay grades, E-7 through E-9, analogous to a senior non-commissioned officers in the other services, and must have a minimum 14 years time in service.[69] Uniformed services pay grade W-5 W-4 W-3 W-2 W-1  United States Navy v t e Chief warrant officer 5 Chief warrant officer 4 Chief warrant officer 3 Chief warrant officer 2 Warrant officer 1 Abbreviation CWO-5 CWO-4 CWO-3 CWO-2 WO-1 NATO rank WO-5 WO-4 WO-3 WO-2 WO-1 Enlisted[edit] See also: List of United States Navy enlisted rates, Ranks and insignia of NATO navies enlisted, and List of United States Navy ratings Sailors in pay grades E-1 through E-3 are considered to be in apprenticeships.[70] They are divided into five definable groups, with colored group rate marks designating the group to which they belong: Seaman, Fireman, Airman, Constructionman, and Hospitalman. E-4 to E-6 are non-commissioned officers (NCOs), and are specifically called Petty officers in the Navy.[71] Petty Officers perform not only the duties of their specific career field but also serve as leaders to junior enlisted personnel. E-7 to E-9 are still considered Petty Officers, but are considered a separate community within the Navy. They have separate berthing and dining facilities (where feasible), wear separate uniforms, and perform separate duties. After attaining the rate of Master Chief Petty Officer, a service member may choose to further their career by becoming a Command Master Chief Petty Officer (CMC). A CMC is considered to be the senior-most enlisted service member within a command, and is the special assistant to the Commanding Officer in all matters pertaining to the health, welfare, job satisfaction, morale, utilization, advancement and training of the command's enlisted personnel.[72][73] CMCs can be Command level (within a single unit, such as a ship or shore station), Fleet level (squadrons consisting of multiple operational units, headed by a flag officer or commodore), or Force level (consisting of a separate community within the Navy, such as Subsurface, Air, Reserves).[74] CMC insignia are similar to the insignia for Master Chief, except that the rating symbol is replaced by an inverted five-point star, reflecting a change in their rating from their previous rating (i.e., MMCM) to CMDCM. The stars for Command Master Chief are silver, while stars for Fleet or Force Master Chief are gold. Additionally, CMCs wear a badge, worn on their left breast pocket, denoting their title (Command/Fleet/Force).[73][75] Uniformed services pay grade E-9 E-8 E-7 E-6 E-5 E-4 E-3 E-2 E-1  United States Navy v t e No insignia yet No insignia Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Fleet/force master chief petty officer Command master chief petty officer Master chief petty officer Command senior chief petty officer Senior chief petty officer Chief petty officer Petty officer first class Petty officer second class Petty officer third class Seaman Seaman apprentice Seaman recruit Abbreviation SEAC MCPON FLTCM/FORCM CMDCM MCPO CMDCS SCPO CPO PO1 PO2 PO3 SN SA SR NATO code OR-9 OR-8 OR-7 OR-6 OR-5 OR-4 OR-3 OR-2 OR-1 Badges of the United States Navy[edit] See also: Badges of the United States Navy Insignia and badges of the United States Navy are military "badges" issued by the United States Department of the Navy to naval service members who achieve certain qualifications and accomplishments while serving on both active and reserve duty in the United States Navy. Most naval aviation insignia are also permitted for wear on uniforms of the United States Marine Corps. As described in Chapter 5 of U.S. Navy Uniform Regulations,[76] "badges" are categorized as breast insignia (usually worn immediately above and below ribbons) and identification badges (usually worn at breast pocket level).[77] Breast insignia are further divided between command and warfare and other qualification.[78] Insignia come in the form of metal "pin-on devices" worn on formal uniforms and embroidered "tape strips" worn on work uniforms. For the purpose of this article, the general term "insignia" shall be used to describe both, as it is done in Navy Uniform Regulations. The term "badge", although used ambiguously in other military branches and in informal speak to describe any pin, patch, or tab, is exclusive to identification badges[79] and authorized marksmanship awards[80] according to the language in Navy Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5. Below are just a few of the many badges maintained by the Navy. The rest can be seen in the article cited at the top of this section: Naval Aviator Badge Submarine Officer badge Surface Warfare Officer Insignia Bases[edit] Main article: List of United States Navy installations Map of naval bases in the United States The size, complexity, and international presence of the United States Navy requires a large number of navy installations to support its operations. While the majority of bases are located inside the United States itself, the Navy maintains a significant number of facilities abroad, either in U.S.-controlled territories or in foreign countries under a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). Eastern United States[edit] The second largest concentration of installations is at Hampton Roads, Virginia, where the navy occupies over 36,000 acres (15,000 ha) of land. Located at Hampton Roads are Naval Station Norfolk, homeport of the Atlantic Fleet; Naval Air Station Oceana, a Master Jet Base; Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek; and Training Support Center Hampton Roads as well as a number of Navy and commercial shipyards that service navy vessels. The Aegis Training and Readiness Center is located at the Naval Support Activity South Potomac in Dahlgren, Virginia. Maryland is home to NAS Patuxent River, which houses the Navy's Test Pilot School. Also located in Maryland is the United States Naval Academy, situated in Annapolis. NS Newport in Newport, Rhode Island is home to many schools and tenant commands, including the Officer Candidate School, Naval Undersea Warfare Center, and more, and also maintains inactive ships.[clarification needed] There is also a naval base in Charleston, South Carolina. This is home to the Nuclear A-School, and the Nuclear Field Power school, and one of two nuclear 'Prototype' Schools. The state of Florida is the location of three major bases, NS Mayport, the Navy's fourth largest, in Jacksonville, Florida; NAS Jacksonville, a Master Air Anti-submarine Warfare base; and NAS Pensacola; home of the Naval Education and Training Command, the Naval Air Technical Training Center that provides specialty training for enlisted aviation personnel and is the primary flight training base for Navy and Marine Corps Naval Flight Officers and enlisted Naval Aircrewman. There is also NSA Panama City, Florida which is home to the Navy Diving and Salvage Training Center. The main U.S. Navy submarine bases on the east coast are located in Naval Submarine Base New London in Groton, Connecticut and NSB Kings Bay in Kings Bay, Georgia. The Portsmouth Naval Shipyard near Portsmouth, New Hampshire,[81] which repairs naval submarines.[3] NS Great Lakes, north of Chicago, Illinois is the home of the Navy's boot camp for enlisted sailors. The Washington Navy Yard in Washington, DC is the Navy's oldest shore establishment and serves as a ceremonial and administrative center for the U.S. Navy, home to the Chief of Naval Operations, and is headquarters for numerous commands. Western United States and Hawaii[edit] Underwater Demolition Team members using the casting technique from a speeding boat Combat Camera Underwater Photo Team – A U.S. Navy diver during underwater photography training off the coast of Guantanamo Bay The navy's largest complex is Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake, California, which covers 1.1 million acres (4,500 km2) of land, or approximately 1/3 of the U.S. Navy's total land holdings.[3] Naval Base San Diego, California is the main homeport of the Pacific Fleet, although its headquarters is located in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. NAS North Island is located on the north side of Coronado, California, and is home to Headquarters for Naval Air Forces and Naval Air Force Pacific, the bulk of the Pacific Fleet's helicopter squadrons, and part of the West Coast aircraft carrier fleet. NAB Coronado is located on the southern end of the Coronado Island and is home to the navy's west coast SEAL teams and special boat units. NAB Coronado is also home to the Naval Special Warfare Center, the primary training center for SEALs. The other major collection of naval bases on the west coast is in Puget Sound, Washington. Among them, NS Everett is one of the newer bases and the navy states that it is its most modern facility.[82] NAS Fallon, Nevada serves as the primary training ground for navy strike aircrews, and is home to the Naval Strike Air Warfare Center. Master Jet Bases are also located at NAS Lemoore, California, and NAS Whidbey Island, Washington, while the carrier-based airborne early warning aircraft community and major air test activities are located at NAS Point Mugu, California. The naval presence in Hawaii is centered on NS Pearl Harbor, which hosts the headquarters of the Pacific Fleet and many of its subordinate commands. United States territories[edit] USS Carl Vinson (CVN-70) pier side in Apra Harbor, Guam Guam, an island strategically located in the Western Pacific Ocean, maintains a sizable U.S. Navy presence, including NB Guam. The westernmost U.S. territory, it contains a natural deep water harbor capable of harboring aircraft carriers in emergencies.[83] Its naval air station was deactivated[84] in 1995 and its flight activities transferred to nearby Andersen Air Force Base. Puerto Rico in the Caribbean formerly housed NS Roosevelt Roads, which was shut down in 2004 shortly after the controversial closure of the live ordnance training area on nearby Vieques Island.[3] Foreign countries[edit] The largest overseas base is the United States Fleet Activities Yokosuka, Japan, which serves as the home port for the navy's largest forward-deployed fleet and is a significant base of operations in the Western Pacific.[85] European operations revolve around facilities in Italy (NAS Sigonella and Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station Naples) with NSA Naples as the homeport for the Sixth Fleet and Command Naval Region Europe, Africa, Southwest Asia (CNREURAFSWA), and additional facilities in nearby Gaeta. There is also NS Rota in Spain and NSA Souda Bay in Greece. In the Middle East, naval facilities are located almost exclusively in countries bordering the Persian Gulf, with NSA Bahrain serving as the headquarters of U.S. Naval Forces Central Command and U.S. Fifth Fleet. NS Guantanamo Bay in Cuba is the oldest overseas facility and has become known in recent years as the location of a detention camp for suspected al-Qaeda operatives.[86] Equipment[edit] Main article: Equipment of the United States Navy As of 2018[update], the navy operates over 460 ships, including vessels operated by the Military Sealift Command (MSC) crewed by a combination of civilian contractors and a small number of uniformed Naval personnel, 3,650+ aircraft, 50,000 non-combat vehicles and owns 75,200 buildings on 3,300,000 acres (13,000 km2). Ships[edit] Main article: United States Navy ships See also: List of current ships of the United States Navy, List of currently active United States military watercraft, and United States ship naming conventions The names of commissioned ships of the U.S. Navy are prefixed with the letters "USS", designating "United States Ship".[87] Non-commissioned, civilian-manned vessels of the navy have names that begin with "USNS", standing for "United States Naval Ship" The names of ships are officially selected by the secretary of the navy, often to honor important people or places.[88] Additionally, each ship is given a letter-based hull classification symbol (for example, CVN or DDG) to indicate the vessel's type and number. All ships in the navy inventory are placed in the Naval Vessel Register, which is part of "the Navy List" (required by article 29 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea).[dubious – discuss] The register tracks data such as the current status of a ship, the date of its commissioning, and the date of its decommissioning. Vessels that are removed from the register prior to disposal are said to be stricken from the register. The navy also maintains a reserve fleet of inactive vessels that are maintained for reactivation in times of need. The U.S. Navy was one of the first to install nuclear reactors aboard naval vessels;[89] today, nuclear energy powers all active U.S. aircraft carriers and submarines. In the case of the Nimitz-class carrier, two naval reactors give the ship almost unlimited range and provide enough electrical energy to power a city of 100,000 people.[90] The U.S. Navy previously operated nuclear-powered cruisers, but all have been decommissioned. The U.S. Navy had identified a need for 313 combat ships in early 2010s, but under its plans at the time could only afford 232 to 243.[91] In March 2014, the Navy started counting self-deployable support ships such as minesweepers, surveillance craft, and tugs in the "battle fleet" in order to reach a count of 272 as of October 2016,[92][93] and it includes ships that have been put in "shrink wrap".[94] Aircraft carriers[edit] USS Nimitz, a Nimitz-class aircraft carrier Main article: List of aircraft carriers of the United States Navy An aircraft carrier is typically deployed along with a host of additional vessels, forming a carrier strike group. The supporting ships, which usually include three or four Aegis-equipped cruisers and destroyers, a frigate, and two attack submarines, are tasked with protecting the carrier from air, missile, sea, and undersea threats as well as providing additional strike capabilities themselves. Ready logistics support for the group is provided by a combined ammunition, oiler, and supply ship. Modern carriers are named after American admirals and politicians, usually presidents.[95] The Navy has a statutory requirement for a minimum of 11 aircraft carriers.[96] Currently there are 10 that are deployable and one, USS Gerald R. Ford, that is currently undergoing extensive systems and technologies testing until around 2021.[97] Amphibious warfare vessels[edit] USS Bataan, a Wasp-class amphibious assault ship USS San Antonio, a San Antonio-class amphibious transport dock Main article: List of United States Navy amphibious warfare ships Amphibious assault ships are the centerpieces of US amphibious warfare and fulfill the same power projection role as aircraft carriers except that their striking force centers on land forces instead of aircraft. They deliver, command, coordinate, and fully support all elements of a 2,200-strong Marine Expeditionary Unit in an amphibious assault using both air and amphibious vehicles. Resembling small aircraft carriers, amphibious assault ships are capable of V/STOL, STOVL, VTOL, tiltrotor, and rotary wing aircraft operations. They also contain a well deck to support the use of Landing Craft Air Cushion (LCAC) and other amphibious assault watercraft. Recently, amphibious assault ships have begun to be deployed as the core of an expeditionary strike group, which usually consists of an additional amphibious transport dock and dock landing ship for amphibious warfare and an Aegis-equipped cruiser and destroyer, frigate, and attack submarine for group defense. Amphibious assault ships are typically named after World War II aircraft carriers. Amphibious transport docks are warships that embark, transport, and land Marines, supplies, and equipment in a supporting role during amphibious warfare missions. With a landing platform, amphibious transport docks also have the capability to serve as secondary aviation support for an expeditionary group. All amphibious transport docks can operate helicopters, LCACs, and other conventional amphibious vehicles while the newer San Antonio class of ships has been explicitly designed to operate all three elements of the Marines' "mobility triad": Expeditionary Fighting Vehicles (EFVs), the V-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft, and LCACs. Amphibious transport docks are typically named after U.S. cities. The dock landing ship is a medium amphibious transport that is designed specifically to support and operate LCACs, though it is able to operate other amphibious assault vehicles in the United States inventory as well. Dock landing ships are normally deployed as a component of an expeditionary strike group's amphibious assault contingent, operating as a secondary launch platform for LCACs. All dock landing ships are named after cities or important places in U.S. and U.S. Naval history.[95] Cruisers[edit] Main article: List of cruisers of the United States Navy USS Port Royal, a Ticonderoga-class cruiser Cruisers are large surface combat vessels that conduct anti-air/anti-missile warfare, surface warfare, anti-submarine warfare, and strike operations independently or as members of a larger task force. Modern guided missile cruisers were developed out of a need to counter the anti-ship missile threat facing the United States Navy. This led to the development of the AN/SPY-1 phased array radar and the Standard missile with the Aegis combat system coordinating the two. Ticonderoga-class cruisers were the first to be equipped with Aegis and were put to use primarily as anti-air and anti-missile defense in a battle force protection role. Later developments of vertical launch systems and the Tomahawk missile gave cruisers additional long-range land and sea strike capability, making them capable of both offensive and defensive battle operations. The Ticonderoga class is the only active class of cruiser. All cruisers in this class are named after battles.[95] Destroyers[edit] Main article: List of destroyers of the United States Navy USS Zumwalt, a Zumwalt-class stealth guided missile destroyer Destroyers are multi-mission medium surface ships capable of sustained performance in anti-air, anti-submarine, anti-ship, and offensive strike operations. Like cruisers, guided missile destroyers are primarily focused on surface strikes using Tomahawk missiles and fleet defense through Aegis and the Standard missile. Destroyers additionally specialize in anti-submarine warfare and are equipped with VLA rockets and LAMPS Mk III Sea Hawk helicopters to deal with underwater threats. When deployed with a carrier strike group or expeditionary strike group, destroyers and their fellow Aegis-equipped cruisers are primarily tasked with defending the fleet while providing secondary strike capabilities. With very few exceptions, destroyers are named after U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard heroes.[95] Frigates and Littoral combat ships[edit] Main article: List of frigates of the United States Navy See also: Littoral combat ship USS Independence (LCS-2), a Littoral combat ship USS Freedom (LCS-1) underway in special naval camouflage Modern U.S. frigates mainly perform anti-submarine warfare for carrier and expeditionary strike groups and provide armed escort for supply convoys and merchant shipping. They are designed to protect friendly ships against hostile submarines in low to medium threat environments, using torpedoes and LAMPS helicopters. Independently, frigates are able to conduct counterdrug missions and other maritime interception operations. As in the case of destroyers, frigates are named after U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard heroes. As of autumn 2015, the U.S. Navy has retired its most recent class of frigates, and expects that by 2020 the Littoral Combat Ships (LCS) will assume many of the duties the frigate had with the fleet. The LCS is a class of relatively small surface vessels intended for operations in the littoral zone (close to shore). It was "envisioned to be a networked, agile, stealthy surface combatant capable of defeating anti-access and asymmetric threats in the littorals".[citation needed] They have the capabilities of a small assault transport, including a flight deck and hangar for housing two helicopters, a stern ramp for operating small boats, and the cargo volume and payload to deliver a small assault force with fighting vehicles to a roll-on/roll-off port facility. The ship is easy to reconfigure for different roles, including anti-submarine warfare, mine countermeasures, anti-surface warfare, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, homeland defense, maritime intercept, special operations, and logistics, all by swapping mission-specific modules as needed. The LCS program is still relatively new as of 2018 with only ten active ships, but the navy has announced plans for up to 32 ships. (See: List of littoral combat ships) The navy has announced that a further 20 vessels to be built after that will be redesignated as 'frigates'.[98] A special case is the USS Constitution, commissioned in 1797 as one of the original six frigates of the United States Navy, and which remains in commission at the Charlestown Navy Yard in Boston. She serves as a tribute to the heritage of the Navy, and occasionally sails for commemorative events such as Independence Day and various victories during the War of 1812. Constitution is currently the oldest commissioned warship afloat. HMS Victory is older, and in commission, but is in permanent drydock. Mine countermeasures ships[edit] Main article: List of mine warfare vessels of the United States Navy USS Warrior (MCM-10) in port Mine countermeasures vessels are a combination of minehunters, a naval vessel that actively detects and destroys individual naval mines, and minesweepers, which clear mined areas as a whole, without prior detection of the mines. The navy has approximately a dozen of these in active service, but the mine countermeasure (MCM) role is also being assumed by the incoming classes of littoral combat ships. MCM vessels have mostly legacy names of previous US Navy ships, especially WWII-era minesweepers. Patrol boats[edit] Main article: List of patrol vessels of the United States Navy USS Typhoon (PC-5) departing Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek in Virginia A patrol boat is a relatively small naval vessel generally designed for coastal defense duties. There have been many designs for patrol boats, though the navy currently only has a single class. They may be operated by a nation's navy or coast guard, and may be intended for marine ("blue water") or estuarine or river ("brown water") environments. The Navy has approximately a dozen in active service, which are mainly used in the littoral regions of the Persian Gulf, but have also been used for home port patrols and drug interdiction missions. The navy's current class of patrol boats have names based on weather phenomena. Submarines[edit] Main article: Submarines in the United States Navy USS Kentucky (SSBN-737), an Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine USS Virginia (SSN-774), a Virginia-class attack submarine All current and planned U.S. Navy submarines are nuclear-powered, as only nuclear propulsion allows for the combination of stealth and long duration, high-speed sustained underwater movement that makes modern nuclear submarines so vital to a modern blue-water navy. The U.S. Navy operates three types: ballistic missile submarines, guided missile submarines, and attack submarines. U.S. Navy (nuclear) ballistic missile submarines carry the stealthiest leg of the U.S. strategic triad (the other legs are the land-based U.S. strategic missile force and the air-based U.S. strategic bomber force). These submarines have only one mission: to carry and, if called upon, to launch the Trident nuclear missile. The primary missions of attack and guided missile submarines in the U.S. Navy are peacetime engagement, surveillance and intelligence, special operations, precision strikes, and control of the seas.[99] To these, attack submarines also add the battlegroup operations mission. Attack and guided missile submarines have several tactical missions, including sinking ships and other subs, launching cruise missiles, gathering intelligence, and assisting in special operations. As with other classes of naval vessels, most U.S. submarines (or "boats") are named according to specific conventions. The boats of the current U.S. ballistic missile submarine class, Ohio class, are named after U.S. states. As the four current U.S. guided missile submarines are converted Ohio-class boats, they have retained their U.S. state names. The members of the oldest currently-commissioned attack submarine class, the Los Angeles class, are typically named for cities. The follow-on Seawolf class' three submarines—Seawolf, Connecticut and Jimmy Carter—share no consistent naming scheme. With the current Virginia-class attack submarines, the U.S. Navy has extended the Ohio class' state-based naming scheme to these submarines. Attack submarines prior to the Los Angeles class were named for denizens of the deep, while pre-Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines were named for famous Americans and foreigners with notable connections to the United States. Aircraft[edit] Four Navy F/A-18F Super Hornets Main articles: List of United States naval aircraft and List of military aircraft of the United States (naval) See also: List of United States Navy aircraft squadrons and List of active United States military aircraft Carrier-based aircraft are able to strike air, sea, and land targets far from a carrier strike group while protecting friendly forces from enemy aircraft, ships, and submarines. In peacetime, aircraft's ability to project the threat of sustained attack from a mobile platform on the seas gives United States leaders significant diplomatic and crisis-management options. Aircraft additionally provide logistics support to maintain the navy's readiness and, through helicopters, supply platforms with which to conduct search and rescue, special operations, anti-submarine warfare (ASW), and anti-surface warfare (ASuW), including the U.S. Navy's premier Maritime Strike and only organic ASW aircraft, the venerable Sikorsky MH-60R operated by Helicopter Maritime Strike Wing. U.S. Navy MH-60R maritime strike helicopter assigned to the HSM-78 Blue Hawks aboard the carrier USS Carl Vinson The U.S. Navy began to research the use of aircraft at sea in the 1910s, with Lieutenant Theodore G. "Spuds" Ellyson becoming the first naval aviator on 28 January 1911, and commissioned its first aircraft carrier, USS Langley (CV-1), in 1922.[100] United States naval aviation fully came of age in World War II, when it became clear following the Attack on Pearl Harbor, the Battle of the Coral Sea, and the Battle of Midway that aircraft carriers and the planes that they carried had replaced the battleship as the greatest weapon on the seas. Leading navy aircraft in World War II included the Grumman F4F Wildcat, the Grumman F6F Hellcat, the Chance Vought F4U Corsair, the Douglas SBD Dauntless, and the Grumman TBF Avenger. Navy aircraft also played a significant role in conflicts during the following Cold War years, with the F-4 Phantom II and the F-14 Tomcat becoming military icons of the era. The navy's current primary fighter and attack airplanes are the multi-mission F/A-18C/D Hornet and its newer cousin, the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet. The F-35 Lightning II is presently under development and was scheduled to replace the C and D versions of the Hornet beginning in 2012.[101] Initial operational capability of the F-35C is now expected to be February 2019.[102] The Navy is also looking to eventually replace its F/A-18E/F Super Hornets with the F/A-XX program. The Aircraft Investment Plan sees naval aviation growing from 30 percent of current aviation forces to half of all procurement funding over the next three decades.[103] Weapons[edit] Main article: List of United States Navy weapons Current U.S. Navy shipboard weapons systems are almost entirely focused on missiles, both as a weapon and as a threat. In an offensive role, missiles are intended to strike targets at long distances with accuracy and precision. Because they are unmanned weapons, missiles allow for attacks on heavily defended targets without risk to human pilots. Land strikes are the domain of the BGM-109 Tomahawk, which was first deployed in the 1980s and is continually being updated to increase its capabilities. For anti-ship strikes, the navy's dedicated missile is the Harpoon Missile. To defend against enemy missile attack, the navy operates a number of systems that are all coordinated by the Aegis combat system. Medium-long range defense is provided by the Standard Missile 2, which has been deployed since the 1980s. The Standard missile doubles as the primary shipboard anti-aircraft weapon and is undergoing development for use in theater ballistic missile defense. Short range defense against missiles is provided by the Phalanx CIWS and the more recently developed RIM-162 Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile. In addition to missiles, the navy employs Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes and various types of naval mines. Aviation Ordnancemen loading GBU-12 bombs in 2005 Naval fixed-wing aircraft employ much of the same weapons as the United States Air Force for both air-to-air and air-to-surface combat. Air engagements are handled by the heat-seeking Sidewinder and the radar guided AMRAAM missiles along with the M61 Vulcan cannon for close range dogfighting. For surface strikes, navy aircraft utilize a combination of missiles, smart bombs, and dumb bombs. On the list of available missiles are the Maverick, SLAM-ER and JSOW. Smart bombs include the GPS-guided JDAM and the laser-guided Paveway series. Unguided munitions such as dumb bombs and cluster bombs make up the rest of the weapons deployed by fixed-wing aircraft. Rotary aircraft weapons are focused on anti-submarine warfare (ASW) and light to medium surface engagements. To combat submarines, helicopters use Mark 46 and Mark 50 torpedoes. Against small watercraft, they utilize Hellfire and Penguin air to surface missiles. Helicopters also employ various types of mounted anti-personnel machine guns, including the M60, M240, GAU-16/A, and GAU-17/A. Nuclear weapons in the U.S. Navy arsenal are deployed through ballistic missile submarines and aircraft. The Ohio-class submarine carries the latest iteration of the Trident missile, a three-stage, submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) with MIRV capability; the current Trident II (D5) version is expected to be in service past 2020.[104] The navy's other nuclear weapon is the air-deployed B61 nuclear bomb. The B61 is a thermonuclear device that can be dropped by strike aircraft such as the F/A-18 Hornet and Super Hornet at high speed from a large range of altitudes. It can be released through free-fall or parachute and can be set to detonate in the air or on the ground. Naval jack[edit] U.S. naval jack First navy jack The current naval jack of the United States is the Union Jack, a small blue flag emblazoned with the stars of the 50 states. The Union Jack was not flown for the duration of the War on Terror, during which Secretary of the Navy Gordon R. England directed all U.S. naval ships to fly the First Navy Jack. While Secretary England directed the change on 31 May 2002, many ships chose to shift colors later that year in remembrance of the first anniversary of the September 11, 2001 attacks. The Union Jack, however, remained in use with vessels of the U.S. Coast Guard and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. A jack of similar design to the Union Jack was used in 1794, with 13 stars arranged in a 3–2–3–2–3 pattern. When a ship is moored or anchored, the jack is flown from the bow of the ship while the ensign is flown from the stern. When underway, the ensign is raised on the mainmast. Before the decision for all ships to fly the First Navy Jack, it was only flown on the oldest ship in the active American fleet, which is currently USS Blue Ridge (LCC-19). U.S. Navy ships and craft returned to flying the Union Jack effective 4 June 2019. The date for reintroduction of the jack commemorates the Battle of Midway, which began on 4 June 1942.[105] Notable sailors[edit] For a more comprehensive list, see List of United States Navy people. Many past and present United States historical figures have served in the navy. Notable officers include John Paul Jones, John Barry (Continental Navy officer and first flag officer of the United States Navy),[106] Edward Preble, James Lawrence (whose last words "don't give up the ship" are memorialized in Bancroft Hall at the United States Naval Academy), Stephen Decatur Jr., David Farragut, David Dixon Porter, Oliver Hazard Perry, Commodore Matthew Perry (whose Black Ships forced the opening of Japan), George Dewey (the only person in the history of the United States to have attained the rank of Admiral of the Navy), and the officers who attained the rank of Fleet Admiral during World War II: William D. Leahy, Ernest J. King, Chester W. Nimitz, and William F. Halsey Jr.. The first American president who served in the navy was John F. Kennedy (who commanded the famous PT-109). Others included Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and George H. W. Bush. Both Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin D. Roosevelt were the Assistant Secretary of the Navy prior to their presidencies. Many members of Congress served in the navy, notably U.S. Senators Bob Kerrey, John McCain, and John Kerry. Other notable former members of the U.S. Navy include astronauts (Scott Kelly, Michael J. Smith, Neil Armstrong, Lisa Nowak), entertainers (Mike Douglas), authors (Brandon Webb, Marcus Luttrell), professional athletes, and others (Gordon Haller, John Barry).[citation needed] See also[edit] Military portal United States portal Bibliography of early American naval history Columbia-class submarine Spearhead-class expeditionary fast transport Modern United States Navy carrier air operations Naval militia United States Merchant Marine Academy Women in the United States Navy Notes[edit] References[edit] ^ "Establishment of the Navy, 13 October 1775". Naval History and Heritage Command. Archived from the original on 28 April 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. ^ "ARMED FORCES STRENGTH FIGURES FOR NOVEMBER 30, 2020". DMDC. Retrieved 26 January 2021. ^ a b c d e f g h i "The U.S. Navy". U.S. Navy. 23 August 2019. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 28 August 2019. ^ "World Air Forces 2018". Flightglobal: 17. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018. ^ "US Navy Traditions, Customs, & Core Values". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 10 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. The Navy's colors themselves have special meaning: Blue represents the ocean and seas; gold is the color of integrity and valor. ^ Carlos Cabo. "Pantone colors. Convert Pantone colors to RAL, CMYK, RGB, Hex, HSL, HSB, JSON". Archived from the original on 29 December 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2015. ^ a b "The Russian Navy Is Aiming To Be Much Larger Than The US Navy". Business Insider. 24 September 2014. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 12 November 2015. ^ "Carl Lavo: The gigantic advantage the U.S. Navy has over all others". carllavo.blogspot.de. 9 March 2015. Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 12 November 2015. ^ "If More Money Buys a Smaller Fleet, What Will Less Money Buy?". Time. 3 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 13 May 2015. ^ "Speech View". defense.gov. Archived from the original on 21 May 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2015. ^ Gates, Robert M. (January–February 2009). "A Balanced Strategy: Reprogramming the Pentagon for a New Age". Foreign Affairs. Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 5 August 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013. ^ "Responsibilities". Chief of Naval Operations. United States Navy. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2013. ^ "America's Navy". navy.com. Retrieved 25 June 2019. ^ 10 U.S.C. § 5062 ^ http://cimsec.org/naval-warfare-2010-2020-a-comparative-analysis/45129 ^ a b "Famous Navy Quotes: Who Said Them ... and When". Naval History & Heritage Command. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ "George Washington to Marie Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, August 15, 1786". Library of Congress. Retrieved 31 May 2019. ^ Miller, Nathan (1997). The U.S. Navy: A History, Third Edition. Naval Institute Press. p. 9. ISBN 9781612518923. ^ Dull, Jonathan R. (2012). American Naval History, 1607–1865: Overcoming the Colonial Legacy. U. of Nebraska Press. pp. 1–16. ISBN 978-0-8032-4471-9. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2015. ^ a b "Establishment of the Navy, 13 October 1775". Naval History & Heritage Command. US Navy. Archived from the original on 4 February 1999. Retrieved 5 November 2009. ^ a b c d Love, Robert W., Jr. (1992). History of the US Navy. Volume One: 1775–1941. Harrisburg: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-1862-2. |volume= has extra text (help) ^ a b Howarth, Steven (1991). To Shining Sea: A history of the United States Navy 1776–1991. New York: Random House. ISBN 0-394-57662-4. ^ "Alliance". Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. Navy Department, Naval History and Heritage Command. Retrieved 31 August 2009. ^ Abbot 1896, Volume I Part I Chapter XV ^ "Origins of the Navy". Naval History & Heritage Command. Naval History & Heritage Command. Archived from the original on 30 April 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017. ^ "Launching the New U.S. Navy, 27 March 1794". National Archives and Records Administration Center for Legislative Archives Records of the U.S. Senate Record Group 46. 15 August 2016. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2017. ^ "John Adams I (Frigate) 1799–1867". USA.gov. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. Retrieved 22 August 2015. ^ Randal Rust. "Quasi-War". R.Squared Communications. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017. ^ a b c Palmer, Michael A. "The Navy: The Continental Period, 1775–1890". Naval History and Heritage Command. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ McPherson, James M. (2012). War on the Waters: The Union and Confederate Navies, 1861–1865. University of North Carolina Press. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-0-8078-3588-3. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2015. ^ Miller, Nathan (2014-11-05). The U.S. Navy: A History, Third Edition. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-61251-892-3. ^ Hacker, Barton C.; Vining, Margaret (2007). American Military Technology. The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-8018-8772-7. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2015. ^ O'Brien, Phillips P. (1998). British and American Naval Power: Politics and Policy, 1900–1936. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 7, 154–156. ISBN 978-0-275-95898-5. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2015. ^ Past, Airplanes of the. "US Naval & Marine Aircraft". www.airplanesofthepast.com. Archived from the original on 10 February 2018. Retrieved 4 April 2019. ^ Holwitt, Joel I. (January 2012). "Reappraising the Interwar US Navy". Journal of Military History (Book review). 76 (1): 193–210. ^ Crocker III, H. W. (2006). Don't Tread on Me. New York: Crown Forum. p. 302. ISBN 978-1-4000-5363-6. ^ Burbach, David T.; Devore, Marc; Sapolsky, Harvey M.; Van Evera, Stephen (1 December 2001). "Weighing the US Navy". Defense Analysis. 17 (3): 259–265. doi:10.1080/07430170120093382. S2CID 153947005. ^ King, Ernest J., USN (3 December 1945). US Navy at War 1941–1945: Official Report to the Secretary of the Navy. Archived from the original on 11 July 2006. Retrieved 8 April 2006. ^ "U.S. Navy Active Ship Force Levels, 1886–present". Naval History & Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. 20 June 2015. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ Hone, Trent (October 2003). "The Evolution of Fleet Tactical Doctrine in the U.S. Navy, 1922–1941". The Journal of Military History. Society for Military History. 67 (4): 1107–1148. doi:10.1353/jmh.2003.0300. JSTOR 3396884. S2CID 159659057. ^ Dater, Henry M. (1950). "Tactical Use of Air Power in World War II: The Navy Experience". Military Affairs. Society for Military History. 14 (4): 192–200. doi:10.2307/1982840. JSTOR 1982840. ^ "Expanding the Size of the U.S. Military in World War II". warfarehistorynetwork.com. 26 June 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 2019-03-13. ^ Palmer, Michael A. "The Navy: The Transoceanic Period, 1945–1992". Naval History & Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ Chief of Naval Operations (15 May 1991). "The United States Navy in Operations "Desert Storm" / "Desert Shield"". Naval History & Heritage Command. U.S. Navy. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ "Forward ... From the Sea". Department of the Navy. March 1997. Archived from the original on 21 November 2006. Retrieved 25 July 2006. ^ Farley, Robert. "A US Navy With 350 Ships... But What For?". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 22 November 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2016. ^ Garamone, Jim (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. American Forces Press Service. NNS071017-13. Archived from the original on 5 March 2009. Retrieved 27 May 2008. ^ Bacon, Lance M. (22 June 2010). "CNO: Global challenges need global responses". Navy Times. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. ^ Fabey, Michael (27 January 2012). "Pentagon Saves Carrier At Other Programs' Expense". Aviation Week. ^ Harper, Jon (22 May 2014). "Navy's top admiral: Reducing carrier fleet would burn out sailors, ships". www.stripes.com. Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2014. ^ a b Stashwick, Steven. "Road to 350: What Does the US Navy Do Anyway?". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 22 November 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2016. ^ Sweetman, Bill (11 August 2014). "Scotland, Missile Defense And Subs". aviationweek.com. Penton. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2014. ^ Franz-Stefan Gady, The Diplomat. "US Navy Secretary: We will Have Over 300 Ships by 2020". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 12 November 2015. ^ Larter, David B. (14 December 2017). "Trump just made a 355-ship Navy national policy". www.defensenews.com. Defense News. Retrieved 2 November 2018. ^ Browne, Ryan. "US Navy re-establishes Second Fleet amid Russia tensions". CNN. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 2018-11-16. ^ Affairs, This story was written by U.S. Fleet Forces Public. "Navy Establishes U.S. 2nd Fleet, Vice Adm. Lewis Assumes Command". Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 2018-11-16. ^ Gragg, Alan, MCS3 (24 April 2008). "Navy Reestablishes U.S. Fourth Fleet". Navy News Service. NNS080424-13. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008. Retrieved 30 April 2008. ^ "The shore establishment". Navy Organization. United States Navy. 28 November 2006. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. ^ a b Schading, Barbara; Schading, Richard (2006-12-22). A Civilian's Guide to the U.S. Military: A Comprehensive Reference to the Customs, Language and Structure of the Armed Forces. F+W Media. ISBN 978-1-58297-408-8. ^ "Navy and Marine Corps History, Customs, and Courtesies – Fundamentals". Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune. United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. ^ "National Security Act of 1947 (As amended 3 August 2007), (50 U.S.C. 426)" (PDF). 26 July 1947. §606.(9) p. 69. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 February 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ "14 USC 3. Relationship to Navy Department". Legal Information Institute. Cornell University Law School. Retrieved 28 July 2013. ^ "Training After Boot Camp". 10 Steps to Joining the Military. Military.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 16 September 2017. ^ "History of US Navy Uniforms, 1776–1981". Naval History and Heritage Command. US Navy. Archived from the original on 9 December 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2016. ^ U.S. Navy Uniform Regulations, 4102 – Sleeve Designs for Line and Staff Corps Archived 19 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine, updated 28 January 11, accessed 22 January 12 ^ U.S. Navy Personnel Command, Officer, Community Managers, LDO/CWO OCM, References, LDO/CWO Designators Archived 2013-09-27 at the Wayback Machine, rout page updated 4 October 11, accessed 22 January 12 ^ "History of the Warrant Officer". United States Army Warrant Officer Association. Archived from the original on 16 March 2007. Retrieved 18 March 2007. ^ "Warrant Officer Programs of Other Services". United States Army Warrant Officer Association. Archived from the original on 30 December 2006. Retrieved 18 March 2007. ^ "ACTIVE DUTY LIMITED DUTY OFFICER AND CHIEF WARRANT OFFICER IN SERVICE PROCUREMENT BOARDS". US Navy. Washington, D.C.: United States Government. Retrieved 8 March 2017. ^ "Group rate marks for pay grades E-1 through E-3". U. S. Navy. Archived from the original on 22 November 2006. Retrieved 25 January 2007. ^ United States Navy Uniform Regulations. BUPERS, U. S. Navy. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 26 January 2007. ^ "Navy Enlisted Advancement System – Master Chief". Navy Professional Development Center, Military.com. Archived from the original on 14 December 2006. Retrieved 28 January 2007. ^ a b "Senior And Master Chiefs As Principal Enlisted Advisor". Military Requirements for Senior and Master Chief Petty Officer Chief. Integrated Publishing. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 28 January 2007. ^ "Chief of Naval Operations OPNAV Instructions 1306.2D". Navydata, U. S. Navy. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007. Retrieved 28 January 2007. ^ "United States Navy Uniform Regulations CPO Rating". BUPERS, U. S. Navy. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 26 January 2007. ^ "United States Navy Uniform Regulations". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 15 April 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2009. ^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Identification Badges/Awards/Insignia". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 18 April 2011. Retrieved 2 April 2007. ^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Section 2, Breast Insignia". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011. Retrieved 18 November 2007. ^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Section 2, Article 5201.2, Warfare and Other Qualifications". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011. Retrieved 18 November 2007. ^ "Uniform Regulations, Chapter 5, Section 3, Article 5310, Marksmanship Awards (Badges)". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 18 November 2007. ^ scot.greber. "MilitaryINSTALLATIONS – U.S. Department of Defense". Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. ^ "Naval Station Everett Official Site". Naval Station Everett. Archived from the original on 9 September 2005. ^ "Guam". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 10 May 2007. Retrieved 19 May 2007. ^ "Naval Air Station, Agana [Tiyan]". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 19 February 2010. ^ "Yokosuka, Japan 35°17'N 139°40'E". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 20 April 2006. Retrieved 19 April 2006. ^ "Naval facilities outside the US". United States Navy. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ "Ship Naming in the United States Navy". Naval History & Heritage Command. United States Navy. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. ^ O'Rourke, Ronald. (2013). Navy Ship Names: Background For Congress. Archived 28 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service. ^ "CVN-65 Enterprise". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 14 March 2007. Retrieved 7 March 2007. ^ "CVN-68 Nimitz Class". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 6 April 2006. Retrieved 8 April 2006. ^ "Vice Adm. Barry McCullough". Defense News. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. ^ Fleet Size Archived 19 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine US Navy Retrieved 17 October 2016 ^ CAVAS, CHRISTOPHER P. (9 March 2014). "US Navy Budget Plan: Major Questions Abound". defensenews.com. Gannett Government Media. Archived from the original on 9 March 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2014. ^ Freedberg Jr., Sydney J. (11 March 2014). "Outrage on Capitol Hill As Navy Changes Ship-Counting Rules". breakingdefense.com. Breaking Media, Inc. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 11 March 2014. ^ a b c d "Report to Congress on U.S. Navy Ship Names". USNI News. 2020-06-25. Retrieved 2020-07-22. ^ Wolf, Jim (6 May 2010). "US Navy to Gates: Yes, we need 11 aircraft carriers". Reuters. ^ LaGrone, Sam (18 January 2017). "Delay in Aircraft Carrier Ford Testing Could Compress Workups for First Deployment". USNI News. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017. ^ SNA: Modified Littoral Combat Ships to be Designated Frigates Archived 6 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine – News.USNI.org, 15 January 2015 ^ "Submarine Missions". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 25 April 2006. Retrieved 8 April 2006. ^ "A Brief History of U.S. Navy Aircraft Carriers: Part I – The Early Years". The Carriers. United States Navy. Archived from the original on 20 June 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2011. ^ "F-35C Carrier Variant Joint Strike Fighter (JSF)". GlobalSecurity. Archived from the original on 19 August 2006. Retrieved 18 July 2006. ^ "Services Deliver F-35 Initial Operational Capability Timelines to Congress". Navy News Service. 31 May 2013. NNS130531-06. Archived from the original on 6 March 2014. Retrieved 1 June 2013. ^ Wheeler, Winslow T. (9 March 2010). "This Pentagon Needs Watching". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 13 March 2010. ^ "Trident Fleet Ballistic Missile". U.S. Navy Fact File. Archived from the original on 5 April 2006. Retrieved 8 April 2006. ^ Faram, Mark D. (23 February 2019). "Here's why the Union Jack is back". Navy Times. Retrieved 4 April 2019. ^ One Hundred Ninth Congress. "Joint Resolution Recognizing Commodore John Barry as the first flag officer of the United States Navy" (PDF). Government Printing Office. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2009. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Navy. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Wikiquote has quotations related to: United States Navy Library resources about API Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official website "U.S. Naval Institute". usni.org. A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower "Navy.com, USN official recruitment site". "U.S. Navy News". Archived from the original on 23 December 2007. D'Alessandro, Michael P. (ed.). "Naval Open Source Intelligence". Lanzendörfer, Tim. "The Pacific War: The U.S. Navy". "United States Navy Memorial". America's Naval Hardware – Life magazine slideshow "Photographic History of The U.S. Navy". Naval History. NavSource. "Naval History and Photography". Haze Gray & Underway – HazeGray.org. U.S. Navy during the Cold War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives "United States Navy in World War I". World War I at Sea.net. Retrieved 3 February 2007. (includes warship losses) "U.S. Navy in World War II". World War II on the World Wide Web. Hyper War. (includes The Official Chronology of the U.S. Navy in World War II) "Our Fighting Ships". U.S. WW II Newsmap. Army Orientation Course. 29 June 1942 – via UNT Libraries Digital Collections. "Strict Neutrality – Britain & France at War with Germany, September 1939 – May 1940". United States Navy and World War II. Naval-History.net. Archived from the original on 18 November 2006. Retrieved 3 February 2007. (chronology of the lead up of U.S. entry into World War II) "The National Security Strategy of the United States of America". whitehouse.gov. Archived from the original on 28 January 2010 – via National Archives. "US Navy". GlobalSecurity. "U.S. Navy Ships". Federation of America Scientists. Military Analysis Network. "Naval recognition-Grand Valley State University Archives and Special Collections". "US Navy SEALs Information". Archived from the original on 18 November 2010. Retrieved 19 May 2010. "US Navy SEALs Directory". Archived from the original on 4 April 2010. v t e  United States Navy Category Leadership Secretary of the Navy Under Secretary of the Navy Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy 4-star admirals House Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces Senate Subcommittee on Seapower Structure Navy Navy Reserve Fleet Marine Force Expeditionary Combat Command Merchant Marine Units Active ships Aircraft wings Aircraft squadrons Carrier strike group Installations Naval Observatory Master jet base Operating forces Fleet Forces Command Pacific Fleet Commander Naval Forces Europe – Naval Forces Africa Naval Forces Central Command Naval Forces Southern Command Naval Special Warfare Command Naval Reserve Forces Operational Test and Evaluation Force Naval Network Warfare Command Military Sealift Command Shore Naval Sea Systems Command Naval Air Systems Command Naval Facilities Engineering Systems Command Naval Supply Systems Command Naval Information Warfare Systems Command Fleet Cyber Command Naval Academy Naval Education and Training Command Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command Office of Naval Intelligence Naval Aviation Warfighting Development Center Naval Legal Service Command Naval Observatory Naval Safety Center Bureau of Naval Personnel Chief of Naval Personnel Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Navy Installations Command Navy Working Capital Fund Fleets Second Fleet Third Fleet Fourth Fleet Fifth Fleet Sixth Fleet Seventh Fleet Tenth Fleet Ships A–B C D–F G–H I–K L M N–O P Q–R S T–V W–Z Aircraft carriers Airships Amphibious warfare ships Auxiliaries Battleships Cruisers Destroyers Destroyer escorts Escort carriers Frigates Mine warfare vessels Monitors Patrol vessels Sailing frigates Steam frigates Steam gunboats Ships of the line Sloops of war Submarines Torpedo boats Personnel and training People Officers Insignia Designators Enlisted Rates Ratings Classification Personnel Chaplain Corps Chief Deputy Chief Explosive ordnance disposal Medical Corps Dental Corps Nurse Corps Medical Service Corps Supply Corps Civil Engineer Corps JAG Corps JAG DJAG NCIS Boatswain's mates Hospital corpsman Naval Aviator SEALs Seabees Master-at-arms Operations specialist SWCCs Hispanic sailors Training Recruit Naval Academy Officer Candidate School STA-21 NROTC BESS BFTT CNATT COMPTUEX NAWCTSD AIM Naval Chaplaincy School Naval Hospital Corps School Naval Justice School Naval Postgraduate School United States Armed Forces School of Music Navy Senior Enlisted Academy Navy Supply Corps School Naval War College Nuclear Power School JMTC TOPGUN USNTPS Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Equipment Uniforms Awards and decorations Badges Current fleet Reserve fleet Aircraft Weapons Naval reactors History and traditions History "Anchors Aweigh" Blue Angels Continental Navy Ensign Fleet bands Fleet Week Jack Line-crossing ceremony National Museum Navy Band Ceremonial Guard Navy Flag Navy Hymn Navy Memorial Navy service numbers Navy Weeks Revolt of the Admirals Sailor's Creed Ship commissioning Ship decommissioning Tingey House USS Constitution Wetting-down United States battleship retirement debate v t e  United States Armed Forces Military budget of the United States Category A MC N AF SF CG Navbox A MC N AF SF CG Leadership Commander-in-chief: President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff: Chairman Vice Chairman United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services: Senate House Active duty four-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Organization Military departments Department of Defense (Secretary): Department of the Army (Secretary) Department of the Navy (Secretary) Department of the Air Force (Secretary) Department of Homeland Security (Secretary) Service branches and heads Army (Chief of Staff) Marine Corps (Commandant) Navy (Chief of Naval Operations) Air Force (Chief of Staff) Space Force (Chief of Space Operations) Coast Guard (Commandant) Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard: A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified Combatant Command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History: A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II By ancestry African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Pakistani Americans Sikh Americans History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies: A (prep) MC/N (prep) AF/SF (prep) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer: A MC MEPS ASVAB Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms: A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations: Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges: Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Office Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers: A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System/TRICARE Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains: A MC N AF CG Equipment A MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles (active) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N (active) AF CG MSC Weapons: N CG Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active Aircraft designation Missiles Helicopter arms Other Nuclear football Electronics (designations) Flags: A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs: Nuclear Biological Chemical Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Lloyd Austin, Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks, Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Economic Adjustment Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Microelectronics Activity Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency Space Development Agency Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity (Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute * Defense Travel Management Office * Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service) Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency (White House Communications Agency) National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service (Director/Chief) Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel) General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services (White House Military Office) Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff: Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service v t e Uniformed services of the United States Armed Forces United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Non-armed uniformed services National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps v t e NATO Allied Maritime Command Structure Standing NATO Maritime Group 1 Standing NATO Maritime Group 2 Standing NATO Mine Countermeasures Group 1 Standing NATO Mine Countermeasures Group 2 NATO maritime forces Albanian Naval Force Belgian Maritime Component Bulgarian Navy Royal Canadian Navy Croatian Navy Royal Danish Navy Estonian Navy French Navy German Navy Hellenic Navy Icelandic Coast Guard Italian Navy Latvian Naval Forces Lithuanian Naval Force Montenegrin Navy Royal Netherlands Navy Royal Norwegian Navy Polish Navy Portuguese Navy Romanian Naval Forces Slovenian Navy Spanish Navy Turkish Naval Forces Royal Navy United States Navy United States Marine Corps United States Coast Guard v t e United States articles History By event Pre-Columbian era Colonial era Thirteen Colonies military history Founding Fathers Continental Congress Continental Association Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Confederation Period American frontier Drafting and ratification of Constitution Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2008) War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic debt ceiling Inventions before 1890 1890–1945 1946–1991 after 1991 Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States Continental America counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive Cabinet Civil service Executive departments Executive Office Independent agencies Law enforcement President of the United States Powers Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore Vice President Judicial District courts Courts of appeals Supreme Court Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights Federal Reporter United States Code United States Reports Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency Defense Intelligence Agency Federal Bureau of Investigation National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency Office of the Director of National Intelligence Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps 51st state political status of Puerto Rico District of Columbia statehood movement Elections Electoral College Foreign relations Foreign policy Hawaiian sovereignty movement Ideologies anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Local government Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Red states and blue states Purple America Scandals State government governor state legislature state court Imperial Presidency Corruption Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade Transportation by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demography Economic issues affluence eviction home-ownership household income income inequality labor unions middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth Education attainment Family structure Fashion Flag Folklore Great American Novel Health health care health insurance Holidays Homelessness Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Black American Sign Language HSL Plains Sign Talk Arabic Chinese French German Italian Russian Spanish Literature Media Journalism Internet Newspapers Radio Television Music Names National symbols Columbia Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Public holidays Race Religion Sexuality / Adolescent Sexuality Social class Society Sports Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Home-ownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Professional and working class conflict Standard of living Issues Ages of consent Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism hair texture intersex rights Islamophobia LGBT rights racism same-sex marriage Drug policy Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Health care abortion health insurance hunger obesity smoking Human rights Immigration illegal International rankings National security Mass surveillance Terrorism Separation of church and state Outline Index Category Portal Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125