The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline. Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or deleted. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Underdark is a fictional setting which has appeared in Dungeons & Dragons role-playing campaigns and Dungeons & Dragons-based fiction books, including the Legend of Drizzt series by R. A. Salvatore. It is described as a vast subterranean network of interconnected caverns and tunnels, stretching beneath entire continents and forming an underworld for surface settings. Polygon called it "one of D&D's most well-known realms".[1] Contents 1 Use in campaign settings 2 Features 2.1 Environment 2.2 Araumycos 2.3 Inhabitants 3 Media 3.1 Source books 3.2 Game modules 3.3 Computer games 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Use in campaign settings[edit] The Underdark featured prominently in the campaign settings World of Greyhawk[2] and the Forgotten Realms.[3] The concept of a dungeon that spanned a planet was first introduced by Gary Gygax in his D-series of game modules[4] and at the end of the G-series. The Underdark was described in detail in the 1986 manual Dungeoneer's Survival Guide, by Doug Niles.[5] It was also part of the Eberron campaign setting, in which it was called Khyber and was home to evil beings driven deep into the caverns at the end of the age of demons.[6] A review for Pyramid refers to the Underdark as "one of the most well known facets of the Forgotten Realms".[7] Much of the literary attention for this deep underworld stemmed from the sourcebooks and accessories for the Forgotten Realms setting, including R.A. Salvatore's novels about the fictional character Drizzt Do'Urden.[3] The Underdark was also the setting for the expansion pack to the computer game Neverwinter Nights called Hordes of the Underdark, which featured the port city of Lith My'athar, and the mysterious Seer.[8] Features[edit] The Underdark is "a vast subterranean realm inhabited by drow, mind flayers, aboleth, and other strange, sinister creatures. It is a place where few humans go and from where even fewer return".[5] It extends well past the dungeons made by surface dwellers, encompassing myriad caverns, tunnels and complexes.[7] Environment[edit] The fictional Underdark's physical characteristics are based upon conditions in real-world caverns deep underground, except at immense size. Within the context of a game, the Underdark is extremely dangerous, especially to non-native characters and creatures. There are also the usual dangers associated with caverns: claustrophobia, poor air circulation, floor/ceiling collapses and getting lost. There is no light except for occasional patches of phosphorescent fungus; most Underdark inhabitants either have highly developed senses other than sight or have developed darkvision.[note 1] Food can be extremely difficult to find, and much of the natural vegetation is poisonous. In addition, potable water is hard to locate. In the Forgotten Realms setting, the Underdark is permeated with a magical energy the drow call faerzress, which is used as a source of energy by the native plant life and which interferes with scrying and teleportation spells. Araumycos[edit] In the Forgotten Realms setting, Araumycos (Dwarvish, literally meaning "Great Fungus") is an enormous fungal growth in the Upper Underdark under the continent of Faerûn. It is a single organism living beneath the High Forest between one and three miles under the surface, immune to magic and resistant to psionic energy. Araumycos will sometimes attack intruders with poison, spores, and manifestations that resemble oozes and slimes.[3] Araumycos houses many other fungal creatures. Travel within it is difficult since many passages and caves are blocked by it and damage regenerates quickly.[3] Inhabitants[edit] The Underdark is home to many predators, races and fantasy monsters, most of which are hostile. These include: Aboleths Beholders Drow (dark elves) Duergar (gray dwarves) Dwarves Fomorian Illithids (Mind Flayers) Hook horrors Kuo-toa Myconids (Fungus-men) Pech Svirfneblin (Deep Gnomes) Troglodyte There is no unified underground government since each individual city-state has a different form of rule. The Underdark economy deals primarily in armor, exotic goods, magic, slaves, timber and weapons. The ethical code of many indigenous races tends toward evil or neutral. In the Forgotten Realms campaign setting, R.A. Salvatore created the drow Underdark city Menzoberranzan.[9] Media[edit] Source books[edit] Wyatt, James (September 2002). City of the Spider Queen. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-1212-X. Boyd, Eric L. (November 1999). Drizzt Do'Urden's Guide to the Underdark. TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-7869-1509-9. Greenwood, Ed (July 1991). The Drow of the Underdark. TSR, Inc. ISBN 1-56076-132-6. Wyatt, James (2007). Lost Caverns of the Underdark. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-4709-8. Greenwood, Ed; Niles, Douglas; Salvatore, R. A. (December 1992). Menzoberranzan. TSR, Inc. ISBN 1-56076-460-0. Cordell, Bruce R.; Kestrel, Gwendolyn F. M.; Quick, Jeff (2003). Underdark. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3053-5. Heinsoo, Rob; Collins, Andy (2010). Underdark. D&D 4th edition supplement. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-5387-X.[4] Game modules[edit] Gygax, Gary (1978). Descent into the Depths of the Earth (9059 ed.). TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-935696-60-1. Sargent, Carl (1995). Night Below: An Underdark Campaign. TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-7869-0179-9. Sutherland III, David C; Gygax, Gary (1980). Queen of the Demonweb Pits. TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-394-51541-2. Gygax, Gary (1978). Vault of the Drow (9021 ed.). TSR, Inc. ISBN 0-935696-07-5. Computer games[edit] Part of Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn took place in the Underdark,[10] and Icewind Dale II featured journeys through the Underdark. An expansion pack based on the Underdark setting was released for the Neverwinter Nights game series, titled Neverwinter Nights: Hordes of the Underdark. The tilesets which came with the Hordes of the Underdark expansion pack were used in several persistent worlds, most notably Escape from the Underdark. See also[edit] Eclavdra Edralve Lolth Menzoberranzan Notes[edit] ^ This was infravision before the 3rd edition of the game rules. References[edit] ^ Hall, Charlie (September 2, 2015). "Out of the Abyss: D&D's next campaign goes deep into the Underdark". Polygon. Retrieved June 24, 2017. ^ Mona, Erik; Holian, Gary; Reynolds, Sean K.; Weining, Frederick (2000). Living Greyhawk Gazetteer. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-1743-1. ^ a b c d Cordell, Bruce R.; Kestrel, Gwendolyn F. M.; Quick, Jeff (2003). Underdark. Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3053-5. ^ a b Baichtal, John (February 26, 2010). "D&D's Underdark Describes a Vast and Perilous Realm". Wired. Condé Nast Digital. Retrieved 2010-07-16. ^ a b Bambra, Jim (October 1986). "Open Box". White Dwarf. Games Workshop (82): 2. ^ Wyatt, James; Baker, Keith; Johnson, Luke (January 2006). Player's Guide to Eberron. Wizards of the Coast. ^ a b "Pyramid Review: Drizzt Do'Urden's Guide to the Underdark". Pyramid. January 21, 2000. Retrieved 2021-01-31. ^ Lummis, Michael; Pleet, Kathleen; Kern, Edwin; Ricketts, Kurt; Burton, Christopher (2004). Neverwinter Nights: Hordes of the Underdark, Official Strategy Guide. Brady Games. ISBN 0-7440-0341-5. ^ Jacob, Merle; Apple, Hope (2000). To be Continued: An Annotated Guide to Sequels. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 251. ISBN 1-57356-155-X. ^ Cappellini, Matt (November 30, 2000). "Blockbusters Make Christmas Bright". The Beacon News. Aurora, Illinois. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved November 21, 2012. – via HighBeam Research (subscription required) Further reading[edit] Pramas, Chris. "Underground Scenarios." Dragon #294. Renton, WA: Wizards of the Coast, 2002. External links[edit] Information at the official Forgotten Realms website Psionic Races and Classes of the Realms v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond