Not to be confused with Arcana Unearthed. Unearthed Arcana, 1st edition Cover of Unearthed Arcana for the 1st edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons; cover art by Jeff Easley Author Gary Gygax Illustrators Jeff Easley, Jim Roslof, Roger Raupp, Timothy Truman, and Jim Holloway Genre Role-playing game Publisher TSR, Inc. Publication date 1985 Media type Print (Hardback) Pages 128 ISBN 0-88038-084-5 OCLC 15054860 Dewey Decimal 794 19 LC Class GV1469.62.D84 G96 1985 Unearthed Arcana, 3rd edition Authors Andy Collins, Jesse Decker, David Noonan, and Rich Redman Genre Role-playing game Publisher Wizards of the Coast Publication date February 2004 Media type Print (Hardback) Pages 224 ISBN 0-7869-3131-0 Unearthed Arcana (abbreviated UA)[1] is the title shared by two hardback books published for different editions of the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game. Both were designed as supplements to the core rulebooks, containing material that expanded upon other rules. The original Unearthed Arcana was written primarily by Gary Gygax, and published by game publisher TSR in 1985 for use with the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons first edition rules. The book consisted mostly of material previously published in magazines, and included new races, classes, and other material to expand the rules in the Dungeon Masters Guide and Players Handbook. The book was notorious for its considerable number of errors, and was received negatively by the gaming press whose criticisms targeted the over-powered races and classes, among other issues. Gygax intended to use the book's content for a planned second edition of Advanced Dungeons & Dragons; however, much of the book's content was not reused in the second edition, which went into development shortly after Gygax's departure from TSR. A second book titled Unearthed Arcana was produced by Wizards of the Coast for Dungeons & Dragons third edition in 2004. The designers did not reproduce material from the original book, but instead attempted to emulate its purpose by providing variant rules and options to change the game itself. The title Unearthed Arcana is also used for a regular column on the official Dungeons & Dragons website that presents new content for playtesting for Dungeons & Dragons fifth edition. Contents 1 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1.1 Development history 1.2 Contents 1.3 Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition 2 Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition 3 Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition 4 Reception 5 References Advanced Dungeons & Dragons[edit] Development history[edit] The original Unearthed Arcana was written by Gary Gygax with design and editing contributions by Jeff Grubb and Kim Mohan, respectively, and published by TSR in 1985.[2]:128 Gygax reportedly produced the book to raise money as TSR was deeply in debt at the time.[3] He announced in the March 1985 issue of Dragon magazine that Unearthed Arcana would be released in the summer of that year. He proposed the book as "an interim volume to expand the Dungeon Masters Guide and Players Handbook", as the information was spread out in several places and difficult to keep track of.[4] Unearthed Arcana was to include material previously published in Dragon, written by Gygax and updated and revised for the book. The book would also contain previously unpublished material, some of it written by other contributors to Dragon.[4] According to British writer Paul Cockburn, some of the material in Unearthed Arcana had been previously published in Imagine magazine.[5] The original Unearthed Arcana contains errors in its text, which readers discovered and reported to Dragon magazine.[6] Even some positive reviews of the book pointed out the considerable number of mistakes.[7] Dragon editor Kim Mohan, with ideas from Gygax, Frank Mentzer, and Jeff Grubb, addressed the many errors found in the book. In the November 1985 issue of Dragon magazine, Mohan printed four pages of rules corrections as well as new supplementary material intended to be inserted into the book, and some explanations and justifications for items which were not actually errors,[6] and compiled a two-page list of type corrections meant to be pasted into further revisions of Unearthed Arcana.[8] Dragon also devoted the entirety of its "Sage Advice" column in the January 1987 issue to answering readers' questions about Unearthed Arcana, as a follow-up to Mohan's prior column.[9] However, the errata were not incorporated into later printings of the manual.[10] The original Unearthed Arcana was reproduced in a premium edition with gilded pages, released on February 19, 2013, after the premium reprints of the 1st Edition Player's Handbook, Dungeon Masters Guide, and Monster Manual.[11] This reprint is the first printing of the book to be modified with the errata previously published in Dragon magazine incorporated into the corrected text. Contents[edit] The 128-page Unearthed Arcana was written for use with the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons first edition rules and was divided into two sections: one for players and one for the Dungeon Master (or "DM", the game organizer).[2][12] The book provided new races, classes, and other expansion material. The book gives details on using "subraces" of the standard races, such as dark elves (drow), and deep gnomes (svirfneblin), for use as player characters and non-player characters. Unearthed Arcana includes the barbarian (found in Dragon #63[13]), cavalier (found in Dragon #72[14]), and thief-acrobat (found in Dragon #69[15]) character classes,[4][5] and also includes expansions and revisions of the druid and ranger classes.[4] The book presents a large addition to the range of character races, including the drow and svirfneblin.[5] The book includes new weapons, and revised information on character level maximums for non-human player characters.[4] Unearthed Arcana details the weapon specialization rules, in which a fighter or ranger "can adopt a weapon as a special arm, and receive bonuses in its use".[5] The book also describes the comeliness attribute, and contains new spells.[5] The DM's section covers suggestions for handling player characters, social class and rank tables, many new magic items, weaponless combat rules, and nonhuman deities.[12] Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition[edit] By 1985 Gygax was planning a second edition for the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons (AD&D) rules, and intended beginning work on this in 1986. He intended to incorporate material from Unearthed Arcana, Oriental Adventures, and the original Players Handbook into the new edition's Players Handbook.[16] Gygax used the book to explore some ideas he had for the new edition, such as changing the mechanics for hit dice (the measurement of a character's "health" in the game), and altering the game's mechanics to allow the game system to work other genres, and to allow characters to have skills that complement the character classes.[17] Shortly after announcing his intentions for second edition, Gygax was removed as TSR's President and Chairman of the Board. In 1986 he resigned all positions with TSR, leaving the shape and direction of the Dungeons & Dragons game to other designers.[18] The designers of second edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons removed material from the original Players Handbook in the new edition, as well as much of the new material that had appeared in Unearthed Arcana, which they considered to be "unbalanced".[19] The book had five printings after the release of AD&D 2nd edition with the last printing published two years after the new edition was released.[10] Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition[edit] The second book to use the name Unearthed Arcana was written by Andy Collins, Jesse Decker, David Noonan, and Rich Redman, and published in February 2004 by Wizards of the Coast, for use with the Dungeons & Dragons third edition rules.[20] Cover art was by Matt Cavotta, with interior art by Steven Belledin, Ed Cox, Wayne England, Emily Fiegenschuh, David Hudnut, Jeremy Jarvis, Doug Kovacs, John and Laura Lakey, David Martin, Dennis Crabapple McClain, Mark Nelson, James Pavelec, Steve Prescott, David Roach, Richard Sardinha, Ron Spencer, Stephen Tappin, Joel Thomas, and Ben Thompson.[20] The designers aimed the book at experienced players and DMs looking for something new, encouraging them to customize the game's rules. The designers did not want the third edition book to be like the original Unearthed Arcana mechanically, because according to Andy Collins: "Every book on the market looks like the original Unearthed Arcana. New classes, new spells, new magic items - that's the default "recipe" for a d20 product these days. We saw no need to do that with this book."[21] Where the original Unearthed Arcana had simply expanded the rules and options of the core game, this 224-page supplement was aimed at providing an extensive list of variant rules and options to change the standard game itself.[21] The volume of options added was intentionally excessive; according to the designers, a Dungeon Master who reads the book must be prepared to "Drink from the fire hose"[20]:4 and to think before using options that may radically imbalance the game.[21] The book ends with a checklist of the included variants, preceded by a short chapter discussing ways of transitioning among multiple games using different rulesets (one of which explicitly emulates the "Eternal Champion" stories of Michael Moorcock). Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition[edit] The Unearthed Arcana title has been used for an approximately monthly column at the official D&D website that began in February 2015 and presents new, work-in-progress content such as class archetypes, playable races, and rule variants, similar to the playtest that preceded the release of 5th edition.[22][23][24] Much of the information in Xanathar's Guide to Everything (2017)[23] and Tasha's Cauldron of Everything (2020) was developed through the public Unearthed Arcana playtest.[25] On the playtest subclasses developed for Tasha’s Cauldron of Everything, Jeremy Crawford said "almost every single one made it into the game".[25] Reception[edit] Reaction to Unearthed Arcana was often critical. According to Lawrence Schick, in his 1991 book Heroic Worlds, "Many players regard the new character classes introduced in this volume as overly powerful and out of line with those in the Player's Handbook."[12] Paul Cockburn reviewed the original Unearthed Arcana in issue 73 of White Dwarf magazine (January 1986), rating it 4 out of 10 overall. He summed up the book's contents by calling them "A rules extension package of reprints, most of which add very little of interest or value to anybody's game."[5] William B. Haddon's review of the third edition Unearthed Arcana on RPGnet lauded the book's content while criticizing the interest level of the content as "very flat". He found the power level unbalanced for each of the new sub-systems introduced, and found little in the suggested rules that he wanted to use.[26] References[edit] ^ "Dungeons & Dragons FAQ". Wizards of the Coast. Archived from the original on May 14, 2010. Retrieved October 3, 2008. ^ a b Gygax, Gary. Unearthed Arcana (TSR, 1985) ^ La Farge, Paul (September 2006). "Destroy All Monsters". The Believer Magazine. Archived from the original on March 27, 2010. ^ a b c d e Gygax, Gary (March 1985). "Demi-Humans Get a Lift". Dragon. TSR (95): 8–10. ^ a b c d e f Cockburn, Paul (January 1986). "Open Box: Dungeon Modules". White Dwarf (review). Games Workshop (73): 7. ISSN 0265-8712. ^ a b Mohan, Kim (November 1985). "Arcana Update, Part 1". Dragon. TSR (103): 12. ^ Farstad, Errol (1987). "The Critical Hit". Polyhedron Newszine. TSR (38): 8. ^ "Unearthed Arcana additions and corrections". Dragon. TSR (103): 48–49. November 1985. ^ Petticord, Penny (January 1987). "Sage Advice". Dragon. TSR (117): 32, 47, 54. ^ a b Later AD&D Manuals. The Acaeum. Retrieved on June 1, 2006. ^ "Unearthed Arcana". Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved June 22, 2013. ^ a b c Schick, Lawrence (1991). Heroic Worlds: A History and Guide to Role-Playing Games. Prometheus Books. p. 116. ISBN 0-87975-653-5. ^ Gygax, Gary (July 1982). "The Big, Bad Barbarian". Dragon. TSR (63): 8–10. ^ Gygax, Gary (April 1983). "The Chivalrous Cavalier". Dragon. TSR (72): 6. ^ Gygax, Gary (January 1983). "A "split class" for nimble characters: the Thief-Acrobat". Dragon. TSR (69): 20–23. ^ Gygax, Gary (November 1985). "The Future of the Game". Dragon. TSR (103): 8. ^ Johnson, Joel (2008-03-04). "Dungeons & Dragons Creator Gary Gygax Passes Away; Interview". Boing Boing Gadgets. Retrieved 2010-03-21. ^ Gygax, Gary (June 1987). "From the Sorcerer's Scroll". Dragon. TSR (122): 40. ^ Winter, Steve (September 1997). "Cure Light Wounds". Polyhedron Newszine. TSR (49): 24. ^ a b c Collins, Andy; Decker, Jesse; Noonan, David; Redman, Rich (February 2004). Unearthed Arcana (3rd ed.). Wizards of the Coast. ISBN 0-7869-3131-0. ^ a b c Ryan, Michael (February 7, 2004). Product Spotlight: Unearthed Arcana. Wizards of the Coast. Retrieved on June 1, 2006. ^ Unearthed Arcana ^ a b Hudak, Rob (2017-11-30). "Review: Dungeons & Dragons: Xanathar's Guide to Everything". SLUG Magazine. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ Sheridan, Connor (2019-11-05). "Your Dungeon Master will love or hate the big changes in these new D&D playtest rules". Games Radar. Retrieved 2019-11-11. ^ a b Grebey, James (2020-08-24). "D&D's next expansion, Tasha's Cauldron of Everything, adds new subclasses and racial customization". SYFY WIRE. Retrieved 2020-08-24. ^ Haddon, William B. (February 20, 2004). "Review of Unearthed Arcana". RPGnet. Retrieved January 11, 2009. v t e Dungeons & Dragons rulebooks and accessories Original Dungeons & Dragons Core Dungeons & Dragons Chainmail Supplements Supplement I: Greyhawk Supplement II: Blackmoor Supplement III: Eldritch Wizardry Supplement IV: Gods, Demi-Gods, and Heroes Swords & Spells Basic Dungeons & Dragons Core Basic Set Expert Set Companion Set Master Rules Immortals Rules Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Creature Catalogue The Shady Dragon Inn Wrath of the Immortals Modules Adventures in Blackmoor Castle Amber Castle Caldwell and Beyond City of the Gods Combat Shield and Mini-adventure Curse of Xanathon Death's Ride The Duchy of Ten Earthshaker! The Endless Stair The Gem and the Staff Ghost of Lion Castle Horror on the Hill In Search of Adventure In Search of the Unknown The Isle of Dread The Jade Hare The Keep on the Borderlands The Kidnapping of Princess Arelina Legacy of Blood The Lost City Master Player Screen Mystery of the Snow Pearls Night's Dark Terror Palace of the Silver Princess Queen's Harvest Rahasia The Revenge of Rusak Sabre River Temple of the Frog Test of the Warlords The Tree of Life The Veiled Society War Rafts of Kron Where Chaos Reigns Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Core Players Handbook Dungeon Masters Guide Monster Manual Supplements Deities & Demigods Dragonlance Adventures Dungeoneer's Survival Guide Empires of the Sands Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Set Greyhawk Adventures Lords of Darkness The Magister Manual of the Planes Monster Manual II Moonshae Oriental Adventures The Savage Frontier Unearthed Arcana Waterdeep and the North Wilderness Survival Guide World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting Modules Against the Cult of the Reptile God Against the Giants The Assassin's Knot Assault on the Aerie of the Slave Lords The Bane of Llywelyn Beyond the Crystal Cave Blood of the Yakuza Bloodstone Pass The Bloodstone Wars Castle Greyhawk Conan Against Darkness! Conan Unchained! Danger at Dunwater Day of Al'Akbar Deep Dwarven Delve Descent into the Depths of the Earth Dragonlance modules Dragons of Despair Dungeonland Dwellers of the Forbidden City The Final Enemy The Forest Oracle Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun The Gauntlet The Ghost Tower of Inverness Glacial Rift of the Frost Giant Jarl Hall of the Fire Giant King The Hidden Shrine of Tamoachan Isle of the Ape The Land Beyond the Magic Mirror Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth The Lost Island of Castanamir Lost Tomb of Martek The Mines of Bloodstone Oasis of the White Palm Pharaoh Queen of the Demonweb Pits Queen of the Spiders Ravager of Time Ravenloft Ravenloft II: The House on Gryphon Hill Red Sonja Unconquered Ruins of Adventure Scourge of the Slave Lords The Secret of Bone Hill The Sentinel Shrine of the Kuo-Toa Sinister Secret of Saltmarsh Swords of Deceit Swords of the Undercity The Temple of Elemental Evil The Throne of Bloodstone To Find a King Tomb of Horrors Tomb of the Lizard King Treasure Hunt Under Illefarn Vault of the Drow The Village of Hommlet White Plume Mountain Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monstrous Compendium/Monstrous Manual Supplements Anauroch Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Artifacts The Code of the Harpers The Complete Book of Dwarves The Complete Book of Humanoids The Complete Fighter's Handbook The Complete Psionics Handbook The Dalelands Demihuman Deities Draconomicon Drow of the Underdark Dwarves Deep Earth, Air, Fire, and Water Faiths & Avatars Forgotten Realms Adventures The Forgotten Realms Atlas Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting From the Ashes Greyhawk: The Adventure Begins A Guide to the Astral Plane Hall of Heroes Heroes' Lorebook Iuz the Evil Jungles of Chult Legends & Lore The Marklands Monster Mythology Old Empires The Ruins of Undermountain The Shining South Tome of Magic Villains' Lorebook Adventures Against the Giants: The Liberation of Geoff The Bloodstone Lands Border Watch The City of Skulls Crypt of Lyzandred the Mad Die Vecna Die! The Doomgrinder Doom of Daggerdale Fate of Istus Five Shall Be One Gargoyle Greyhawk Ruins Halls of the High King House of Strahd Howl from the North Mordenkainen's Fantastic Adventure Night Below Patriots of Ulek Rary the Traitor Return of the Eight Return to the Keep on the Borderlands Return to the Tomb of Horrors Return to White Plume Mountain Slavers The Star Cairns Treasures of Greyhawk Vecna Lives! Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Book of Challenges Book of Vile Darkness Defenders of the Faith Deities and Demigods Enemies and Allies Epic Level Handbook Faiths and Pantheons Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Ghostwalk Hero Builder's Guidebook Living Greyhawk Gazetteer Lords of Darkness Magic of Faerûn Monsters of Faerûn Manual of the Planes Masters of the Wild Monster Manual II Oriental Adventures Psionics Handbook Races of Faerûn Savage Species Song and Silence Stronghold Builder's Guidebook Sword and Fist Tome and Blood Adventures Bastion of Broken Souls City of the Spider Queen Deep Horizon The Forge of Fury The Fright at Tristor Heart of Nightfang Spire Lord of the Iron Fortress Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil The Speaker in Dreams The Standing Stone The Sunless Citadel Dungeons & Dragons v3.5 Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Dungeons & Dragons Basic Game Supplements An Adventurer's Guide to Eberron Book of Exalted Deeds City of Splendors: Waterdeep City of Stormreach Cityscape Complete Adventurer Complete Arcane Complete Champion Complete Divine Complete Mage Complete Psionic Complete Scoundrel Complete Warrior Draconomicon Dragon Magic Dragonmarked Dragons of Eberron Dragons of Faerûn Drow of the Underdark Dungeon Master's Guide II Dungeonscape Eberron Campaign Setting Elder Evils Exemplars of Evil Expanded Psionics Handbook Faiths of Eberron Fiendish Codex I: Hordes of the Abyss Fiendish Codex II: Tyrants of the Nine Hells Five Nations The Forge of War Frostburn The Grand History of the Realms Heroes of Battle Heroes of Horror Libris Mortis Lords of Madness Lost Empires of Faerûn Magic Item Compendium Magic of Incarnum Miniatures Handbook Monster Manual III Monster Manual IV Monster Manual V Planar Handbook Player's Handbook II Races of Destiny Races of the Dragon Races of Stone Races of the Wild Rules Compendium Sandstorm Spell Compendium Stormwrack Tome of Battle: The Book of Nine Swords Tome of Magic Underdark Unearthed Arcana Weapons of Legacy Adventures Eberron Eyes of the Lich Queen Grasp of the Emerald Claw Shadows of the Last War Voyage of the Golden Dragon Whispers of the Vampire's Blade Expedition series Expedition to Castle Ravenloft Expedition to the Demonweb Pits Expedition to the Ruins of Greyhawk Expedition to Undermountain Fantastic Locations City of Peril Dragondown Grotto Fane of the Drow Fields of Ruin The Frostfell Rift Hellspike Prison Other adventures Barrow of the Forgotten King Fortress of the Yuan-Ti Red Hand of Doom Scourge of the Howling Horde The Shattered Gates of Slaughtergarde The Sinister Spire Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Arcane Power Divine Power Dark Sun Campaign Setting Dungeon Master's Guide 2 Draconomicon: Chromatic Dragons Draconomicon: Metallic Dragons Eberron Campaign Guide Eberron Player's Guide Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide Forgotten Realms Player's Guide Manual of the Planes Martial Power Martial Power 2 Monster Manual 2 Monster Manual 3 Player's Handbook 2 Player's Handbook 3 Primal Power Psionic Power Adventures Assault on Nightwyrm Fortress Demon Queen's Enclave Keep on the Shadowfell King of the Trollhaunt Warrens Madness at Gardmore Abbey Marauders of the Dune Sea Orcs of Stonefang Pass Prince of Undeath Pyramid of Shadows Thunderspire Labyrinth Tomb of Horrors Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition Core Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Supplements Elemental Evil Player's Companion Sword Coast Adventurer's Guide Volo's Guide to Monsters Xanathar's Guide to Everything Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica Acquisitions Incorporated Eberron: Rising from the Last War Explorer's Guide to Wildemount Mythic Odysseys of Theros Tasha's Cauldron of Everything Adventures Hoard of the Dragon Queen The Rise of Tiamat Princes of the Apocalypse Out of the Abyss Curse of Strahd Storm King's Thunder Tomb of Annihilation Waterdeep: Dragon Heist Waterdeep: Dungeon of the Mad Mage Baldur's Gate: Descent Into Avernus Icewind Dale: Rime of the Frostmaiden Anthologies Tales from the Yawning Portal Ghosts of Saltmarsh Candlekeep Mysteries Magazines Dragon Dungeon v t e Dungeons & Dragons Basics General Controversies Editions Gen Con Popular culture Film series Related products Retro-clones RPGA Sources and influences Gameplay Adventures Alignment Attribute Dungeon Master Game mechanics Magic Magic item Miniatures Psionics Creators Gary Gygax Dave Arneson Keith Baker Richard Baker Ed Greenwood Jeff Grubb Tracy Hickman Robert J. Kuntz Mike Mearls Frank Mentzer Chris Perkins Jim Ward Margaret Weis Companies TSR Wizards of the Coast Grenadier Models Judges Guild Paizo Ral Partha Strategic Simulations WizKids Licenses Open Game License Game System License System Reference Document Geography and cosmology Campaign settings Birthright Council of Wyrms Dark Sun Dragonlance Dragon Fist​ Eberron Exandria Forgotten Realms Faerûn Al-Qadim Kara-Tur Ghostwalk Greyhawk Jakandor Kingdoms of Kalamar Mahasarpa Mystara Blackmoor Savage Coast Hollow World Nentir Vale​ Pelinore Planescape Ravenloft Masque of the Red Death Ravnica Rokugan Spelljammer Theros Planes of existence Material Plane Aebrynis Abeir-Toril Athas Krynn Eberron Mystara Nerath Oerth Underdark Inner Planes Outer Planes Sigil Characters and beings Races Dwarf Elf Drow Gnome Half-elf Half-orcs Halfling Kender Tiefling Triton Warforged Classes Artificer Barbarian Bard Cleric Druid Fighter Monk Paladin Ranger Sorcerer Rogue Warlock Wizard List of alternative classes Character lists Dragonlance Greyhawk Ravenloft Notable characters Alias Drizzt Do'Urden Elminster Volothamp Geddarm Gord the Rogue Iggwilv Lord Soth Raistlin Majere Minsc Mordenkainen Tenser Strahd von Zarovich Wulfgar Creatures and monsters Beholders Devils Dragons Gelatinous cube Giants Goblins Illithid (mind flayer) Lich Mimic Owlbear Orcs Reptilian humanoids Kobolds Slaadi Trolls Vampires List of 2nd edition monsters Deities and powers Bahamut Corellon Larethian Eilistraee Greyhawk deities Tharizdun Vecna Moradin Mystra Tiamat Publications Core rulebooks Player's Handbook Dungeon Master's Guide Monster Manual Classic boxed sets Dungeons & Dragons (original) Basic Expert Companion Master Immortals Rules Cyclopedia Supplements Arms and Equipment Guide Battlesystem Book of Exalted Deeds Book of Vile Darkness Deities & Demigods Draconomicon Dungeon Master Option: High-Level Campaigns Fiend Folio Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting Libris Mortis Manual of the Planes Player's Option: Combat & Tactics Player's Option: Skills & Powers Player's Option: Spells & Magic Psionics Handbook AD&D 2nd edition D&D 3rd edition D&D v3.5 Expanded and Complete Unearthed Arcana Wrath of the Immortals Notable modules List of Eberron modules and sourcebooks Against the Giants Dead Gods Desert of Desolation Dragonlance Expedition to the Barrier Peaks Expedition to the Demonweb Pits The Gates of Firestorm Peak The Isle of Dread The Keep on the Borderlands The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth Queen of the Spiders Ravenloft Red Hand of Doom The Ruins of Undermountain The Temple of Elemental Evil Tomb of Horrors White Plume Mountain Online tools D&D Beyond