Military forces of the United States United States Armed Forces Emblems of the U.S. Armed Forces' service branches Founded 14 June 1775; 245 years ago (1775-06-14)[a] Service branches  U.S. Army  U.S. Marine Corps  U.S. Navy  U.S. Air Force  U.S. Space Force  U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters The Pentagon, Arlington County, Virginia Leadership Commander-in-Chief President Joe Biden Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff GEN Mark A. Milley, USA Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen John E. Hyten, USAF Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman SEAC Ramón Colón-López, USAF Manpower Military age 17 with parental consent, 18 for voluntary service.[b] Conscription Male only (inactive since 1973) Available for military service 17 million[4], age 18–25 (2016) Reaching military age annually 2 million[5] (2016) Active personnel 1,385,727[6] (ranked 3rd) Reserve personnel 849,450[7] Deployed personnel 165,000 Expenditures Budget US$738 billion (2020)[8] (ranked 1st) Percent of GDP 3.42% (2019)[9] Industry Domestic suppliers List Related articles History Military history of the United States List of engagements American Revolutionary War Whiskey Rebellion Indian Wars Barbary Wars War of 1812 Patriot War Mexican–American War Utah War Cortina Troubles Reform War American Civil War New York City draft riots Las Cuevas War Spanish–American War Banana Wars Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion Border War World War I Russian Civil War World War II Cold War Puerto Rican Nationalist Revolts Korean War Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1958 Lebanon crisis Dominican Civil War Bay of Pigs Invasion Cuban Missile Crisis Vietnam War Korean DMZ Conflict Operation Eagle Claw Multinational Force Lebanon Invasion of Grenada Operation Golden Pheasant Invasion of Panama Persian Gulf War Somali Civil War Operation Gothic Serpent Battle of Mogadishu Bosnian War Operation Deliberate Force Operation Deny Flight Kosovo War Operation Allied Force Global War on Terrorism Operation Enduring Freedom Afghanistan Philippines Horn of Africa Trans Sahara Iraq War Intervention against ISIL War in North-West Pakistan Military deployment after Hurricane Katrina Pakistan–United States skirmishes Other Ranks Commissioned officer Army officer Marine Corps officer Navy officer Air Force officer Space Force officer Coast Guard officer Warrant officer Army warrant officer Marine Corps warrant officer Navy warrant officer Coast Guard warrant officer Enlisted Army enlisted Marine Corps enlisted Navy enlisted Air Force enlisted Space Force enlisted Coast Guard enlisted United States Armed Forces Executive departments Department of Defense Department of Homeland Security Staff Joint Chiefs of Staff Military departments Department of the Army Department of the Navy Department of the Air Force Military service branches United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Unified combatant commands Geographic combatant commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Indo-Pacific Command Northern Command Southern Command Space Command Functional combatant commands Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command v t e The United States Armed Forces are the military forces of the United States of America.[10] It consists of the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, and Coast Guard.[11][12] The president of the United States is the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces and forms military policy with the Department of Defense (DoD) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS), both federal executive departments, acting as the principal organs by which military policy is carried out. All six armed services are among the eight uniformed services of the United States.[13] From its inception during the American Revolutionary War, the U.S. Armed Forces have played a decisive role in the history of the United States. It helped forge a sense of national unity and identity through its victories in the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. It played a critical role in the American Civil War, keeping the Confederacy from seceding from the republic. The National Security Act of 1947, adopted following World War II, created the modern U.S. military framework. The Act established the National Military Establishment, headed by the secretary of defense; and created the United States Air Force and the National Security Council. It was amended in 1949, renaming the National Military Establishment the Department of Defense, and merged the cabinet-level Department of the Army, Department of the Navy, and Department of the Air Force, into the Department of Defense. The U.S. Armed Forces are one of the largest military forces in terms of personnel. It draws its personnel from a large pool of paid volunteers. Although conscription has been used in the past, it has not been used since 1973. The Selective Service System retains the power to conscript males, and requires that all male citizens and residents residing in the U.S. between the ages of 18–25 register with the service. The U.S. Armed Forces are considered the world's most powerful military.[14][15] The military budget of the United States was US$693 billion in 2019, the highest in the world.[16] In 2018, that accounted for 36 percent of the world's defense expenditures. The U.S. Armed Forces has significant capabilities in both defense and power projection due to its large budget, resulting in advanced and powerful technologies which enables a widespread deployment of the force around the world, including around 800 military bases outside the United States.[17] The U.S. Air Force is the world's largest air force, the U.S. Navy is the world's largest navy by tonnage, and the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Marine Corps combined are the world's second largest air arm. In terms of size, the U.S. Coast Guard is the world's 12th largest maritime force.[18][19] The U.S. as of FY2019 has about 14,061 aircraft in its military inventory.[20] The U.S. Space Force is the world's first and, as of 2021, only independent space force.[21][22] Contents 1 History 2 Structure 3 Service branches 3.1 Army 3.2 Marine Corps 3.3 Navy 3.4 Air Force 3.5 Space Force 3.6 Coast Guard 4 Combatant commands 4.1 Geographic 4.1.1 Africa Command 4.1.2 Central Command 4.1.3 European Command 4.1.4 Indo-Pacific Command 4.1.5 Northern Command 4.1.6 Southern Command 4.1.7 Space Command 4.2 Functional 4.2.1 Cyber Command 4.2.2 Special Operations Command 4.2.3 Strategic Command 4.2.4 Transportation Command 5 Budget 6 Personnel 6.1 Personnel by service 6.2 Locations 6.2.1 Overseas 6.2.2 Domestic 6.3 Rank structure 6.3.1 Officer corps 6.3.2 Warrant officer corps 6.3.3 Enlisted corps 6.4 Women in the armed forces 7 Order of precedence 8 See also 9 Notes 10 Citations 11 References 12 External links History[edit] Main articles: Military history of the United States, History of the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, and Coast Guard The history of the U.S. Armed Forces dates to 14 June 1775, with the creation of the Continental Army, even before the Declaration of Independence marked the establishment of the United States. The Continental Navy, established on 13 October 1775, and Continental Marines, established on 10 November 1775, were created in close succession by the Second Continental Congress in order to defend the new nation against the British Empire in the American Revolutionary War. These forces demobilized in 1784 after the Treaty of Paris ended the War for Independence. The Congress of the Confederation created the current United States Army on 3 June 1784. The United States Congress created the current United States Navy on 27 March 1794 and the current United States Marine Corps on 11 July 1798. All three services trace their origins to their respective Continental predecessors. The 1787 adoption of the Constitution gave the Congress the power to "raise and support armies", to "provide and maintain a navy" and to "make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces", as well as the power to declare war. The president is the U.S. Armed Forces' commander-in-chief. The United States Coast Guard traces its origin to the founding of the Revenue Cutter Service on 4 August 1790 which merged with the United States Life-Saving Service on 28 January 1915 to establish the Coast Guard. The United States Air Force was established as an independent service on 18 September 1947; it traces its origin to the formation of the Aeronautical Division, U.S. Signal Corps, which was formed 1 August 1907 and was part of the Army Air Forces before becoming an independent service as per the National Security Act of 1947. The United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps was formerly considered to be a branch of the United States Armed Forces from 29 July 1945 until its status as such was revoked on 3 July 1952.[23] The United States Space Force was established as an independent service on 20 December 2019. It is the sixth branch of the U.S. military and the first new branch since the establishment of the independent U.S. Air Force in 1947.[24] It traces its origin to the formation of the Air Force Space Command, which was formed 1 September 1982 and was a major command of the United States Air Force. Structure[edit] The United States Armed Forces are led by the president of the United States, which Article Two of the United States Constitution names them as the "Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States." The United States Armed Forces are split between two cabinet departments, with the Department of Defense serving as the primary cabinet department for military affairs and the Department of Homeland Security responsible for administering the United States Coast Guard. The military chain of command flows from the president of the United States to the secretary of defense (for services under the Defense Department) or secretary of homeland security (for services under the Department of Homeland Security), ensuring civilian control of the military. Within the Department of Defense the military departments, the Department of the Army, United States Department of the Navy, and Department of the Air Force, are civilian led entities that oversee the coequal military service branches organized within. The military departments and services are responsible for organizing, training, and equipping forces, with the actual chain of command flowing through the unified combatant commands. The Joint Chiefs of Staff in December 2020. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, although outside the operational chain of command, is the senior-most military body in the United States Armed Forces. It is led by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who is the military head of the armed forces and principle advisor to the president and secretary of defense on military matters. Their deputy is the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Other members include the chief of staff of the Army, commandant of the Marine Corps, chief of naval operations, chief of staff of the Air Force, chief of space operations, and the chief of the National Guard Bureau. The commandant of the Coast Guard is not an official member of the Joint Chiefs, but sometimes attends meetings as the one of the military service chiefs. The Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman is the most senior enlisted member in the United States Armed Forces.[25] Leadership of the Armed Forces, to include the president of the United States, Secretary of Defense, Secretary of Homeland Security and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are members of the United States National Security Council, which advises the president on national security, military, and foreign policy matters. The National Security Advisor and Deputy National Security Advisor may also be members of the United States Armed Forces. The National Security Council Deputies Committee also includes the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The United States Homeland Security Council, which advises the president on homeland security, includes the president of the United States, Secretary of Defense, Secretary of Homeland Security and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Homeland Security Advisor may also be a member of the armed forces. Military leadership, including the Secretary of Defense, United States Secretary of Homeland Security, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff also sit on the National Space Council. Service branches[edit] Organization of the military services and military departments within the Department of Defense The United States Armed Forces is comprised of six coequal military service branches. Five of the branches, the United States Army, United States Marine Corps, United States Navy, United States Air Force, and United States Space Force are organized under the Department of Defense's military departments. The United States Coast Guard is nominally under the Department of Homeland Security, but may be transferred to the Department of Defense's Department of the Navy (which is the civilian entity that oversees the coequal U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Navy) at the direction of the president or congress. With the exception of the Coast Guard, the military services only organize, train, and equip forces. The unified combatant commands are responsible for operational control of non-service retained forces. Army[edit] Main article: United States Army Logo of the United States Army The United States Army (USA) is the land service branch of the United States Armed Forces and part of the civilian-led Department of the Army, which is led by the Secretary of the Army. The military head of the U.S. Army is the chief of staff of the Army, who is assisted by the vice chief of staff of the United States Army and sergeant major of the Army. It was founded on 14 June 1775 as the Continental Army. The five core competencies of the Army are to conduct:[26] Prompt and sustained land combat Combined arms operations Combined arms maneuver and wide area security Armored and mechanized operations Airborne and air assault operations Special operations Set and sustain the theater for the joint force Integrate national, multinational, and joint power on land U.S. Army Soldiers with 2nd Battalion, 327th Infantry Regiment, 101st Airborne Division return fire during a firefight with Taliban forces in Barawala Kalay Valley in Kunar province, Afghanistan on 31 March 2011. The U.S. Army is composed of the Regular Army, United States Army Reserve, and United States Army National Guard. The U.S. Army is organized into four army commands, which conduct the majority of the service's organize, train, and equip functions, ten Army service component commands, which command forces attached to the combatant commands, and twelve direct reporting units. The Army also organizes its personnel into 21 different basic branches.[27] U.S. Army M1A2 Abrams tanks from the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment maneuver in the streets as they conduct a combat patrol in the city of Tall Afar, Iraq, on Feb. 3, 2005. The four army commands are: United States Army Forces Command: Provides Army forces to combatant commanders. United States Army Training and Doctrine Command: Recruits, trains, and educates soldiers and develops Army doctrine. United States Army Materiel Command: Develops, maintains, and acquires systems and materiel. United States Army Futures Command: Modernization and future systems development. The U.S. Army's field structure is broken into several subdivisions under its commands:[28] Army group: Only used during large scale wars or as part of multinational commands, consist of four to five field armies and 400,000 to 1 million soldiers. Usually responsible for directing campaigns in a certain geographical area and commanded by a general Field army: Consists of two or more corps or more than four divisions and consists of up to 90,000 soldiers commanded by a general or lieutenant general. Corps: Consists of two to five divisions and 20,000 to 45,000 soldiers commanded by a lieutenant general. A corps is the highest level of command that provides operational direction for combat operations, with higher levels concerned with administration rather than operations. Division: Consists of three to four brigades and 10,000 to 15,000 soldiers commanded by a major general and are subdivided into airborne, armored, infantry, and mountain divisions. Each division conducts major tactical operations and sustained battlefield operations. Brigade / Regiment / Group: Consists of two to three battalions and 3,000 to 5,000 soldiers commanded by a colonel. Armored and Ranger units are organized into regiments and Special Forces are organized into groups. In 2016, the Army reorganized its brigades into brigade combat teams, which are autonomous modular brigades that most commonly include one combat arms brigade and its assigned support and fire units. Battalion / Squadron: Consist of four to six companies and consist of up to 1,000 soldiers commanded by a lieutenant colonel. Battalions are organized into combat arms battalions, combat support, and combat service support battalions by unit type. Armored and air cavalry are organized into squadrons. Battalions and squadrons conduct independent operations of limited scope and duration. Company / Battery / Troop: Consist of three to four platoons and a few dozen to 200 soldiers commanded by a captain. Artillery is organized into batteries and armored and air cavalry units are organized into troops. Companies, batteries, and troops are tactical-sized unit that can perform a battlefield function on its own. Platoon: Consists of two to three squads and up to 36 soldiers led by a first lieutenant or second lieutenant. Squad / Section: Consists of two teams and four to ten soldiers led by a staff sergeant. Team: Consists of four soldiers and led by a sergeant or corporal. Marine Corps[edit] Main article: United States Marine Corps Eagle, Globe, and Anchor The United States Marine Corps (USMC) is the maritime land force service branch of the United States Armed Forces and part of the civilian-led Department of the Navy, which is led by the Secretary of the Navy. The military head of the U.S. Marine Corps is the commandant of the Marine Corps, who is assisted by the assistant commandant of the Marine Corps and sergeant major of the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps was founded on 10 November 1775 as the Continental Marines and disbanded in 1783, before being reestablished as the United States Marine Corps on 11 July 1789.[29] U.S. Marines with India Company, Battalion Landing Team, 3rd Battalion, 2nd Marine Regiment, 22nd Marine Expeditionary Unit run on the beach during an amphibious assault demonstration. The Marine Corps is responsible for amphibious warfare and expeditionary warfare operations, having a very close relationship with its coequal sister service, the United States Navy. The U.S. Marine Corps is composed of the Regular Marine Corps and the United States Marine Corps Reserve. The central unit of the Marine Corps is a Marine Air-Ground Task Force, which consist of a command element, ground combat element, aviation combat element, and logistics combat element. The Marine Corps is divided in the Fleet Marine Force and the Supporting Establishment. The Fleet Marine Force includes: United States Marine Corps Forces Command / Fleet Marine Force, Atlantic: Conducts operations in the Atlantic, Europe, and Africa. Fleet Marine Force, Atlantic under the command of United States Fleet Forces Command. United States Marine Corps Forces, Pacific / Fleet Marine Force, Pacific: Conducts operations in the Pacific and Middle East. Fleet Marine Force, Pacific under the command of United States Pacific Fleet. A U.S. Marine Corps MV-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft attached to VMX-22 prepares to land on the amphibious assault ship USS America (LHA-6) in the Pacific Ocean. The U.S. Marine Corps' Marine Air-Ground Task Force structure is broken into several levels under the Fleet Marine Force:[30] Marine Expeditionary Force: The largest type of Marine Air-Ground Task Force, consists of a marine division, air wing, and logistics group under a headquarters group and 20,000 to 90,000 marines and sailors commanded by a lieutenant general. The principal warfighting organization of the Marine Corps during larger crisis or contingencies, MEFs' are self-sufficient for 60 days.[31][32] Marine Expeditionary Brigade: The medium type of Marine Air-Ground task Force, consists of a reinforced infantry regiment, reinforced composite marine aircraft group, and task organized logistics combat regiment under a command element and 20,000 marines and sailors commanded by a brigadier general. Forward deployed MEUs provide an expeditionary force in readiness and are self-sufficient for 30 days.[31] Marine Expeditionary Unit: The light type of Marine Air-Ground task Force, consists of a reinforced infantry battalion, reinforced composite aviation squadron, and task organized combat logistics battalion command element and 2,600 marines and sailors commanded by a colonel. Forward deployed MEUs provide an expeditionary force in readiness, capable of commencing missions on a six-hour timeline and are self-sufficient for 15 days.[31] The U.S. Marine Corps' unit structure is broken into several subdivisions under the Fleet Marine Force:[30] Marine division / Marine aircraft wing: Consists of three marine regiments or marine aircraft groups and 6,561 marines commanded by a major general. Marine logistics group: Consists of three combat logistics regiments and commanded by a brigadier general. Marine regiment / Marine aircraft group: Consist of three or more marine battalions or marine aviation squadrons and 2,187 marines commanded by a colonel. Marine regiment / Marine aviation squadron: Consists of three or more companies or 24 aircraft and 729 marines commanded by a lieutenant colonel. Company: Consists of three or more platoons and 243 marines commanded by a Captain. Platoon: Consists of three squads and 27 marines commanded by a first lieutenant or second lieutenant. Squad / Section: Consists of three teams and nine marines led by a sergeant. Fire team: Consists of four marines led by a corporal. Navy[edit] Main article: United States Navy Logo of the United States Navy The United States Navy (USN) is the maritime service branch of the United States Armed Forces and part of the civilian-led Department of the Navy, which is led by the Secretary of the Navy. The military head of the U.S. Navy is the chief of naval operations, who is assisted by the vice chief of naval operations and master chief petty officer of the Navy. The Navy was founded on 13 October 1775 as the Continental Navy, which was disbanded on 1 August 1785 before being reestablished as the modern U.S. Navy on 20 January 1794.[33] The five enduring functions of the Navy are:[34] Sea control Power projection Deterrence Maritime security Sealift USS John C. Stennis (CVN-74) and Carrier Strike Group 3 underway with Republic of Korea Navy ships. The U.S. Navy is composed of the Regular Navy and United States Navy Reserve. The U.S. Navy is organized into eight navy component commands, which command operational forces, fifteen shore commands, which support the fleets' operating forces, five systems commands, which oversee the technical requirements of the Navy, and nine type commands, which administratively manage units of a certain type. USS Nebraska (SSBN-739), an Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine underway in the Atlantic Ocean. The navy component commands are:[35] United States Fleet Forces Command / United States Naval Forces Northern Command / United States Naval Forces Strategic Command: Conducts naval operations in North America as United States Northern Command's joint force maritime component and strategic deterrence operations as United States Strategic Command's joint force maritime component. United States Pacific Fleet: Conducts naval operations in the Pacific and Asia as United States Indo-Pacific Command's joint force maritime component. United States Naval Forces Central Command: Conducts Naval operations in the Middle East as United States Central Command's joint force maritime component. United States Naval Forces Southern Command: Conducts naval operations in South America as United States Southern Command's joint force maritime component. United States Naval Forces Europe-Africa: Conducts naval operations in Europe and Africa as United States European Command's and United States Africa Command's joint force maritime component. United States Fleet Cyber Command / United States Navy Space Command: Naval component to United States Cyber Command and United States Space Command. United States Naval Special Warfare Command: Commands the United States Navy SEALs and conducts special operations as United States Special Operations Command joint force maritime component. United States Navy Military Sealift Command: Conducts sealift operations as United States Transportation Command's joint force maritime component. The U.S. Navy's unit structure is broken into several subdivisions under the operating force:[35] Numbered fleet: Elements of navy component commands led by vice admirals Task force: Scalable organization that is responsible to the fleet commander for assigned units and functions. Task group: An individual carrier strike group, amphibious ready group, surface strike group within a given fleet. Task unit: Units operating together for a specific task, such as air defense units within a carrier strike group. Task element: Individual units within a task unit. The U.S. Navy's unit structure is broken into several subdivisions under the type command structure. For Naval Air Forces:[35] Carrier air wing / Wing: Consists of four strike fighter squadrons, one electronic attack squadron, one carrier airborne early warning squadron, on helicopter sea combat squadron, one helicopter maritime strike squadron, and one fleet logistic support squadron under the command of a captain. Squadron: Consists of several aircraft under the command of a commander. Air Force[edit] Main article: United States Air Force United States Air Force Symbol The United States Air Force (USAF) is the air service branch of the United States Armed Forces and part of the civilian-led Department of the Air Force, which is led by the Secretary of the Air Force. The military head of the U.S. Air Force is the chief of staff of the Air Force, who is assisted by the vice chief of staff of the United States Air Force and chief master sergeant of the Air Force. It achieved independence on 18 September 1947 from the U.S. Army, but directly traces its history through the United States Army Air Forces, United States Army Air Corps, United States Army Air Service, the Division of Military Aeronautics, Aviation Section, U.S. Signal Corps, to the birth of Aeronautical Division, U.S. Signal Corps on 1 August 1907. F-22A Raptors in flight. The five core missions of the Air Force are:[36] Air superiority Global integrated intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance Rapid global mobility Global strike Command and control The U.S. Air Force is composed of the Regular Air Force, United States Air Force Reserve, and United States Air National Guard. The U.S. Air Force is organized into nine major commands, which conduct the majority of the service's organize, train, and equip functions and command forces attached to the combatant commands.[37] U.S. Air Force B-2A Spirit stealth bombers flying with Royal Air Force F-35B Lightning II stealth fighters. The Air Force's major commands are: Air Combat Command: Provides fighter, attack, intelligence, cyber, combat rescue, and air force ground forces to combatant commanders. Air Education and Training Command: Recruits, educates, and trains airmen and develops Air Force doctrine Air Force Global Strike Command: Operates the Air Force's strategic bomber and intercontinental ballistic missile forces as United States Strategic Command's joint force air component. Air Force Materiel Command: Develops, maintains, and acquires systems and materiel. Air Force Reserve Command: Manages Air Force reserve forces. Air Force Special Operations Command: Conducts special operations with aviation and Special Tactics Commandos as United States Special Operations Commmand's joint force air component. Air Mobility Command: Conducts airlift and air refueling operations as United States Transportation Command's joint force air component. Pacific Air Forces: Conducts air operations as United States Indo-Pacific Commands joint force air component. United States Air Forces in Europe - Air Forces Africa: Conducts air operations as United States European Command's and United States Africa Command's joint force air component. The U.S. Air Force's field structure is broken into several subdivisions under its major commands:[38] Numbered air force / Named air force: Consists of multiple wings with a geographic or functional assignment commanded by a general or lieutenant general. Wing: Consists of two or more groups commanded by a brigadier general or colonel. Wings typically contain an operations group, maintenance group, mission support group, and a medical group. There are two types of wings: composite wings or objective wings. Composite wings operate more than one kind of aircraft and may be designated as self-contained units designed for quick air intervention anywhere in the world. Objective wings are based on a single purpose, such as an operational, air base, or specialized mission. Group: Consists of two or more squadrons whose mission are similar or complementary commanded by a colonel. Squadron: Consist of two or more flights commanded by a lieutenant colonel or major. Flight: Consists of individual airmen, sections, or shops commanded by a captain. Element / Section: Consists of two or more airmen led by a staff sergeant or senior airman. Space Force[edit] Main article: United States Space Force Space Force Delta The United States Space Force (USSF) is the space service branch of the United States Armed Forces and part of the civilian-led Department of the Air Force, which is led by the Secretary of the Air Force. The military head of the U.S. Space Force is the chief of space operations, who is assisted by the vice chief of space operations and senior enlisted advisor of the Space Force. It achieved independence on 20 December 2019 from the U.S. Air Force, but directly traces its history through Air Force Space Command to 1 September 1982, with even earlier history traced to the Western Development Division established on 1 July 1954. The Sodium Guidestar at the Directed Energy Directorate's Starfire Optical Range for real-time, high-fidelity tracking and imaging of satellites. The five core competencies of the Space Force are:[39] Space security Combat power projection Space mobility and logistics Information mobility Space domain awareness Boeing X-37B spaceplane after deorbiting and landing. The U.S. Space Force is composed of the Regular Space Force, not yet having organized a reserve component outside of the Air Force. The Space Force is organized into one field command and one center, with the intent to fully organize into three field commands, activating Space Systems Command to replace the Space and Missile Systems Center and Space Training and Readiness Command to institutionalize its training, education, and doctrine development.[40] The Space Force's field command and center is: Space Operations Command: Conducts space, cyber, and intelligence operations as primary service component to United States Space Command. Space and Missile Systems Center: Conducts research, development, acquisitions, and sustainment of Space Force systems. The Space Force's field structure is broken into several subdivisions under its field commands:[40] Delta / Garrison / Wing : Consists of two or more squadrons, or attached Air Force mission support and medical groups for garrisons and wings and a Space Force operations group for wings as well, commanded by a brigadier general or colonel. Deltas are responsible for executing a specific mission, while garrisons are responsible for installations support and management. Space Force wings are a legacy organizational structure inherited from the Air Force that manage a singular base and mission under one organization and are being phased out in favor of deltas and garrisons. Operations group: Consists of two or more squadrons whose mission are similar or complementary commanded by a colonel. Space Force operations groups are a legacy organizational structure inherited from the Air Force wing structure and are being phased out and replaced with deltas. Squadron: Consist of two or more flights commanded by a lieutenant colonel. Flight / Crew: Consists of individual guardians commanded by a captain, first lieutenant, or second lieutenant. Coast Guard[edit] Main article: United States Coast Guard Service mark of the United States Coast Guard The United States Coast Guard (USCG) is the maritime security, search and rescue, and law enforcement service branch of the United States Armed Forces and part of the Department of Homeland Security, which is led by the Secretary of Homeland Security. It is the only military branch outside the Department of Defense, but can be transferred to the civilian-led Department of the Navy, which is led by the Secretary of the Navy, in the case that congress stipulates that when declaring war or the president directs.[41] The military head of the U.S. Coast Guard is the commandant of the Coast Guard, who is assisted by the vice commandant of the Coast Guard and master chief petty officer of the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard was founded as a military service branch on 4 August 1790 as the United States Revenue-Marine, before being renamed on 31 July 1894 as the United States Revenue Cutter Service. On 28 January 1915 it was merged with the civilian United States Life-Saving Service to form the United States Coast Guard. In 1939, the civilian United States Lighthouse Service was merged into the Coast Guard. The Revenue-Marine, and later the Coast Guard, were organized under the Department of the Treasury, transferring to the Department of the Navy during World War I and World War II. In 1967 it was transferred to the Department of Transportation, where it would reside until 2003 when it was permanently transferred to the Department of Homeland Security. USCGC Bertholf underway. The eleven missions of the Coast Guard are:[42] Port and waterway security Drug interdiction Aids to navigation Search and rescue Living marine resources Marine safety Defense readiness Migrant interdiction Marine environmental protection Ice operations Law enforcement The U.S. Coast Guard is composed of the Regular Coast Guard and United States Coast Guard Reserve. The U.S. Coast Guard is organized into two area commands.[43] Coast Guard Atlantic Area: Conducts Coast Guard operations in the Atlantic Ocean and central United States. Coast Guard Pacific Area: Conducts Coast Guard operations in the Pacific Ocean. Combatant commands[edit] Main article: Unified combatant command Unified combatant commands areas of responsibility Unified combatant commands are joint military commands consisting of forces from multiple military departments, with their chain of command flowing from the president, to the secretary of defense, to the commanders of the combatant commands. There are eleven unified combatant commands that come in two types. Geographic commands, such as Africa, Central, European, Indo-Pacific, Northern, Southern and Space commands are responsible for planning and operations in a certain geographic area. Functional commands, such as Cyber, Special Operations, Strategic, and Transportation commands are responsible for a functional activity that crosses geographic boundaries. Each service organizes, trains, and equips forces that are then presented to the unified combatant commands through service component commands. Special Operations Command and Cyber Command also present theater special operations commands or joint force headquarters – cyber to other combatant commanders. Army or Marine Corps components are typically duel hatted as the joint force land component, Navy components are typically duel hatted as the joint force maritime component, and Air Force components are typically duel hatted as the joint force air component, with the theater special operations command duel hatted as the joint force special operations component, and Space Force component sometimes duel hatted as the joint force space component.[44] Geographic[edit] Africa Command[edit] Main article: United States Africa Command Seal of United States Africa Command United States Africa Command (USAFRICOM or AFRICOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations in Africa, except for Egypt, which is under United States Central Command. Africa Command is headquartered in Kelley Barracks, Stuttgart, Germany. Africa Command was created due to the rising strategic importance of Africa, and to harmonize military eff in Africa with the United States Department of State and other U.S. agencies, activated on 1 October 2007 as a sub-unified command of United States European Command, beortsfore becoming an independent combatant command on 1 October 2008. Prior to the establishment of United States Africa Command, military operations on the continent were the responsibility of United States European Command for North Africa, West Africa, and Southern Africa, United States Central Command for East Africa, and United States Pacific Command for the Indian Ocean and African islands off the coast.[45] United States Africa Command includes one combined joint task force: Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa: conducts combined (multinational) and joint (multiservice) operations in the Horn of Africa United States Africa Command's service components are: Army United States Army Africa Ninth United States Army Southern European Task Force[46] Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Africa Navy United States Naval Forces Africa United States Sixth Fleet Air Force United States Air Forces Africa Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command Africa Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Army[47] Central Command[edit] Main article: United States Central Command Seal of United States Central Command United States Central Command (USCENTCOM or CENTCOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations in the Middle East, Central Asia, and parts of South Asia, except for Israel, which is under United States European Command. Central Command is headquartered in MacDill Air Force Base, Tampa, Florida, with a forward headquarters at Al Udeid Air Base, Qatar. Central Command was established on 1 January 1983, growing out of United States Readiness Command's Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force, which itself was established on 1 March 1980 . Prior to its establishment, military operations in the Middle East were the responsibility of United States European Command, and before that United States Strike Command.[48] United States Central Command includes two subordinate units: Combined Joint Task Force – Operation Inherent Resolve: conducts combined (multinational) and joint (multiservice) operations against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. United States Forces – Afghanistan: United States component to NATO's Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan. United States Central Command's service components are: Army United States Army Central Combined Force Land Component Command Marine Corps United States Marine Forces Central Command Navy United States Naval Forces Central Command United States Fifth Fleet Air Force Ninth Air Force United States Air Forces Central Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command Central Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Army[47] European Command[edit] Main article: United States European Command Seal of United States European Command United States European Command (USEUCOM or EUCOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations in Europe, Russia, Greenland, and Israel. European Command is headquartered in Patch Barracks, Stuttgart, German, and shares a commander with NATO Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe. European Command was established on 1 August 1952.[49] United States European Command's service components are: Army United States Army Europe Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Europe Navy United States Naval Forces Europe United States Sixth Fleet Air Force United States Air Forces in Europe Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command Europe Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Air Force[47] Indo-Pacific Command[edit] Main article: United States Indo-Pacific Command Seal of United States Indo-Pacific Command United States Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM or INDOPACOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations in the Pacific, Asia, India, and Antarctica. Indo-Pacific Command is headquartered in Camp H. M. Smith, Oahu, Hawaii. Indo-Pacific Command was established on 1 January 1947 as United States Pacific Command, assuming the responsibilities of United States Far East Command and Alaskan Command on 1 July 1957. It was renamed on 30 May 2018 in recognition of the increasing strategic importance of the Indian Ocean.[50] Indo-Pacific Command has two subordinate unified commands, two direct reporting units, and one standing joint task force: United States Forces Japan Army United States Army Japan I Corps (Forward) Marine Corps III Marine Expeditionary Force Navy United States Naval Forces Japan United States Seventh Fleet Air Force Fifth Air Force United States Forces Korea Army Eighth United States Army Marine Corps United States Marine Forces Korea Navy United States Naval Forces Korea United States Seventh Fleet Air Force Seventh Air Force (Air Forces Korea) Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command Korea Joint Intelligence Operations Center Pacific Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance Joint Interagency Task Force West United States Indo-Pacific Command's service components are: Army United States Army Pacific Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Pacific Navy United States Pacific Fleet Air Force Pacific Air Forces Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command Pacific Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Fleet Cyber Command[51] Northern Command[edit] Main article: United States Northern Command Seal of United States Northern Command United States Northern Command (USNORTHCOM or NORTHCOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations and the defense of North America. Northern Command is headquartered in Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado and shares a commander and some staff with the combined U.S.–Canadian North American Aerospace Defense Command. Northern Command was established on 1 October 2002 in direct response to the 9/11 Attacks.[52] Northern Command has one sub-unified command and three joint task forces: Alaskan Command Army United States Army Alaska Navy United States Naval Forces Alaska Air Force Eleventh Air Force Joint Force Headquarters National Capital Region Army United States Army Military District of Washington Marine Corps Marine Corps National Capital Region Command Navy Naval District Washington Air Force Air Force District of Washington Coast Guard Coast Guard Fifth District Joint Task Force – Civil Support Joint Task Force North United States Northern Command's service components are: Army United States Army North Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces North Navy United States Naval Forces Northern Command Air Force First Air Force Air Forces Northern Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command North Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Army[47] Southern Command[edit] Main article: United States Southern Command Seal of United States Southern Command United States Southern Command (USSOUTHCOM or SOUTHCOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations in Central America, the Caribbean, and South America. Southern Command is headquartered in Doral, Florida. Southern Command was established on 11 June 1963, replacing Caribbean Command.[53] Southern Command has three joint task forces: Joint Task Force Bravo Joint Task Force Guantanamo Joint Interagency Task Force South United States Southern Command's service components are: Army United States Army South Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces South Navy United States Naval Forces Southern Command United States Fourth Fleet Air Force Twelfth Air Force Air Forces Southern Special Operations Command: United States Special Operations Command South Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Fleet Cyber Command[47] Space Command[edit] Main article: United States Space Command Seal of United States Space Command United States Space Command (USSPACECOM or SPACECOM) is the geographic combatant command responsible for United States military operations in outerspace. Space Command is headquartered in Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado. Space Command was reestablished on 29 August 2019, being first established as a unified combatant command on 23 September 1985 before being inactivated on 1 October 2002 and having space activities folded into Strategic Command. While at strategic command, space operations were handled by the Joint Force Space Component Command, Joint Functional Component Command for Space, and Joint Space Operations. United States Space Command has one subordinate combined command and one joint task force: Combined Force Space Component Command Joint Task Force–Space Defense United States Space Command's service components are: Army United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Space Command Navy United States Navy Space Command Air Force First Air Force Space Force Space Operations Command Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Air Force Functional[edit] Cyber Command[edit] Main article: United States Cyber Command Seal of United States Cyber Command United States Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM or CYBERCOM) is the functional combatant command responsible for United States military operations in cyberspace. Cyber Command is headquartered in Fort George G. Meade, Maryland, sharing leadership, personnel, and resources with the National Security Agency and Central Security Service. Cyber Command was established on 21 May 2010 as a sub-unified command under United States Strategic Command, becoming an independent combatant command on 4 May 2018. Cyber Command traces its history through Strategic Command's Joint Functional Component Command – Network Warfare, Joint Task Force – Global Network Operations, Joint Task Force–Computer Network Operations, to Space Command's Joint Task Force–Computer Network Defense on 1 December 1998. Prior to the establishment of Cyber Command, cyber operations were the responsibility of Strategic Command, and before that Space Command. Cyber Command supports the other combatant commands by providing Joint Force Headquarters–Cyber elements.[54] United States Cyber Command's service components are: Army United States Army Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Army Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Cyberspace Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Marines[55] Navy United States Fleet Cyber Command United States Tenth Fleet Joint Force Headquarters – Fleet Cyber Command Air Force Sixteenth Air Force Air Forces Cyber Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Air Force Special Operations Command[edit] Main article: United States Special Operations Command Seal of United States Special Operations Command United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM or SOCOM) is the functional combatant command responsible for United States military special operations. Special Operations Command is headquartered in MacDill Air Force Base, Florida. Special Operations Command was established on 16 April 1987. United States Special Operations Command has one subordinate component command and seven theater special operations commands: Joint Special Operations Command Army 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta Intelligence Support Activity Regimental Reconnaissance Company Navy Naval Special Warfare Development Group Air Force 24th Special Tactics Squadron Joint Joint Communications Unit Theater Commands: United States Special Operations Command Africa United States Special Operations Command Central United States Special Operations Command Europe United States Special Operations Command Korea United States Special Operations Command Pacific United States Special Operations Command North United States Special Operations Command South United States Special Operations Command's service components are: Army United States Army Special Operations Command Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command Navy United States Navy Special Warfare Command Air Force Air Force Special Operations Command Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Marines Strategic Command[edit] Main article: United States Strategic Command Seal of United States Strategic Command United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM or STRATCOM) is the functional combatant command responsible for United States military nuclear and missile defense operations. Strategic Command is headquartered in Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska. Strategic Command was established on 1 June 1992, replacing the specified command function of Strategic Air Command.[56] United States Strategic Command's service components are: Army United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command Joint Functional Component Command for Integrated Missile Defense Marine Corps United States Marine Corps Forces Strategic Command Navy United States Naval Forces Strategic Command Air Force Air Force Global Strike Command Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Air Force Transportation Command[edit] Main article: United States Transportation Command Seal of United States Transportation Command United States Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM or TRANSCOM) is the functional combatant command responsible for United States military mobility and transport operations. Transportation Command is headquartered in Scott Air Force Base, Illinois. Strategic Command was established on 1 July 1987, replacing the specified command function of Strategic Air Command.[57] United States Transportation Command has one subordinate command and a reserve unit that are direct reporting elements:[58] Joint Enabling Capabilities Command Joint Planning Support Element Joint Communications Support Element (Airborne) Joint Transportation Reserve Unit United States Transportation Command's service components are: Army Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command Navy Military Sealift Command Air Force Air Mobility Command Cyber Command Joint Force Headquarters – Cyber Air Force Budget[edit] Main article: Military budget of the United States A pie chart showing global military expenditures by country for 2018, in US$ billions, according to SIPRI The United States has the world's largest military budget. In the fiscal year 2019, $693 billion in funding were enacted for the DoD and for "Overseas Contingency Operations" in the War on Terrorism.[16] Outside of direct DoD spending, the United States spends another $218 to $262 billion each year on other defense-related programs, such as Veterans Affairs, Homeland Security, nuclear weapons maintenance and DoD. In FY2016 $146.9 billion was allocated for the Department of the Army, $168.8 billion for the Department of the Navy, $161.8 billion for the Department of the Air Force, and $102.8 billion for DoD-wide spending.[59] By function, $138.6 billion was requested for personnel, $244.4 billion for operations and maintenance, $118.9 billion for procurement, $69.0 billion for research and development, $1.3 billion for revolving and management funds, $6.9 billion for military construction, and $1.3 billion for family housing.[59] Personnel[edit] The U.S. Armed Forces is the world's third largest military by active personnel, after the Chinese's People's Liberation Army and the Indian Armed Forces, consisting of 1,359,685 servicemembers in the regular armed forces with an additional 799,845 servicemembers in the reserves as of 28 February 2019.[60] While the United States Armed Forces is an all-volunteer military, conscription through the Selective Service System can be enacted at the president's request and Congress' approval, with all males ages 18 through 25 who are living in the United States are required to register with the Selective Service.[61] Although the constitutionality of registering only males for Selective Service was challenged by federal district court in 2019, its legality was upheld by a federal appeals court in 2020.[62] As in most militaries, members of the U.S. Armed Forces hold a rank, either that of officer, warrant officer or enlisted, to determine seniority and eligibility for promotion. Those who have served are known as veterans. Rank names may be different between services, but they are matched to each other by their corresponding paygrade.[63] Officers who hold the same rank or paygrade are distinguished by their date of rank to determine seniority, while officers who serve in certain positions of office of importance set by law, outrank all other officers in active duty of the same rank and paygrade, regardless of their date of rank.[64] In 2012, it was reported that only one in four persons in the United States of the proper age meet the moral, academic and physical standards for military service.[65] Personnel by service[edit] February 2018 Demographic Reports and end strengths for reserve components.[59][66][67][68][69][70] Component Military Enlisted Officer Male Female Civilian  U.S. Army 471,513 376,206 90,785 465,784 69,345 299,644  U.S. Marine Corps 184,427 163,092 21,335 181,845 15,551 20,484  U.S. Navy 325,802 267,286 54,114 265,852 62,168 179,293  U.S. Air Force 320,811 255,605 61,054 270,462 50,750 174,754  U.S. Space Force 2,501 2,411 90  U.S. Coast Guard 42,042 32,782 8,239 Total active 1,347,106 1,137,916 236,826 1,219,510 210,485 681,232 Army National Guard 336,879 291,865 45,014 U.S. Army Reserve 190,699 153,064 37,635 U.S. Marine Corps Reserve 38,473 34,079 4,394 U.S. Navy Reserve 57,650 43,596 14,054 Air National Guard 106,549 91,274 15,275 Air Force Reserve 68,216 54,658 13,558 U.S. Coast Guard Reserve 6,142 5,086 1,056 Total reserves 807,562 673,622 130,986 Other DoD personnel 108,833 Locations[edit] Main article: United States military deployments Overseas[edit] See also: United States military presence in other countries As of 31 December 2010, U.S. Armed Forces troops were stationed in 150 countries; the number of non-contingent deployments per country ranges from 1 in Suriname to over 50,000 in Germany.[71] Some of the largest deployments are: 103,700 in Afghanistan, 52,440 in Germany (see list), 35,688 in Japan (USFJ), 28,500 in South Korea (USFK), 9,660 in Italy and 9,015 in the United Kingdom. These numbers change frequently due to the regular recall and deployment of units. U.S. global military presence Altogether, 77,917 military personnel are located in Europe, 141 in the former Soviet Union, 47,236 in East Asia and the Pacific, 3,362 in North Africa, the Near East and South Asia, 1,355 in sub-Saharan Africa and 1,941 in the Western Hemisphere excluding the United States itself. Domestic[edit] Including U.S. territories and ships afloat within territorial waters As of 31 December 2009, a total of 1,137,568 personnel were on active duty within the United States and its territories (including 84,461 afloat).[72] The vast majority (941,629 personnel) were stationed at bases within the contiguous United States. There were an additional 37,245 in Hawaii and 20,450 in Alaska while 84,461 were at sea, 2,972 in Guam and 179 in Puerto Rico. Rank structure[edit] Rank in the United States Armed Forces is split into three distinct categories: officers, warrant officers, and enlisted personnel. Officers are the leadership of the military, holding commissions from the president of the United States and confirmed to their rank by the Senate. Warrant officers hold a warrant from the secretaries of the military departments, serving as specialist in certain military technologies and capabilities. Upon promotion to chief warrant officer 2, they gain a commission from the president of the United States. Enlisted personnel comprise the majority of the armed forces, serving as specialists and tactical-level leaders until they become senior non-commissioned officers or senior petty officers. Military ranks across the services can be compared by U.S. Uniformed Services pay grade or NATO rank code.[73] Officer corps[edit] Uniformed Services pay grade Officer candidate O-1 O-2 O-3 O-4 O-5 O-6 O-7 O-8 O-9 O-10 Special grade NATO code OF(D) OF-1 OF-2 OF-3 OF-4 OF-5 OF-6 OF-7 OF-8 OF-9 OF-10 Insignia Various  United States Army Cadet / Officer candidate Second lieutenant First lieutenant Captain Major Lieutenant colonel Colonel Brigadier general Major general Lieutenant general General General of the Army  United States Marine Corps Midshipman / Officer candidate Second lieutenant First lieutenant Captain Major Lieutenant colonel Colonel Brigadier general Major general Lieutenant general General Not established  United States Navy Midshipman / Officer candidate Ensign Lieutenant (junior grade)  Lieutenant  Lieutenant commander Commander Captain Rear admiral (lower half) Rear admiral Vice admiral Admiral Fleet admiral  United States Air Force Cadet / Officer trainee Second lieutenant First lieutenant Captain Major Lieutenant colonel Colonel Brigadier general Major general Lieutenant general General General of the Air Force  United States Space Force Cadet / Officer trainee Second lieutenant First lieutenant Captain Major Lieutenant colonel Colonel Brigadier general Major general Lieutenant general General Not established  United States Coast Guard Cadet / Officer candidate Ensign Lieutenant (junior grade) Lieutenant Lieutenant commander Commander Captain Rear admiral (lower half) Rear admiral Vice admiral Admiral Not established The United States Air Force Academy commissioned the first 86 U.S. Space Force officers on 18 April 2020 from the members of the class of 2020. Officers represent the top 18% of the armed forces, serving in leadership and command roles.[74] Officers are divided into three categories:[73] O-1 to O-3: Company grade officers in the Army, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force or junior officers in the Navy. O-4 to O-6: Field grade officers in the Army, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force or mid-grade officers in the Navy and Coast Guard. O-7 to O-10: General officers in the Army, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force or flag officers in the Navy and Coast Guard. Graduation of the class of 2009 at the United States Military Academy at West Point. Graduation of the class of 2011 at the United States Naval Academy. Officers are typically commissioned as second lieutenants or ensigns with a bachelor's degree after several years of training and education or directly commissioning from civilian life into a specific specialty, such as a medical professional, lawyer, chaplain, or cyber specialist.[75][76] The three primary commissioning routes include: United States service academies: Four-year military college that provides academic, military, physical, and leadership training. United States Military Academy at West Point: Commissions officers into the United States Army. United States Naval Academy: Commissions officers into the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps. United States Air Force Academy: Commissions officers into the United States Air Force and United States Space Force. United States Coast Guard Academy: Commissions officers into the United States Coast Guard. United States Merchant Marine Academy: Commissions officers into the United States Navy Reserve. Reserve Officer Training Corps: Part time military program at traditional colleges. Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps: Commissions officers into the United States Army. Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps: Commissions officers into the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps. Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps: Commissions officers into the United States Air Force and United States Space Force. Officer candidate school: Shortened military training for civilians or enlisted personnel who already possess a bachelor's degree. Army Officer Candidate School: Commissions officers into the United States Army. Marine Corps Officer Candidate School: Commissions officers into the United States Marine Corps. Navy Officer Candidate School: Commissions officers into the United States Navy. Air Force Officer Training School: Commissions officers into the United States Air Force and United States Space Force. Coast Guard Officer Candidate School: Commissions officers into the United States Coast Guard. United States Air Force pilot officers walk to their F-15 fighter jets prior to take off. General of the Air Force Hap Arnold, the only individual to hold two five-star ranks in two different services. Throughout their careers, officers continue professional military education throughout their careers, typically before major milestones.[77] Professional military education institutions across the services and armed forces include: National Defense University National War College Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy Joint Forces Staff College Defense Acquisition University United States Army War College United States Army Command and General Staff College Marine Corps University Marine Corps War College Naval War College Naval Postgraduate School: Run by the United States Navy for the entire armed forces. Air University: For United States Air Force and United States Space Force officers. Air War College Air Command and Staff College Squadron Officer School Air Force Institute of Technology During a time of war, officers may be promoted to five-star ranks, with general of the Army, fleet admiral, and general of the Air Force the only five-star ranks currently authorized.[78] Warrant officer corps[edit] Uniformed Services pay grade W-1 W-2 W-3 W-4 W-5 NATO code WO-1 WO-2 WO-3 WO-4 WO-5  United States Army Warrant officer one   Chief warrant officer two   Chief warrant officer three   Chief warrant officer four   Chief warrant officer five    United States Marine Corps Warrant officer one   Chief warrant officer two   Chief warrant officer three   Chief warrant officer four   Chief warrant officer five    United States Navy Warrant officer one   Chief warrant officer two   Chief warrant officer three   Chief warrant officer four   Chief warrant officer five    United States Air Force Warrant officer one   Inactive Chief warrant officer two   Inactive Chief warrant officer three   Inactive Chief warrant officer four   Inactive Chief warrant officer five   Inactive  United States Space Force Not established Not established Not established Not established Not established  United States Coast Guard Warrant officer one   Inactive Chief warrant officer two   Chief warrant officer three   Chief warrant officer four   Not established Warrant officers are specialists, comprising only 8% of the officer corps.[74] Warrant officers hold warrants from their service secretary and are specialists and experts in certain military technologies or capabilities. The lowest-ranking warrant officers serve under a warrant, but they receive commissions from the president upon promotion to chief warrant officer 2. They derive their authority from the same source as commissioned officers but remain specialists, in contrast to commissioned officers, who are generalists. There are no warrant officers in the Air Force or Space Force.[73] Warrant officers are typically non-commissioned officers before being selected, with the exception of the Army Aviation where any enlisted grade can apply for a warrant. Army Warrant officers attend the Army Warrant Officer Candidate School.[79] Enlisted corps[edit] Uniformed Services pay grade E-1 E-2 E-3 E-4 E-5 E-6 E-7 E-8 E-9 NATO code OR-1 OR-2 OR-3 OR-4 OR-5 OR-6 OR-7 OR-8 OR-9  United States Army No insignia No insignia yet Private  Private  Private first class  Specialist  Corporal  Sergeant  Staff sergeant  Sergeant first class  Master sergeant  First sergeant  Sergeant major  Command sergeant major  Senior enlisted advisor to the chief of the National Guard Bureau  Sergeant Major of the Army  Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman  United States Marine Corps No insignia No insignia yet Private  Private first class  Lance corporal  Corporal  Sergeant  Staff sergeant  Gunnery sergeant Master sergeant  First sergeant  Master gunnery sergeant Sergeant major  Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps  Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman  United States Navy No insignia No insignia yet Seaman recruit  Seaman apprentice  Seaman  Petty officer third class  Petty officer second class  Petty officer first class  Chief petty officer  Senior chief petty officer  Command senior chief petty officer  Master chief petty officer  Command master chief petty officer  Fleet master chief petty officer or  Force master chief petty officer Master chief petty officer of the Navy  Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman  United States Air Force No insignia Airman basic  Airman  Airman first class  Senior airman  Staff sergeant  Technical sergeant  Master sergeant  First sergeant  Senior master sergeant  First sergeant  Chief master sergeant  First sergeant  Command chief master sergeant  Senior enlisted advisor to the chief of the National Guard Bureau Chief master sergeant of the Air Force  Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman  United States Space Force No insignia Specialist 1  Specialist 2  Specialist 3  Specialist 4  Sergeant  Technical sergeant  Master sergeant  First sergeant  Senior master sergeant  First sergeant  Chief master sergeant  First sergeant  Command chief master sergeant  Chief master sergeant of the Space Force  Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman  United States Coast Guard No insignia yet Seaman recruit  Seaman apprentice  Seaman  Petty officer third class  Petty officer second class  Petty officer first class  Chief petty officer  Senior chief petty officer  Master chief petty officer  Command master chief petty officer  Deputy master chief petty officer of the Coast Guard or Other senior enlisted leaders[80] Master chief petty officer of the Coast Guard  Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman Air Force basic trainees in a base defense exercise at Air Force Basic Military Training. Enlisted personnel consist of 82% of the armed forces, serving as specialists and tactical leaders.[74] Enlisted personnel are divided into three categories: E-1 to E-3/4: Junior enlisted personnel, usually in initial training or at their first assignment. E-1 to E-3 in the Marine Corps, Navy, and Coast Guard and E-1 to E-4 in the Army, Air Force, and Space Force. In the Army, specialist (E-4) are considered to be junior enlisted, while corporals (E-4) are non-commissioned officers. E-4/5 to E-6: Non-commissioned officers in the Army, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force and petty officers in the Navy and Coast Guard. In the Air Force and Space Force, staff sergeant (E-5) is the first non-commissioned officer rank. Non-commissioned officers and petty officers are responsible for tactical leadership. E-7 to E-9: Senior non-commissioned officers in the Army, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Space Force and chief petty officers in the Navy and Coast Guard. Serve as senior enlisted advisors to officers. The rank of senior enlisted advisor is the highest rank in each service, serving as the primary advisors to their service secretary and service chief on enlisted matters. Prior to entering their service, enlisted personnel must their service's basic training. In the Army, after completing Basic Combat Training recruits then go to advanced individual training for their military occupational specialty. In the Marine Corps, after completing Recruit Training, marines attend the School of Infantry, going to the Infantry Training Battalion for infantry marines, with non-infantry marines completing Marine Combat Training before advancing to technical training for their military occupational specialty. In the Navy, after completing Recruit Training, sailors advance to their "A" schools to complete training for their rating. In the Air Force and Space Force, recruits complete combined Basic Military Training before going to technical training for their Air Force Specialty Codes. In the Coast Guard, after completing Recruit Training, sailors advance to their "A" schools to complete training for their rating. Women in the armed forces[edit] Further information: Women in the United States military From 2005, the first all female C-130 Hercules crew to fly a combat mission for the U.S. Air Force[81] The Woman's Army Auxiliary Corps was established in the United States in 1942. Women saw combat during World War II, first as nurses in the Pearl Harbor attacks on 7 December 1941. The Woman's Naval Reserve, Marine Corps Women's Reserve, US Coast Guard Women's Reserve, and Women Airforce Service Pilots (WASPs) were also created during this conflict.[citation needed] In 1944, WACs arrived in the Pacific and landed in Normandy on D-Day. During the war, 67 Army nurses and 16 Navy nurses were captured and spent three years as Japanese prisoners of war. There were 350,000 American women who served during World War II and 16 were killed in action. In total, they gained over 1,500 medals, citations and commendations. Virginia Hall, serving with the Office of Strategic Services, received the second-highest U.S. combat award, the Distinguished Service Cross, for action behind enemy lines in France.[citation needed] After World War II, demobilization led to the vast majority of serving women being returned to civilian life. Law 625, The Women's Armed Services Act of 1948, was signed by President Truman, allowing women to serve in the U.S. Armed Forces in fully integrated units during peacetime, with only the WAC remaining a separate female unit. During the Korean War of 1950–1953, many women served in the Mobile Army Surgical Hospitals, with women serving in Korea numbering 120,000[dubious – discuss]during the conflict.[citation needed] During the Vietnam War, 600 women served in the country as part of the Air Force, along with 500 members of the WAC and over 6,000 medical personnel and support staff. The Ordnance Corps began accepting female missile technicians in 1974[82] and female crewmembers and officers were accepted into Field Artillery missile units.[83][84] Sergeant Leigh Ann Hester, awarded the Silver Star for direct combat In 1974, the first six women naval aviators earned their wings as Navy pilots. The congressionally mandated prohibition on women in combat places limitations on the pilots' advancement,[85] but at least two retired as captains.[86] In 1989, Captain Linda L. Bray, 29, became the first woman to command American soldiers in battle during the invasion of Panama. The 1991 Gulf War proved to be the pivotal time for the role of women in the U.S. Armed Forces to come to the attention of the world media; there are many reports of women engaging enemy forces during the conflict.[87] In the 2000s, women can serve on U.S. combat ships, including in command roles. They are permitted to serve on submarines.[88] Women can fly military aircraft and make up 2% of all pilots in the U.S. Military. In 2003, Major Kim Campbell was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for landing her combat damaged A-10 Thunderbolt II with no hydraulic control and only one functional engine after being struck by hostile fire over Baghdad.[citation needed] On 3 December 2015, U.S. defense secretary Ashton Carter announced that all military combat jobs would become available to women.[89] This gave women access to the roughly 10% of military jobs which were previously closed off due to their combat nature.[90] The decision gave military services until January 2016 to seek exceptions to the rule if they believe that certain jobs, such as machine gunners, should be restricted to men only.[91] These restrictions were due in part to prior studies which stated that mixed gender units are less capable in combat.[92] Physical requirements for all jobs remained unchanged, though.[92] Many women believe this will allow for them to improve their positions in the military, since most high-ranking officers start in combat positions. Since women are now available to work in any position in the military, female entry into the draft has been proposed.[93] Sergeant Leigh Ann Hester became the first woman to receive the Silver Star, the third-highest U.S. decoration for valor, for direct participation in combat. In Afghanistan, Monica Lin Brown was presented the Silver Star for shielding wounded soldiers with her body.[94] In March 2012, the U.S. military had two women, Ann E. Dunwoody and Janet C. Wolfenbarger, with the rank of four-star general.[95][96] In 2016, Air Force General Lori Robinson became the first female officer to command a major Unified Combatant Command (USNORTHCOM) in the history of the United States Armed Forces.[97] No woman has ever become a Navy SEAL. In 2017, a woman who wanted to become the first female Navy SEAL officer quit after one week into initial training.[98][99] Despite concerns of a gender gap, all personnel, both men and women at the same rank and time of service are compensated the same rate across all branches.[100] A study conducted by the RAND Corporation also suggests that women who make the military their career see an improved rate of promotion, as they climb through the military ranks at a faster rate.[101] As per the Department of Defense’s report on sexual assault within the U.S. Army for the fiscal year of 2019, 7,825 cases of sexual assault had been reported with the service members either victims or subjects of the assault. There has been a 3% increase in the number of cases as compared to the 2018 report.[102][103] Order of precedence[edit] Under Department of Defense regulation, the various components of the U.S. Armed Forces have a set order of seniority.[104] Examples of the use of this system include the display of service flags, and placement of soldiers, marines, sailors, airmen, guardians, and coast guardsmen in formation. Cadets, U.S. Military Academy Midshipmen, U.S. Naval Academy Cadets, U.S. Air Force Academy Cadets, U.S. Coast Guard Academy Midshipmen, U.S. Merchant Marine Academy United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Army National Guard United States Army Reserve United States Marine Corps Reserve United States Navy Reserve Air National Guard United States Air Force Reserve United States Coast Guard Reserve Other training and auxiliary organizations of the Army, Marine Corps, Merchant Marine, Civil Air Patrol, and Coast Guard Auxiliary, as in the preceding order. While the U.S. Navy is older than the Marine Corps,[105] the Marine Corps takes precedence due to previous inconsistencies in the Navy's birth date. The Marine Corps has recognized its observed birth date on a more consistent basis. The Second Continental Congress is considered to have established the Navy on 13 October 1775 by authorizing the purchase of ships, but did not actually pass the "Rules for the Regulation of the Navy of the United Colonies" until 27 November 1775.[106] The Marine Corps was established by an act of the Second Continental Congress on 10 November 1775. The Navy did not officially recognize 13 October 1775 as its birth date until 1972, when then–chief of naval operations Admiral Elmo Zumwalt authorized it to be observed as such.[105] The Coast Guard is normally situated after the Space Force, however in the event that it is moved to the Department of the Navy, its place in the order of precedence changes to being situated after the Navy and before the Air Force.[105] See also[edit] Awards and decorations of the United States Armed Forces Full-spectrum dominance List of active United States military aircraft List of currently active United States military land vehicles List of currently active United States military watercraft Military expression Military justice National Guard of the United States Provisional Army of the United States Public opinion of militaries Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance Sexual orientation and gender identity in the United States military State Defense Force Tricare – Health care plan for the U.S. uniformed services United States military casualties of war United States military veteran suicide Women in the United States Army Women in the United States Marine Corps Women in the United States Navy Women in the United States Air Force Women in the United States Space Force Women in the United States Coast Guard Notes[edit] ^ With the establishment of the Continental Army. ^ Maximum age for first-time enlistment is 35 for the Army,[1] 28 for the Marine Corps, 34 for the Navy, 39 for the Air Force[2] and 27 for the Coast Guard.[3] Citations[edit] ^ "United States Army". Goarmy.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 18 June 2013. ^ "Contact Us: Frequently Asked Questions - airforce.com". airforce.com. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. ^ "Plan Your Next Move to Become a Coast Guard Member". Enlisted Opportunities. U.S. Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 28 April 2014. Retrieved 27 April 2014. ^ "QUICK FACTS AND FIGURES". Selective Service System. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018. ^ "Number of births in the United States from 1990 to 2016 (in millions)". Statista. 2018. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018. ^ "ARMED FORCES STRENGTH FIGURES FOR DECEMBER 31, 2020". ^ IISS 2020, p. 46. sfn error: no target: CITEREFIISS2020 (help) ^ "National Defense Estimates for FY Budget2021" (PDF). United States Department of Defense. April 2020. ^ "Defence Expenditure of NATO Countries (2012-2019)" (PDF). NATO Public Diplomacy Division. 25 June 2019. Retrieved 18 July 2019. ^ As stated on the official U.S. Navy website Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine, "armed forces" is capitalized when preceded by "United States" or "U.S.". ^ 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(4) ^ "Trump Signs Law Establishing U.S. Space Force". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved 2019-12-21. ^ Note: The other two services being the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps and the NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps. ^ O’Sullivan, Michael; Subramanian, Krithika (2015-10-17). The End of Globalization or a more Multipolar World? (Report). Credit Suisse AG. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018. Retrieved 2017-07-14. ^ "2021 United States Military Strength". www.globalfirepower.com. Retrieved 2021-03-08. ^ a b "FY20 Green Book" (PDF). ^ "Department of Defense |Base Structure Report |FY 2015 Baselinedate=5 September 2015" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 18 October 2017. ^ "Coast Guard Organization and Administration, Chapter One". Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 7 October 2013. ^ "'15 Fascinating Facts You Never Learned About America' – Reader's digest". rd.com. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017. Retrieved 11 April 2017. ^ "Annual Aviation Inventory and Funding Plan Fiscal Years (FY) 2019-2048" (PDF). ^ "The US may soon have the world's first Space Force". Futurism. ^ https://twitter.com/SpaceForceDoD/status/1339737028414623744?s=20 ^ "Veterans Preference and "Wartime" Service". 15 August 2016. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018. ^ "United States Space Force Facebook Page". 2019-12-20. ^ "Time for the Coast Guard to Join the Joint Chiefs". U.S. Naval Institute. 1 August 2020. ^ https://armypubs.army.mil/epubs/DR_pubs/DR_a/pdf/web/ARN18008_ADP-1%20FINAL%20WEB.pdf ^ "Organization | The United States Army". Organization | The United States Army. ^ "Military Units: Army". U.S. Department of Defense. ^ "How the U.S. Marine Corps Was Founded Twice". Time. ^ a b "Military Units: Marine Corps". U.S. Department of Defense. ^ a b c "U.S. Marine Corps Concepts & Programs > Organization > MAGTF > Types of MAGTFs". www.candp.marines.mil. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. ^ "I Marine Expeditionary Force". www.globalsecurity.org. ^ "Reestablishment of the Navy, 1787-1801". public1.nhhcaws.local.[permanent dead link] ^ http://cimsec.org/naval-warfare-2010-2020-a-comparative-analysis/45129 ^ a b c "Military Units: Navy". U.S. Department of Defense. ^ http://www.airforcemag.com/DocumentFile/Documents/2015/Future_Operating_Concept.pdf ^ https://www.airforcemag.com/PDF/MagazineArchive/Magazine%20Documents%2F2013%2FMay%202013%2F0513MC_RC.pdf ^ "Military Units: Air Force". U.S. Department of Defense. ^ "Space Force releases 1st doctrine, defines "spacepower" as distinct form of military power". United States Space Force. ^ a b "Space Force begins transition into field organizational structure". United States Space Force. ^ "14 U.S. Code § 103 - Department in which the Coast Guard operates". LII / Legal Information Institute. ^ "USCG: A Multi-Mission Force | GoCoastGuard.com". www.gocoastguard.com. ^ "United States Coast Guard > Units > Organization". www.uscg.mil. ^ https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/pubs/jp1_ch1.pdf ^ "History of U.S. Africa Command". www.africom.mil. ^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ a b c d e "All Cyber Mission Force Teams Achieve Initial Operating Capability". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. ^ https://csis-website-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/legacy_files/files/media/csis/pubs/uscentcom3%5B1%5D.pdf ^ "History of USEUCOM". www.eucom.mil. ^ "History of United States Indo-Pacific Command". pacom.mil. ^ "All Cyber Mission Force Teams Achieve Initial Operating Capability". defense.gov. ^ "A Short History of U.S. Northern Command". U.S. Northern Command. ^ "History of U.S. Southern Command". www.southcom.mil. ^ "Command History". www.cybercom.mil. ^ "U.S. Marine Corps Concepts & Programs > Organization > Operating Forces > U.S. Marine Corps Forces, Cyberspace Command". www.candp.marines.mil. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. ^ "History". www.stratcom.mil. ^ About USTRANSCOM, USTRANSCOM official website, last accessed 8 March 20201 ^ Component & Subordinate Commands, USTRANSCOM official website, last accessed 8 March 20201 ^ a b c "Number of Military and DoD Appropriated Fund (APF) Civilian Personnel Permanently Assigned". U.S. Department of Defense. 31 December 2017. Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2016. ^ "DoD Personnel, Workforce Reports & Publications". dmdc.osd.mil. Defence Manpower Data Centre. ^ "Quick Facts and Figures". Sss.gov. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 17 October 2017. ^ McGill, Kevin (13 August 2020). "Federal appeals court: Male-only draft is constitutional". Retrieved 13 September 2020. ^ For example, a lieutenant general in the Air Force is equivalent to a vice admiral in that Navy since they both carry a paygrade of O-9. ^ "Department of Defence Instruction 1310.01: Rank and Seniority of Commissioned Officers" (PDF). United States Department of Defense. 6 May 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2011. ^ Barber, Barrie. "Military looking for more tech-savvy recruits." Springfield News-Sun. 11 March 2012. ^ "Department of Defense Selected Reserves by Rank/Grade". U.S. Department of Defense. 28 February 2018. Archived from the original on 29 April 2018. Retrieved 29 April 2018. ^ "Department of Defense Active Duty Military Personnel by Rank/Grade". United States Department of Defense. 28 February 2018. Archived from the original on 29 April 2018. Retrieved 29 April 2018. ^ "Table of Active Duty Females by Rank/Grade and Service". February 2018. Archived from the original on 29 April 2018. Retrieved 29 April 2018. ^ "Armed Forces Strength Figures". 28 February 2018. Archived from the original on 29 April 2018. Retrieved 29 April 2018. ^ Dickstein, Corey (15 May 2020). "Space Force unveils its service flag at White House ceremony". Stars and Stripes. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Last month, the service increased from just two official members — Raymond and Towberman — to 88, when it added 86 second lieutenants who commissioned into the branch from the Air Force Academy. ^ "Active duty military personnel strengths by regional area and by country" (PDF). U.S. Department of Defense. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2011. Retrieved 31 December 2010. ^ "Active Duty Military Personnel Strengths by Regional Area and by Country" (PDF). United States Department of Defense. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 29 March 2013. ^ a b c "U.S. Military Rank Insignia". U.S. Department of Defense. ^ a b c "Military Careers : Occupational Outlook Handbook: : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics". www.bls.gov. ^ "Becoming an Officer — Today's Military". www.todaysmilitary.com. ^ Rempfer, Kyle (17 August 2020). "Direct commissions for Army cyber officers finally gaining steam, two-star says". Army Times. ^ https://www.jcs.mil/Portals/36/Documents/Doctrine/education/cjcsi_1800_01f.pdf?ver=2020-05-15-102430-580 ^ "These are the 9 general officers who have earned five stars". 28 January 2019. ^ "What is a Warrant Officer?". goarmy.com. ^ Master chief petty officer of the Coast Guard Reserve Force Command master chief petty officers for the Deputy Commandants Area command master chief petty officers ^ Johnson, Michael G. (27 September 2005). "First All-female Crew Flies Combat Mission". DefendAmerica.mil. United States Department of Defense. Archived from the original on 30 June 2006. Retrieved 2 July 2006. ^ "The Women of Redstone Arsenal". United States Army. Archived from the original on 20 June 2008. Retrieved 6 June 2009. ^ Busse, Charlane (July 1978). "First women join Pershing training" (PDF). Field Artillery Journal. United States Army Field Artillery School: 40. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2009. ^ "The Journal interviews: 1LT Elizabeth A. Tourville" (PDF). Field Artillery Journal. United States Army Field Artillery School: 40–43. November 1978. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2009. ^ "Ocala Star-Banner – Google News Archive Search". News.google.com. Retrieved 18 October 2017. ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "American Women in Uniform, Desert Storm". Userpages.aug.com. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 17 October 2017. ^ "US navy lifts ban on women submariners". The Guardian. Associated Press. 29 April 2010. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 23 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. ^ Baldor, Lolita. "Carter Telling Military to Open all Combat Jobs to Women". Military.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 5 December 2015. Retrieved 5 December 2015. ^ Lamothe, Dan (3 December 2015). "In historic decision, Pentagon chief opens all jobs in combat units to women". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 8 December 2015. ^ Connley, Courtney (7 December 2015). "Breaking Barriers: U.S. Military Opens up Combat Jobs to Women". Black Enterprise. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 8 December 2015. ^ a b Tilghman, Andrew (3 December 2015). "All combat jobs open to women in the military". Military Times. Archived from the original on 7 December 2015. Retrieved 8 December 2015. ^ "Now Women Should Register For The Draft". TIME. 7 December 2015. Archived from the original on 3 November 2017. Retrieved 17 October 2017. ^ Clare, Micah E. (24 March 2008), "Face of Defense: Woman Soldier Receives Silver Star", American Forces Press Service, archived from the original on 30 November 2009, retrieved 11 October 2015 ^ "Military's First Female Four-Star General". Npr.org. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 17 October 2017. ^ [1][dead link] ^ "Carter Names First Female Combatant Commander". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. 18 March 2016. Archived from the original on 13 July 2016. Retrieved 16 September 2016. ^ Tritten, Travis J. (10 August 2017). "Candidate to be first female Navy SEAL officer quits after a week". The Washington Examiner. ^ Watson, Julie. "Navy: Only woman in SEAL training pipeline drops out". chicagotribune.com. Retrieved 2020-10-23. ^ "2018 Pay Chart". 1 January 2018. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2018. ^ "Significant Gender- and Race/Ethnicity-Based Differences Exist in Rates of Promotion and Retention Among Officers". Asch, Beth J., Miller, Trey, Malchiodi, Alessandro. 2012. Archived from the original on 20 April 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2018. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)CS1 maint: others (link) ^ "Sexual Assault Reports, Harassment Complaints Rise in US Military". Military.com. Retrieved 30 April 2020. ^ "Defense Officials Tout Progress in Fight Against Sexual Assault". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved 30 April 2020. ^ 10 U.S.C. § 118 (prior section 133b renumbered in 1986); DoD Directive 1005.8 dated 31 October 77 Archived 3 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine and AR 600-25 Archived 6 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Naval History & Heritage Command. "Precedence of the U.S. Navy and the Marine Corps" Archived 10 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Department of the Navy. 11 February 2016 ^ "Rules for the Regulation of the Navy of the United Colonies of North-America". Naval Historical Center. Department of the Navy. Archived from the original on 23 January 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016. References[edit] IISS (2020). The Military Balance 2020. Routledge. ISBN 978-0367466398.CS1 maint: ref duplicates default (link) External links[edit] APIat Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official U.S. Department of Defense website Global Security on U.S. Military Operations v t e  United States Armed Forces Military budget of the United States Category A MC N AF SF CG Navbox A MC N AF SF CG Leadership Commander-in-chief: President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff: Chairman Vice Chairman United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services: Senate House Active duty four-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Organization Military departments Department of Defense (Secretary): Department of the Army (Secretary) Department of the Navy (Secretary) Department of the Air Force (Secretary) Department of Homeland Security (Secretary) Service branches and heads Army (Chief of Staff) Marine Corps (Commandant) Navy (Chief of Naval Operations) Air Force (Chief of Staff) Space Force (Chief of Space Operations) Coast Guard (Commandant) Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard: A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified Combatant Command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History: A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II By ancestry African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Pakistani Americans Sikh Americans History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies: A (prep) MC/N (prep) AF/SF (prep) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer: A MC MEPS ASVAB Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms: A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations: Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges: Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Office Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers: A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System/TRICARE Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains: A MC N AF CG Equipment A MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles (active) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N (active) AF CG MSC Weapons: N CG Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active Aircraft designation Missiles Helicopter arms Other Nuclear football Electronics (designations) Flags: A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs: Nuclear Biological Chemical Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard United States Armed Forces navboxes v t e  United States Army Leadership Secretary of the Army Under Secretary of the Army Chief of Staff Vice Chief of Staff 4-star generals Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer Sergeant Major of the Army House Armed Services Committee (House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces) Senate Committee on Armed Services (Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces) Components and commands Regular Army Army Reserve Army National Guard Active Units Reorganization plan of United States Army Army commands Forces Futures Materiel Training and Doctrine Service components Central Europe-Africa Pacific North South Special Operations Surface Deployment and Distribution Space and Missile Defense Cyber Command Direct reporting units Second Army Medical Intelligence and Security Criminal Investigation Corps of Engineers Military District of Washington Test and Evaluation Military Academy Reserve Acquisition Support Center Installation Management War College Field armies First Third Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Branches Acquisition Corps Adjutant General's Corps Air Defense Artillery Branch Armor Branch Aviation Branch Army Band Chaplain Corps Chemical Corps Civil Affairs Corps Corps of Engineers Dental Corps Field Artillery Branch Finance Corps Infantry Branch Inspector General's Corps Judge Advocate General's Corps Logistics Branch Medical Corps Medical Service Corps Medical Specialist Corps Military Intelligence Corps Military Police Corps Nurse Corps Ordnance Corps Psychological Operations Quartermaster Corps Signal Corps Special Forces Transportation Corps Veterinary Corps Installations United States and overseas Germany Kosovo Kuwait South Korea Training Basic Training BOLC ROTC (ECP) OCS WOBC WOCS Military Academy (West Point) MOS Uniforms and insignia Awards and decorations Badges Branch Officer Warrant Enlisted World War I World War II Uniforms Equipment Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles Premier ensembles Army Field Band Army Band Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps West Point Band History and traditions History Continental Army Union Army National Army Army of the United States Center of Military History Institute of Heraldry America's Army Army Art Program Flag National Museum West Point Museum Rangers U.S. Army Regimental System Soldier's Creed "The Army Goes Rolling Along" Division nicknames Draft Service numbers Seventh Army Symphony Orchestra Category v t e  United States Marine Corps Leadership Secretary of the Navy Under Secretary of the Navy Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Military Secretary to the Commandant of the Marine Corps Marine Corps generals US Congress House Armed Services Committee Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee Senate Armed Services Committee Seapower subcommittee Major commands Organization of the Marine Corps Headquarters Marine Corps Marine Forces Command II Marine Expeditionary Force Marine Forces Pacific I Marine Expeditionary Force III Marine Expeditionary Force Marine Forces Reserve Fleet Marine Force Atlantic Pacific Marine Corps Combat Development Command Training & Education Command (TECOM) United States Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory Marine Corps Systems Command Auxiliary Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Structure Marine Air-Ground Task Force Bases Battalions Regiments Brigades Divisions MEF/Corps Marine aviation Marine expeditionary unit Special Operations Marine Raiders Marine Raider Regiment Recon Force Division Personnel and training Personnel Rank insignia MOS Notable Marines Historical Marines Marine Astronauts Criminal Investigation Division Judge Advocate Division Chaplain of the Marine Corps Associated organizations Training Recruit Training School of Infantry Officer Candidates School The Basic School Martial Arts Program Uniforms and equipment Uniforms Awards Badges Weapons Vehicles and aircraft Individual equipment History and traditions History Culture Acronyms and terms Birthday Ball Color Sergeant of the Marine Corps Eagle, Globe, and Anchor Flag Marine Band Drum and Bugle Corps Marine One Silent Drill Platoon White House Sentries Service Numbers Marine Corps War Memorial Marine Detachments "Marines' Hymn" Oorah National Museum Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima Rifleman's Creed Semper Fidelis march History of Hispanics in the USMC History of women in the USMC Women's Reserve Honorary Marine Toys for Tots Gung-ho Category v t e  United States Navy Category Leadership Secretary of the Navy Under Secretary of the Navy Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy 4-star admirals House Armed Services Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces Senate Subcommittee on Seapower Structure Navy Navy Reserve Fleet Marine Force Expeditionary Combat Command Merchant Marine Units Active ships Aircraft wings Aircraft squadrons Carrier strike group Installations Naval Observatory Master jet base Operating forces Fleet Forces Command Pacific Fleet Commander Naval Forces Europe – Naval Forces Africa Naval Forces Central Command Naval Forces Southern Command Naval Special Warfare Command Naval Reserve Forces Operational Test and Evaluation Force Naval Network Warfare Command Military Sealift Command Shore Naval Sea Systems Command Naval Air Systems Command Naval Facilities Engineering Systems Command Naval Supply Systems Command Naval Information Warfare Systems Command Fleet Cyber Command Naval Academy Naval Education and Training Command Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command Office of Naval Intelligence Naval Aviation Warfighting Development Center Naval Legal Service Command Naval Observatory Naval Safety Center Bureau of Naval Personnel Chief of Naval Personnel Bureau of Medicine and Surgery Navy Installations Command Navy Working Capital Fund Fleets Second Fleet Third Fleet Fourth Fleet Fifth Fleet Sixth Fleet Seventh Fleet Tenth Fleet Ships A–B C D–F G–H I–K L M N–O P Q–R S T–V W–Z Aircraft carriers Airships Amphibious warfare ships Auxiliaries Battleships Cruisers Destroyers Destroyer escorts Escort carriers Frigates Mine warfare vessels Monitors Patrol vessels Sailing frigates Steam frigates Steam gunboats Ships of the line Sloops of war Submarines Torpedo boats Personnel and training People Officers Insignia Designators Enlisted Rates Ratings Classification Personnel Chaplain Corps Chief Deputy Chief Explosive ordnance disposal Medical Corps Dental Corps Nurse Corps Medical Service Corps Supply Corps Civil Engineer Corps JAG Corps JAG DJAG NCIS Boatswain's mates Hospital corpsman Naval Aviator SEALs Seabees Master-at-arms Operations specialist SWCCs Hispanic sailors Training Recruit Naval Academy Officer Candidate School STA-21 NROTC BESS BFTT CNATT COMPTUEX NAWCTSD AIM Naval Chaplaincy School Naval Hospital Corps School Naval Justice School Naval Postgraduate School United States Armed Forces School of Music Navy Senior Enlisted Academy Navy Supply Corps School Naval War College Nuclear Power School JMTC TOPGUN USNTPS Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Equipment Uniforms Awards and decorations Badges Current fleet Reserve fleet Aircraft Weapons Naval reactors History and traditions History "Anchors Aweigh" Blue Angels Continental Navy Ensign Fleet bands Fleet Week Jack Line-crossing ceremony National Museum Navy Band Ceremonial Guard Navy Flag Navy Hymn Navy Memorial Navy service numbers Navy Weeks Revolt of the Admirals Sailor's Creed Ship commissioning Ship decommissioning Tingey House USS Constitution Wetting-down United States battleship retirement debate v t e  United States Air Force Leadership Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force Under Secretary of the Air Force Air Staff Chief of Staff Vice Chief of Staff Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Four-star generals House Armed Services Committee House Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces House Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces Senate Committee on Armed Services Senate Subcommittee on Airland Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces Structure Commands Reserve Air National Guard Field Operating Agencies Installations Direct Reporting Units District of Washington Operational Test and Evaluation Center USAF Academy Major commands ACC AETC AFGSC AFMC AFRC AFSOC AMC PACAF USAFE–AFA Air Forces Central Numbered Air Forces First Second Third Fourth Fifth Seventh Eighth Ninth Tenth Eleventh Twelfth Sixteenth Seventeenth Eighteenth Nineteenth Twentieth Twenty-Second Wings ANG Groups ANG Squadrons ANG Security Forces Civilian auxiliary: Civil Air Patrol Personnel and training Airmen Rank officers enlisted Specialty Code Aeronautical ratings Judge Advocate General's Corps RED HORSE Security Forces Medical Service Chief of Chaplains Chief Scientist Training: Air Force Academy Officer Training School Reserve Officer Training Corps Basic Training Airman Leadership School SERE Fitness Assessment Uniforms and equipment Awards and decorations Badges Equipment Uniforms History and traditions History Aeronautical Division / Aviation Section / Division of Military Aeronautics / Army Air Service / Army Air Corps / Army Air Forces "The U.S. Air Force" Air Force Band Airman's Creed Core Values Flag Symbol Memorial National Museum Women Airforce Service Pilots Air Force One / Air Force Two Honor Guard Thunderbirds Service numbers Category v t e  United States Space Force Leadership Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force Under Secretary of the Air Force Space Staff Chief of Space Operations Vice Chief of Space Operations Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Oversight House Armed Services Committee Strategic Forces subcommittee Senate Committee on Armed Services Strategic Forces subcommittee Structure Field commands / Direct reporting units Space Operations Command Space and Missile Systems Center Deltas / Garrisons / Wings Space Delta 2 Space Delta 3 Space Delta 4 Space Delta 5 Space Delta 6 Space Delta 7 Space Delta 8 Space Delta 9 Space Training and Readiness Delta Provisional Peterson-Schriever Garrison Buckley Garrison 30th Space Wing 45th Space Wing Squadrons 527th Space Aggressor Squadron 4th Space Control Squadron 5th Space Control Squadron 16th Space Control Squadron 18th Space Control Squadron 20th Space Control Squadron 3rd Space Experimentation Squadron 2nd Space Launch Squadron 5th Space Launch Squadron 1st Space Operations Squadron 2nd Space Operations Squadron 3rd Space Operations Squadron 4th Space Operations Squadron 21st Space Operations Squadron 22nd Space Operations Squadron 23rd Space Operations Squadron 25th Space Range Squadron 2nd Space Warning Squadron 6th Space Warning Squadron 7th Space Warning Squadron 10th Space Warning Squadron 11th Space Warning Squadron 12th Space Warning Squadron 13th Space Warning Squadron 17th Test Squadron 533rd Training Squadron 328th Weapons Squadron Locations Space Force Bases Buckley Los Angeles Patrick Peterson Schriever Vandenberg Space Force Stations Cape Canaveral Cape Cod Cavalier Cheyenne Mountain Clear Kaena Point New Boston Thule Personnel and training Awards and decorations Badges Ranks Training Academy Reserve Officer Training Corps Officer Training School Basic Military Training Uniforms History and traditions Air Force Space Command Delta Flag History Seal Space Force Association Former wings 21st Space Wing 50th Space Wing 460th Space Wing v t e  United States Coast Guard Category:United States Coast Guard Leadership Secretary of Homeland Security Commandant of the Coast Guard Vice Commandant of the United States Coast Guard Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard Organization Missions Reserve Intelligence Investigative Service Legal Division Police Deployable Operations Group Areas Districts Sectors Stations Air Stations Radio stations Shipbuilding Yard National Ice Center Research & Development Center Coast Guard Auxiliary Personnel and training Personnel Officer ranks Enlisted rates Ratings Coast Guard Academy Training Center Cape May Training Center Petaluma Training Center Yorktown Maritime Law Enforcement Academy Joint Maritime Training Center Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl Chaplain of the Coast Guard Uniforms and equipment Uniforms Awards Badges Cutters List of cutters Ship commissioning Ship decommissioning Equipment History and traditions History Coast Guard Act Coast Guard City Life-Saving Service Revenue Cutter Service Lighthouse Service Steamboat Inspection Service Bureau of Navigation "Semper Paratus" Flag Ensign Racing Stripe United States Coast Guard Band United States Coast Guard Ceremonial Honor Guard United States Coast Guard Pipe Band Fleet Week Coast Guard service numbers Coast Guardsman's Creed United States Coast Guard Cutters Coast Guard Bears Battles and operations Quasi-War War of 1812 West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations Capture of the Bravo Ingham Incident Amistad Incident Great Lakes Patrol Mexican–American War American Civil War Battle of Fort Sumter Battle of Pig Point Battle of Galveston Harbor Battle of Portland Harbor Overland Relief Expedition Spanish–American War Battle of Manila Bay Battle of Cárdenas Ice Patrol World War I 1st Battle of the Atlantic Great Mississippi Flood Rum Patrol World War II 2nd Battle of the Atlantic Battle of Guam Operation Overlord Korean War Vietnam War Coast Guard Squadron One Operation Market Time Operation Sealords Action of 1 March 1968 Persian Gulf War War on Terrorism Afghanistan War Iraq War Operation Enduring Freedom HOA v t e Armed conflicts involving the United States Armed Forces listed chronologically Domestic Shays' Rebellion Whiskey Rebellion Fries's Rebellion Turner's Rebellion Mormon War Dorr Rebellion Bleeding Kansas Utah War Civil War Indian Wars Brooks–Baxter War Range War Lincoln County War Johnson County War Coal Creek War Homestead strike Battle of Blair Mountain Tulsa Riot Bonus Army Puerto Rican revolts 1960s civil unrest Kent State shooting Los Angeles riots Foreign Revolutionary War Quasi-War First Barbary War War of 1812 Second Barbary War First Sumatran expedition Second Sumatran expedition Ivory Coast expedition Mexican–American War First Fiji expedition Second Opium War Second Fiji expedition Formosa Expedition Korean Expedition Spanish–American War Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion Banana Wars Border War World War I Russian Civil War World War II Korean War Bay of Pigs invasion Vietnam War Invasion of the Dominican Republic Invasion of Grenada Lebanese Civil War Tanker War 1986 bombing of Libya Invasion of Panama Gulf War 1993 missile strikes on Iraq Somali Civil War 1996 missile strikes on Iraq 1998 bombing of Iraq Bosnian War Kosovo War Afghanistan War Iraq War War in North-West Pakistan Libyan Civil War Intervention against ISIL Iraq Syria Cameroon Libya Yemeni Civil War Related List of conflicts in the U.S. List of wars involving the U.S. Timeline of U.S. military operations Length of U.S. participation in major wars Overseas expansion Military history Covert regime-change actions Casualties of war Peace movement List of anti-war organizations Conscientious objector War on Terror v t e United States articles History By event Pre-Columbian era Colonial era Thirteen Colonies military history Founding Fathers Continental Congress Continental Association Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Confederation Period American frontier Drafting and ratification of Constitution Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 / 1896–1954 / 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2008) War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic debt ceiling Inventions before 1890 1890–1945 1946–1991 after 1991 Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States Continental America counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive Cabinet Civil service Executive departments Executive Office Independent agencies Law enforcement President of the United States Powers Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore Vice President Judicial District courts Courts of appeals Supreme Court Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights Federal Reporter United States Code United States Reports Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency Defense Intelligence Agency Federal Bureau of Investigation National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency Office of the Director of National Intelligence Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps 51st state political status of Puerto Rico District of Columbia statehood movement Elections Electoral College Foreign relations Foreign policy Hawaiian sovereignty movement Ideologies anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Local government Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Red states and blue states Purple America Scandals State government governor state legislature state court Imperial Presidency Corruption Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade Transportation by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demography Economic issues affluence eviction home-ownership household income income inequality labor unions middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth Education attainment Family structure Fashion Flag Folklore Great American Novel Health health care health insurance Holidays Homelessness Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Black American Sign Language HSL Plains Sign Talk Arabic Chinese French German Italian Russian Spanish Literature Media Journalism Internet Newspapers Radio Television Music Names National symbols Columbia Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Public holidays Race Religion Sexuality / Adolescent Sexuality Social class Society Sports Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Home-ownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Professional and working class conflict Standard of living Issues Ages of consent Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism hair texture intersex rights Islamophobia LGBT rights racism same-sex marriage Drug policy Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Health care abortion health insurance hunger obesity smoking Human rights Immigration illegal International rankings National security Mass surveillance Terrorism Separation of church and state Outline Index Category Portal v t e North Atlantic Treaty Organization History North Atlantic Treaty Summit Operations Enlargement Structure Council Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe Air Command Land Command Maritime Command JFC Brunssum JFC Naples STRIKFORNATO JFCNF Joint Support and Enabling Command Allied Command Transformation Parliamentary Assembly Standardization Agreement People Secretary General Chairman of the Military Committee Supreme Allied Commander Europe Supreme Allied Commander Transformation Members Albania Belgium Bulgaria Canada Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Turkey United Kingdom United States Multilateral relations Atlantic Treaty Association Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council Mediterranean Dialogue Istanbul Cooperation Initiative Partnership for Peace v t e Military of North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda British Virgin Islands Caribbean Netherlands Cayman Islands Collectivity of Saint Martin Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Pierre and Miquelon Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125