"USMC" redirects here. For other uses, see USMC (disambiguation). Maritime land forces service branch of the United States Armed Forces United States Marine Corps Emblem of the United States Marine Corps Founded 11 July 1798 (222 years, 9 months) (As current service) 10 November 1775 (245 years, 5 months) (As Continental Marines)[1] Country  United States Type Maritime land force Combined arms[2] Role Amphibious warfare Expeditionary warfare Size 180,958 active personnel (as of 2020[update])[3] 38,500 reserve personnel (as of 2017[update])[4] 1,304 manned aircraft[5] (total includes 11 VH-3D and 8 VH-60N of HMX-1[6] not listed by WAF 2018) Part of Department of the Navy Headquarters The Pentagon Arlington County, Virginia, U.S. Nickname(s) "Jarheads", "Devil Dogs", "Teufel Hunden", "Leathernecks" Motto(s) Semper fidelis Colors  Scarlet  and  Gold  [7][8] March "Semper Fidelis" Play (help·info) Mascot(s) English bulldog[9][10] Anniversaries 10 November Equipment List of U.S. Marine Corps equipment Engagements See list American Revolutionary War Quasi-War First Barbary War War of 1812 Second Barbary War West Indies Anti-Piracy Operations Seminole Wars African Anti-Slavery Operations Aegean Sea Anti-Piracy Operations First Sumatran expedition Second Sumatran expedition United States Exploring Expedition Capture of Monterey Mexican–American War Bombardment of Greytown Battle of Ty-ho Bay First Fiji Expedition Second Opium War Second Fiji Expedition Paraguay expedition Reform War John Brown's raid American Civil War Bombardment of Qui Nhon Shimonoseki Campaign Formosa Expedition United States expedition to Korea Egyptian Expedition (1882) Bering Sea anti-poaching operations Overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii Second Samoan Civil War Banana Wars Spanish–American War Second Occupation of Cuba Border War Negro Rebellion Occupation of Nicaragua Occupation of Haiti Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916) Sugar Intervention Philippine–American War Boxer Rebellion World War I Russian Civil War World War II Korean War Vietnam War 1958 Lebanon Crisis Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965) Iranian hostage rescue Multinational Force in Lebanon Operation Urgent Fury 1986 bombing of Libya Tanker War Operation Earnest Will Operation Prime Chance Operation Eager Glacier Operation Nimble Archer Operation Praying Mantis Operation Just Cause Persian Gulf War Somali Civil War Iraqi no-fly zones Bosnian War Kosovo War 1999 East Timorese crisis Operation Enduring Freedom Afghanistan Philippines Horn of Africa Pankisi Gorge Trans Sahara Caribbean and Central America Iraq War Pakistan-United States skirmishes Operation Odyssey Dawn 2014 intervention against ISIL Operation Inherent Resolve Resolute Support Mission Battle of Khasham Decorations List Presidential Unit Citation Joint Meritorious Unit Award Navy Unit Commendation Valorous Unit Award Meritorious Unit Commendation French Croix de guerre 1914–1918 Philippine Presidential Unit Citation Korean Presidential Unit Citation Vietnam Gallantry Cross Vietnam Civil Actions Medal Website Marines.mil Commanders Commander-in-Chief President Joe Biden Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin Secretary of the Navy Thomas Harker (acting) Commandant Gen David H. Berger Assistant Commandant Gen Gary L. Thomas Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps SMMC Troy E. Black Insignia Flag Seal Emblem ("Eagle, Globe, and Anchor" or "EGA")[note 1] Song "The Marine's Hymn" Play (help·info) United States Armed Forces Executive departments Department of Defense Department of Homeland Security Staff Joint Chiefs of Staff Military departments Department of the Army Department of the Navy Department of the Air Force Military service branches United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Unified combatant commands Geographic combatant commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Indo-Pacific Command Northern Command Southern Command Space Command Functional combatant commands Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command v t e The United States Marine Corps (USMC), also referred to as the United States Marines, is the maritime land force service branch of the United States Armed Forces responsible for conducting expeditionary and amphibious operations[12] through combined arms, implementing its own infantry, armor, artillery, aerial and special operations forces. The U.S. Marine Corps is one of the eight uniformed services of the United States. The Marine Corps has been part of the U.S. Department of the Navy since 30 June 1834 with its sister service, the United States Navy.[13] The USMC operates installations on land and aboard sea-going amphibious warfare ships around the world. Additionally, several of the Marines' tactical aviation squadrons, primarily Marine Fighter Attack squadrons, are also embedded in Navy carrier air wings and operate from the aircraft carriers.[14] The history of the Marine Corps began when two battalions of Continental Marines were formed on 10 November 1775 in Philadelphia as a service branch of infantry troops capable of fighting both at sea and on shore.[15] In the Pacific theater of World War II the Corps took the lead in a massive campaign of amphibious warfare, advancing from island to island.[16][17][18] As of 2017, the USMC has around 182,000 active duty members and some 38,500 personnel in reserve.[4] Contents 1 Mission 1.1 Historical mission 1.2 Capabilities 1.3 Doctrine 2 History 2.1 Foundation and American Revolutionary War 2.2 War of 1812 and afterward 2.3 American Civil War to World War I 2.4 World War I 2.5 World War II 2.6 Korean War 2.7 Vietnam War 2.8 Interim: Vietnam War to the War on Terror 2.9 Global War on Terrorism 2.9.1 Afghanistan Campaign 2.9.2 Iraq Campaign 3 Organization 3.1 Department of the Navy 3.2 Headquarters Marine Corps 3.3 Operating Forces 3.3.1 Marine Air-Ground Task Force 3.4 Supporting Establishment 3.4.1 Marine Corps bases and stations 3.5 Marine Forces Reserve 4 Special Operations 5 Personnel 5.1 Leadership 5.2 Women 5.3 Rank structure 5.3.1 Commissioned officers 5.3.2 Warrant officers 5.3.3 Enlisted 5.4 Military Occupational Specialty 5.5 Initial training 6 Uniforms 7 Culture 7.1 Official traditions and customs 7.2 Unofficial traditions and customs 7.3 Veteran Marines 7.4 Martial arts program 8 Equipment 8.1 Infantry weapons 8.2 Ground vehicles 8.3 Aircraft 9 Relationship with other services 9.1 United States Navy 9.2 United States Army 9.3 United States Air Force 9.4 United States Coast Guard 10 Budget 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 13.1 Citations 13.2 Sources 14 Further reading 15 External links Mission[edit] As outlined in 10 U.S.C. § 5063 and as originally introduced under the National Security Act of 1947, three primary areas of responsibility for the Marine Corps are: Seizure or defense of advanced naval bases and other land operations to support naval campaigns; Development of tactics, technique, and equipment used by amphibious landing forces in coordination with the Army and Air Force; and Such other duties as the President or Department of Defense may direct. This last clause derives from similar language in the Congressional acts "For the Better Organization of the Marine Corps" of 1834, and "Establishing and Organizing a Marine Corps" of 1798. In 1951, the House of Representatives' Armed Services Committee called the clause "one of the most important statutory – and traditional – functions of the Marine Corps". It noted that the Corps has more often than not performed actions of a non-naval nature, including its famous actions in Tripoli, the War of 1812, Chapultepec, and numerous counter-insurgency and occupational duties (such as those in Central America, World War I, and the Korean War). While these actions are not accurately described as support of naval campaigns nor as amphibious warfare, their common thread is that they are of an expeditionary nature, using the mobility of the Navy to provide timely intervention in foreign affairs on behalf of American interests.[19] The Marine Band, dubbed "The President's Own" The Marine Band, dubbed the "President's Own" by Thomas Jefferson, provides music for state functions at the White House.[20] Marines from Ceremonial Companies A & B, quartered in Marine Barracks, Washington, D.C., guard presidential retreats, including Camp David, and the Marines of the Executive Flight Detachment of HMX-1 provide helicopter transport to the President and Vice President, with the radio call signs "Marine One" and "Marine Two", respectively.[21] The Executive Flight Detachment also provides helicopter transport to Cabinet members and other VIPs. By authority of the 1946 Foreign Service Act, the Marine Security Guards of the Marine Embassy Security Command provide security for American embassies, legations, and consulates at more than 140 posts worldwide.[22] The relationship between the Department of State and the U.S. Marine Corps is nearly as old as the Corps itself. For over 200 years, Marines have served at the request of various Secretaries of State. After World War II, an alert, disciplined force was needed to protect American embassies, consulates, and legations throughout the world. In 1947, a proposal was made that the Department of Defense furnishes Marine Corps personnel for Foreign Service guard duty under the provisions of the Foreign Service Act of 1946. A formal Memorandum of Agreement was signed between the Department of State and the Secretary of the Navy on 15 December 1948, and 83 Marines were deployed to overseas missions. During the first year of the program, 36 detachments were deployed worldwide.[23] Historical mission[edit] The Marine Corps was founded to serve as an infantry unit aboard naval vessels and was responsible for the security of the ship and its crew by conducting offensive and defensive combat during boarding actions and defending the ship's officers from mutiny; to the latter end, their quarters on the ship were often strategically positioned between the officers' quarters and the rest of the vessel. Continental Marines manned raiding parties, both at sea and ashore. America's first amphibious assault landing occurred early in the Revolutionary War on 3 March 1776 as the Marines gained control of Fort Montagu and Fort Nassau, a British ammunition depot and naval port in New Providence, the Bahamas. The role of the Marine Corps has expanded significantly since then; as the importance of its original naval mission declined with changing naval warfare doctrine and the professionalization of the naval service, the Corps adapted by focusing on formerly secondary missions ashore. The Advanced Base Doctrine of the early 20th century codified their combat duties ashore, outlining the use of Marines in the seizure of bases and other duties on land to support naval campaigns. Throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries, Marine detachments served aboard Navy cruisers, battleships and aircraft carriers. Marine detachments served in their traditional duties as a ship's landing force, manning the ship's weapons and providing shipboard security. Marine detachments were augmented by members of the ship's company for landing parties, such as in the First Sumatran expedition of 1832, and continuing in the Caribbean and Mexican campaigns of the early 20th centuries. Marines developed tactics and techniques of amphibious assault on defended coastlines in time for use in World War II.[24] During World War II, Marines continued to serve on capital ships. They often were assigned to man anti-aircraft batteries.[citation needed] In 1950,[25] President Harry Truman responded to a message from U.S. Representative Gordon L. McDonough. McDonough had urged President Truman to add Marine representation on the Joint Chiefs of Staff. President Truman, writing in a letter addressed to McDonough, stated that "The Marine Corps is the Navy's police force and as long as I am President that is what it will remain. They have a propaganda machine that is almost equal to Stalin's." McDonough then inserted President Truman's letter, dated 29 August 1950, into the Congressional Record. Congressmen and Marine organizations reacted, calling President Truman's remarks an insult and demanded an apology. Truman apologized to the Marine commandant at the time, writing, "I sincerely regret the unfortunate choice of language which I used in my letter of August 29 to Congressman McDonough concerning the Marine Corps." While Truman had apologized for his metaphor, he did not alter his position that the Marine Corps should continue to report to the Navy secretary. He made amends only by making a surprise visit to the Marine Corps League a few days later, when he reiterated, "When I make a mistake, I try to correct it. I try to make as few as possible." He received a standing ovation.[26] When gun cruisers were retired by the 1960s, the remaining Marine detachments were only seen on battleships and carriers. Its original mission of providing shipboard security ended in the 1990s.[citation needed] Capabilities[edit] The Marine Corps fulfills a critical military role as an amphibious warfare force. It is capable of asymmetric warfare with conventional, irregular, and hybrid forces. While the Marine Corps does not employ any unique capabilities, as a force it can rapidly deploy a combined-arms task force to almost anywhere in the world within days. The basic structure for all deployed units is a Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF) that integrates a ground combat element, an aviation combat element and a logistics combat element under a common command element. While the creation of joint commands under the Goldwater–Nichols Act has improved inter-service coordination between each branch, the Corps' ability to permanently maintain integrated multi-element task forces under a single command provides a smoother implementation of combined-arms warfare principles.[27] U.S. Marines from the 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit training The close integration of disparate Marine units stems from an organizational culture centered on the infantry. Every other Marine capability exists to support the infantry. Unlike some Western militaries, the Corps remained conservative against theories proclaiming the ability of new weapons to win wars independently. For example, Marine aviation has always been focused on close air support and has remained largely uninfluenced by air power theories proclaiming that strategic bombing can single-handedly win wars.[24] Play media Bravo Battery, 1st Battalion, 11th Marines, fight off Iraqi units on 26 March 2003 This focus on the infantry is matched with the doctrine of "Every Marine [is] a rifleman", a precept of Commandant Alfred M. Gray, Jr., emphasizing the infantry combat abilities of every Marine. All Marines, regardless of military specialization, receive training as a rifleman; and all officers receive additional training as infantry platoon commanders.[28] During World War II at the Battle of Wake Island, when all of the Marine aircraft were destroyed, pilots continued the fight as ground officers, leading supply clerks and cooks in a final defensive effort.[29] Flexibility of execution is implemented via an emphasis on "commander's intent" as a guiding principle for carrying out orders, specifying the end state but leaving open the method of execution.[30] The amphibious assault techniques developed for World War II evolved, with the addition of air assault and maneuver warfare doctrine, into the current "Operational Maneuver from the Sea" doctrine of power projection from the seas.[12] The Marines are credited with the development of helicopter insertion doctrine and were the earliest in the American military to widely adopt maneuver-warfare principles, which emphasize low-level initiative and flexible execution. In light of recent warfare that has strayed from the Corps' traditional missions,[31] it has renewed an emphasis on amphibious capabilities.[32] Marines from the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit depart USS Tarawa (LHA-1), using both a Landing Craft Utility and CH-53E "Super Stallion" helicopters, during amphibious operations in Kuwait, 2003. The Marine Corps relies on the Navy for sealift to provide its rapid deployment capabilities. In addition to basing a third of the Fleet Marine Force in Japan, Marine expeditionary units (MEU) are typically stationed at sea so they can function as first responders to international incidents.[33] To aid rapid deployment, the Maritime Pre-Positioning System was developed: fleets of container ships are positioned throughout the world with enough equipment and supplies for a Marine expeditionary force to deploy for 30 days.[citation needed] The USMC is planning to reduce its logistical requirements and by 2025 eliminate all liquid fuel use for Marine Expeditionary Forces, except for highly efficient vehicles.[34] Doctrine[edit] Two small manuals published during the 1930s established USMC doctrine in two areas. The Small Wars Manual laid the framework for Marine counter-insurgency operations from Vietnam to Iraq and Afghanistan while the Tentative Landing Operations Manual established the doctrine for the amphibious operations of World War II. "Operational Maneuver from the Sea" is the current doctrine of power projection.[12] History[edit] Main article: History of the United States Marine Corps Foundation and American Revolutionary War[edit] Maj. Samuel Nicholas, first Commandant of the Marine Corps, was nominated to lead the Continental Marines by John Adams in November 1775. The United States Marine Corps traces its roots to the Continental Marines of the American Revolutionary War, formed by Captain Samuel Nicholas by a resolution of the Second Continental Congress on 10 November 1775, to raise two battalions of Marines. This date is celebrated as the birthday of the Marine Corps. Nicholas was nominated to lead the Marines by John Adams.[35] By December 1775, Nicholas raised one battalion of 300 men by recruitment in his home city of Philadelphia.[citation needed] Continental Marines landing at New Providence in March 1776 during the Battle of Nassau, the first amphibious landing of the Marine Corps, during the American Revolutionary War In January 1776, the Marines went to sea under the command of Commodore Esek Hopkins and in March undertook their first amphibious landing, the Battle of Nassau in the Bahamas, occupying the British port of Nassau for two weeks.[36] On 3 January 1777, the Marines arrived at the Battle of Princeton attached to General John Cadwalader’s brigade, where they had been assigned by General George Washington; by December 1776, Washington was retreating through New Jersey and, "in desperate need of veteran soldiers," had ordered Nicholas and the Marines to attach themselves to the Continental Army. The Battle of Princeton, where the Marines along with General Cadwalader's brigade were personally rallied by Washington, was the first land combat engagement of the Marines; an estimated 130 Marines were present at the battle.[36] At the end of the American Revolution, both the Continental Navy and Continental Marines were disbanded in April 1783. The institution was resurrected on 11 July 1798; in preparation for the Quasi-War with France, Congress created the United States Marine Corps.[37][better source needed] Marines had been enlisted by the War Department as early as August 1797[38][better source needed] for service in the newly-built frigates authorized by the Congressional "Act to provide a Naval Armament" of 18 March 1794,[39][better source needed] which specified the numbers of Marines to recruit for each frigate.[citation needed] U.S. Marines leading Arab mercenaries to victory under U.S. Navy Lieutenant William Eaton and U.S. Marine Corps First Lieutenant Presley O'Bannon during the Battle of Derna The Marines' most famous action of this period occurred during the First Barbary War (1801–1805) against the Barbary pirates,[40] when William Eaton and First Lieutenant Presley O'Bannon led 8 Marines and 500 mercenaries in an effort to capture Tripoli. Though they only reached Derna, the action at Tripoli has been immortalized in the Marines' Hymn and the Mameluke sword carried by Marine officers.[41] War of 1812 and afterward[edit] British and U.S. troops garrisoned aboard Hornet and Penguin exchanging small arms musket fire with Tristan da Cuna in the background during the final engagement between British and U.S. forces in the War of 1812 During the War of 1812, Marine detachments on Navy ships took part in some of the great frigate duels that characterized the war, which were the first and last engagements of the conflict. Their most significant contribution was holding the center of General Andrew Jackson's defensive line at the 1815 Battle of New Orleans, the final major battle and one of the most one-sided engagements of the war. With widespread news of the battle and the capture of HMS Cyane, HMS Levant and HMS Penguin, the final engagements between British and U.S. forces, the Marines had gained a reputation as expert marksmen, especially in defensive and ship-to-ship actions.[41] They played a large role in the 1813 defense of Sacket's Harbor, New York and Norfolk and Portsmouth, Virginia,[42] also taking part in the 1814 defense of Plattsburgh in the Champlain Valley during one of the final British offensives along the Canadian-American border.The battle of Bladensburg fought 24 August 1814, was one of the worst days for American arms, though a few units and individuals performed heroic service. Notable among them were Commodore Joshua Barney‘s 500 sailors and the 120 marines under Captain Samuel Miller USMC, who inflicted the bulk of British casualties and were the only effective American resistance during the battle. A final desperate Marine counter attack, with the fighting at close quarters, however was not enough; Barney and Miller’s forces were overrun. In all of 114 Marines, 11 were killed and 16 wounded. During the battle Captain Miller's arm was badly wounded, for his gallant service in action, Miller was brevetted to the rank of Major USMC.[43] The Final Stand at Bladensburg, Maryland, 24 August 1814 After the war, the Marine Corps fell into a malaise that ended with the appointment of Archibald Henderson as its fifth commandant in 1820. Under his tenure, the Corps took on expeditionary duties in the Caribbean, the Gulf of Mexico, Key West, West Africa, the Falkland Islands, and Sumatra. Commandant Henderson is credited with thwarting President Jackson's attempts to combine and integrate the Marine Corps with the Army.[41] Instead, Congress passed the Act for the Better Organization of the Marine Corps in 1834, stipulating that the Corps was part of the Department of the Navy as a sister service to the Navy.[44] This would be the first of many times that the independent existence of the Corps was challenged.[citation needed] U.S. Marines storming Chapultepec castle under a large American flag, paving the way for the fall of Mexico City Commandant Henderson volunteered the Marines for service in the Seminole Wars of 1835, personally leading nearly half of the entire Corps (two battalions) to war. A decade later, in the Mexican–American War (1846–1848), the Marines made their famed assault on Chapultepec Palace in Mexico City, which would be later celebrated as the "Halls of Montezuma" in the Marines' Hymn. In fairness to the U.S. Army, most of the troops who made the final assault at the Halls of Montezuma were soldiers and not Marines.[45] The Americans forces were led by Army General Winfield Scott. Scott organized two storming parties of about 250 men each for 500 men total including 40 Marines.[citation needed] In the 1850s, the Marines engaged in service in Panama and Asia and were attached to Commodore Matthew Perry's East India Squadron on its historic trip to the Far East.[46] American Civil War to World War I[edit] Five USMC privates with fixed bayonets, and their NCO with his sword at the Washington Navy Yard, 1864 The Marine Corps played a small role in the Civil War (1861–1865); their most prominent task was blockade duty. As more and more states seceded from the Union, about a third of the Corps' officers left the United States to join the Confederacy and form the Confederate States Marine Corps, which ultimately played little part in the war. The battalion of recruits formed for the First Battle of Bull Run performed poorly, retreating with the rest of the Union forces.[33] Blockade duty included sea-based amphibious operations to secure forward bases. In late November 1861, Marines and sailors landed a reconnaissance in force from USS Flag at Tybee Island, Georgia, to occupy the Lighthouse and Martello Tower on the northern end of the island. It would later be the Army base for bombardment of Fort Pulaski.[47] In April and May 1862, Union Marines participated in the capture and occupation of New Orleans and the occupation of Baton Rouge, Louisiana,[48] key events in the war that helped secure Union control of the lower Mississippi River basin and denied the Confederacy a major port and naval base on the Gulf Coast.[citation needed] The remainder of the 19th century was marked by declining strength and introspection about the mission of the Marine Corps. The Navy's transition from sail to steam put into question the need for Marines on naval ships. Meanwhile, Marines served as a convenient resource for interventions and landings to protect American interests overseas. The Corps was involved in over 28 separate interventions in the 30 years from the end of the American Civil War to the end of 19th century.[49] They were called upon to stem political and labor unrest within the United States.[50] Under Commandant Jacob Zeilin's tenure, Marine customs and traditions took shape: the Corps adopted the Marine Corps emblem on 19 November 1868. It was during this time that "The Marines' Hymn" was first heard. Around 1883, the Marines adopted their current motto "Semper fidelis" (Always Faithful).[41] John Philip Sousa, the musician and composer, enlisted as a Marine apprentice at age 13, serving from 1867 until 1872, and again from 1880 to 1892 as the leader of the Marine Band.[citation needed] During the Spanish–American War (1898), Marines led American forces ashore in the Philippines, Cuba, and Puerto Rico, demonstrating their readiness for deployment. At Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, the Marines seized an advanced naval base that remains in use today. Between 1899 and 1916, the Corps continued its record of participation in foreign expeditions, including the Philippine–American War, the Boxer Rebellion in China, Panama, the Cuban Pacifications, the Perdicaris incident in Morocco, Veracruz, Santo Domingo, and the Banana Wars in Haiti and Nicaragua;[citation needed] the experiences gained in counter-insurgency and guerrilla operations during this period were consolidated into the Small Wars Manual.[51][better source needed] World War I[edit] Georges Scott, American Marines in Belleau Wood, 1918 During World War I, Marines served as a part of the American Expeditionary Force under General John J. Pershing when America entered into the war on 6 April 1917. The Marine Corps had a deep pool of officers and non-commissioned officers with battle experience and thus experienced a large expansion. The U.S. Marine Corps entered the war with 511 officers and 13,214 enlisted personnel and by 11 November 1918 had reached a strength of 2,400 officers and 70,000 enlisted.[52] African-Americans were entirely excluded from the Marine Corps during this conflict.[53] Opha May Johnson was the first woman to enlist in the Marines; she joined the Marine Corps Reserve in 1918 during World War I, officially becoming the first female Marine.[54] From then until the end of World War I, 305 women enlisted in the Corps.[55] During the Battle of Belleau Wood in 1918, the Marines and U.S. media reported that Germans had nicknamed them Teufel Hunden, meaning "Devil Dogs" for their reputation as shock troops and marksmen at ranges up to 900 meters; there is no evidence of this in German records (as Teufelshunde would be the proper German phrase). Nevertheless, the name stuck in U.S. Marine lore.[56] The flag of the United States Marine Corps from 1914 to 1939 Between the World Wars, the Marine Corps was headed by Commandant John A. Lejeune, and under his leadership, the Corps studied and developed amphibious techniques that would be of great use in World War II. Many officers, including Lieutenant Colonel Earl Hancock "Pete" Ellis, foresaw a war in the Pacific with Japan and undertook preparations for such a conflict. Through 1941, as the prospect of war grew, the Corps pushed urgently for joint amphibious exercises with the Army and acquired amphibious equipment that would prove of great use in the upcoming conflict.[57] World War II[edit] Former French Foreign Legion Lieutenant, and U.S. Marine Corps officer Peter J. Ortiz, who served in the European theater, often behind enemy lines In World War II, the Marines performed a central role in the Pacific War, along with the U.S. Army. The battles of Guadalcanal, Bougainville, Tarawa, Guam, Tinian, Cape Gloucester, Saipan, Peleliu, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa saw fierce fighting between Marines and the Imperial Japanese Army. Some 600,000 Americans served in the U.S. Marine Corps in World War II.[58] The Battle of Iwo Jima, which began on 19 February 1945, was arguably the most famous Marine engagement of the war. The Japanese had learned from their defeats in the Marianas Campaign and prepared many fortified positions on the island including pillboxes and network of tunnels. The Japanese put up fierce resistance, but American forces reached the summit of Mount Suribachi on 23 February. The mission was accomplished with high losses of 26,000 American casualties and 22,000 Japanese.[59] The Marines played a comparatively minor role in the European theater. Nonetheless, they did continue to provide security detachments to U.S. embassies and ships, contributed personnel to small special ops teams dropped into Nazi-occupied Europe as part of Office of Strategic Services (OSS, the precursor to the CIA) missions, and acted as staff planners and trainers for U.S. Army amphibious operations, including the Normandy landings.[60][61] By the end of the war, the Corps had expanded from two brigades to six divisions, five air wings, and supporting troops, totaling about 485,000 Marines. In addition, 20 defense battalions and a parachute battalion were raised.[62] Nearly 87,000 Marines were casualties during World War II (including nearly 20,000 killed), and 82 were awarded the Medal of Honor.[63] Photograph of the Marine Corps War Memorial, which depicts the second U.S. flag-raising atop Mount Suribachi, on Iwo Jima. The memorial is modeled on Joe Rosenthal's famous Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima. In 1942, the Navy Seabees were created with the Marine Corps providing their organization and military training. Many Seabee units were issued the USMC standard issue and were re-designated "Marine". Despite the Corps giving them their military organization, military training, issuing them uniforms and redesignating their units, the Seabees remained Navy.[note 2][64][65] USMC historian Gordon L. Rottmann writes that one of the "Navy's biggest contributions to the Marine Corps during WWII was the creation of the Seabees."[66] Despite Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal's prediction that the Marine flag raising at Iwo Jima meant "a Marine Corps for the next five hundred years",[67][68] the Corps faced an immediate institutional crisis following the war because of a suddenly shrunken budget. Army generals pushing for a strengthened and reorganized defense establishment attempted to fold the Marine mission and assets into the Navy and Army. Drawing on hastily assembled Congressional support, and with the assistance of the so-called "Revolt of the Admirals", the Marine Corps rebuffed such efforts to dismantle the Corps, resulting in statutory protection of the Marine Corps in the National Security Act of 1947.[69] Shortly afterward, in 1952 the Douglas–Mansfield Act afforded the commandant an equal voice with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on matters relating to the Marines and established the structure of three active divisions and air wings that remain today.[citation needed] Korean War[edit] F4U Corsairs providing close air support to Marines of the 1st Marine Division fighting Chinese forces in North Korea, December 1950 The Korean War (1950–1953) saw the hastily formed Provisional Marine Brigade holding the defensive line at the Pusan Perimeter. To execute a flanking maneuver, General Douglas MacArthur called on United Nations forces, including U.S. Marines, to make an amphibious landing at Inchon. The successful landing resulted in the collapse of North Korean lines and the pursuit of North Korean forces north near the Yalu River until the entrance of the People's Republic of China into the war. Chinese troops surrounded, surprised, and overwhelmed the overextended and outnumbered American forces. The U.S. Army's X Corps, which included the 1st Marine Division and the Army's 7th Infantry Division regrouped and inflicted heavy casualties during their fighting withdrawal to the coast, known as the Battle of Chosin Reservoir. The fighting calmed after the Battle of the Chosin Reservoir, but late in March 1953, the relative quiet of the war was broken when the People's Liberation Army launched a massive offensive on three outposts manned by the 5th Marine Regiment. These outposts were codenamed "Reno", "Vegas", and "Carson". The campaign was collectively known as the Nevada Cities Campaign. There was brutal fighting on Reno hill, which was eventually captured by the Chinese. Although Reno was lost, the 5th Marines held both Vegas and Carson through the rest of the campaign. In this one campaign, the Marines suffered approximately 1,000 casualties and might have suffered much more without the U.S. Army's Task Force Faith. Marines would continue a battle of attrition around the 38th Parallel until the 1953 armistice.[70] During the war, the Corps expanded from 75,000 regulars to a force of 261,000 Marines, mostly reservists; 30,544 Marines were killed or wounded during the war, and 42 were awarded the Medal of Honor.[71] Vietnam War[edit] U.S. Marines of "G" Company, 2nd Battalion, 7th Marines in action during Operation Allen Brook in South Vietnam, 1968 The Marine Corps served in the Vietnam War, taking part in such battles as the Battle of Hue and the Battle of Khe Sanh in 1968. Individuals from the USMC generally operated in the Northern I Corps Regions of South Vietnam. While there, they were constantly engaged in a guerrilla war against the Viet Cong, along with an intermittent conventional war against the North Vietnamese Army. Portions of the Corps were responsible for the less-known Combined Action Program that implemented unconventional techniques for counter-insurgency and worked as military advisers to the Republic of Vietnam Marine Corps. Marines were withdrawn in 1971 and returned briefly in 1975 to evacuate Saigon and attempt a rescue of the crew of the SS Mayaguez.[72] Vietnam was the longest war up to that time for Marines; by its end, 13,091 had been killed in action,[73][74] 51,392 had been wounded, and 57 Medals of Honor had been awarded.[75][76] Because of policies concerning rotation, more Marines were deployed for service during Vietnam than World War II.[77] While recovering from Vietnam, the Corps hit a detrimental low point in its service history caused by courts-martial and non-judicial punishments related partially to increased unauthorized absences and desertions during the war. Overhaul of the Corps began in the late 1970s, discharging the most delinquent, and once the quality of new recruits improved, the Corps focused on reforming the non-commissioned officer Corps, a vital functioning part of its forces.[27] Interim: Vietnam War to the War on Terror[edit] Beirut Memorial at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune After the Vietnam War, the U.S. Marines resumed their expeditionary role, participating in the failed 1980 Iran hostage rescue attempt Operation Eagle Claw, the Operation Urgent Fury and the Operation Just Cause. On 23 October 1983, the Marine headquarters building in Beirut was bombed, causing the highest peacetime losses to the Corps in its history (220 Marines and 21 other service members were killed) and leading to the American withdrawal from Lebanon. In 1990, Marines of the Joint Task Force Sharp Edge saved thousands of lives by evacuating British, French and American nationals from the violence of the Liberian Civil War. U.S. Marines from 3rd Battalion, 3rd Marines during the Desert Storm deployment in 1990–1991 During the Persian Gulf War of 1990 to 1991, Marine task forces formed for Operation Desert Shield and later liberated Kuwait, along with Coalition forces, in Operation Desert Storm.[41] Marines participated in combat operations in Somalia (1992–1995) during Operations Restore Hope, Restore Hope II, and United Shield to provide humanitarian relief.[78] In 1997, Marines took part in Operation Silver Wake, the evacuation of American citizens from the U.S. Embassy in Tirana, Albania.[citation needed] Global War on Terrorism[edit] U.S. Marines from 1st Battalion, 7th Marines entering a palace in Baghdad in 2003 Following the attacks on 11 September 2001, President George W. Bush announced the Global War on Terrorism. The stated objective of the Global War on Terror is "the defeat of Al-Qaeda, other terrorist groups and any nation that supports or harbors terrorists".[79] Since then, the Marine Corps, alongside the other military services, has engaged in global operations around the world in support of that mission.[citation needed] U.S. Marines conducting a dawn patrol in Afghanistan's Nawa District, Helmand Province, 2010 In spring 2009, President Barack Obama's goal of reducing spending in the Defense Department was led by Secretary Robert Gates in a series of budget cuts that did not significantly change the Corps' budget and programs, cutting only the VH-71 Kestrel and resetting the VXX program.[80][81][82] However, the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform singled the Corps out for the brunt of a series of recommended cuts in late 2010.[83] In light of budget sequestration in 2013, General James Amos set a goal of a force of 174,000 Marines.[84] He testified that this was the minimum number that would allow for an effective response to even a single contingency operation, but it would reduce the peacetime ratio of time at home bases to time deployed down to a historical low level.[85] Afghanistan Campaign[edit] U.S. Marines dismounting from an Assault Amphibious Vehicle in Djibouti Marines and other American forces began staging in Pakistan and Uzbekistan on the border of Afghanistan as early as October 2001 in preparation for Operation Enduring Freedom.[86] The 15th and 26th Marine Expeditionary Units were some of the first conventional forces into Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in November 2001.[87] The Marines first entered Afghanistan after Army paratroopers secured their entry.[88] Two Marines of 3rd Battalion, 6th Marines engaging the enemy during Operation Moshtarak in Afghanistan's Helmand Province Since then, Marine battalions and squadrons have been rotating through, engaging Taliban and Al-Qaeda forces. Marines of the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit flooded into the Taliban-held town of Garmsir on 29 April 2008, in Helmand Province, in the first major American operation in the region in years.[89] In June 2009, 7,000 Marines with the 2nd Marine Expeditionary Brigade deployed to Afghanistan in an effort to improve security[90] and began Operation Strike of the Sword the next month. In February 2010, the 2nd Marine Expeditionary Brigade launched the largest offensive of the Afghan Campaign since 2001, the Battle of Marjah, to clear the Taliban from their key stronghold in Helmand Province.[91] After Marjah, Marines progressed north up the Helmand River and cleared the towns of Kajahki and Sangin. Marines remained in Helmand Province until 2014.[citation needed] Iraq Campaign[edit] Play media U.S. Marines during the Second Battle of Fallujah in 2004 U.S. Marines served in the Iraq War, along with its sister services. The I Marine Expeditionary Force, along with the U.S. Army's 3rd Infantry Division, spearheaded the Operation Iraqi Freedom.[92] The Marines left Iraq in the summer of 2003 but returned in the beginning of 2004. They were given responsibility for the Al Anbar Province, the large desert region to the west of Baghdad. During this occupation, the Marines lead assaults on the city of Fallujah in April (Operation Vigilant Resolve) and November 2004 (Operation Phantom Fury) and saw intense fighting in such places as Ramadi, Al-Qa'im and Hīt.[93] Their time in Iraq has courted controversy with the Haditha killings and the Hamdania incident.[94][95] The Anbar Awakening and 2007 surge reduced levels of violence. The Marine Corps officially ended its role in Iraq on 23 January 2010 when they handed over responsibility for Al Anbar Province to the U.S. Army.[96] Marines returned to Iraq in the summer of 2014 in response to growing violence there.[97] 3rd Battalion, 4th Marines loading 120mm mortar rounds during Operation Inherent Resolve in Syria, 2018 Throughout the Global War on Terrorism, the U.S. Marines have supported operations in Africa to counter Islamic extremism and piracy in the Red Sea. In late 2002, Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa was stood up at Camp Lemonnier, Djibouti to provide regional security.[98] Despite transferring overall command to the Navy in 2006, the Marines continued to operate in the Horn of Africa into 2007.[99] Organization[edit] Main article: Organization of the United States Marine Corps Organization of the United States Marine Corps Department of the Navy[edit] The Department of the Navy, led by the Secretary of the Navy, is a military department of the cabinet-level U.S. Department of Defense that oversees the Marine Corps and the Navy. The most senior Marine officer is the Commandant (unless a Marine officer is the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs or Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs), responsible to the Secretary of the Navy for organizing, recruiting, training, and equipping the Marine Corps so that its forces are ready for deployment under the operational command of the combatant commanders. The Marine Corps is organized into four principal subdivisions: Headquarters Marine Corps (HQMC), the Operating Forces, the Supporting Establishment, and the Marine Forces Reserve (MARFORRES or USMCR).[citation needed] Headquarters Marine Corps[edit] HQMC consists of the Commandant of the Marine Corps, the Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps, the Director Marine Corps Staff, the several Deputy Commandants, the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps, and various special staff officers and Marine Corps agency heads that report directly to either the Commandant or Assistant Commandant. HQMC is supported by the Headquarters and Service Battalion, USMC providing administrative, supply, logistics, training, and services support to the Commandant and his staff.[citation needed] Operating Forces[edit] The Operating Forces are divided into three categories: Marine Corps Forces (MARFOR) assigned to unified combatant commands, viz., the Fleet Marine Forces (FMF); Security Forces guarding high-risk naval installations; and Security Guard detachments at American embassies. Under the "Forces for Unified Commands" memo, in accordance with the Unified Command Plan, Marine Corps Forces are assigned to each of the combatant commands at the discretion of the secretary of defense. Since 1991, the Marine Corps has maintained component headquarters at each of the regional unified combatant commands.[100] Marine Corps Forces are divided into Forces Command (MARFORCOM) and Pacific Command (MARFORPAC), each headed by a lieutenant general dual-posted as the commanding general of either FMF Atlantic (FMFLANT) or FMF Pacific (FMFPAC), respectively. MARFORCOM/FMFLANT has operational control of the II Marine Expeditionary Force; MARFORPAC/FMFPAC has operational control of the I Marine Expeditionary Force and III Marine Expeditionary Force.[33] Marine Air-Ground Task Force[edit] Main article: Marine Air-Ground Task Force The basic framework for deployable Marine units is the Marine Air-Ground Task Force (MAGTF), a flexible structure of varying size. A MAGTF integrates a ground combat element (GCE), an aviation combat element (ACE), and a logistics combat element (LCE) under a common command element (CE), capable of operating independently or as part of a larger coalition. The MAGTF structure reflects a strong preference in the Corps towards self-sufficiency and a commitment to combined arms, both essential assets to an expeditionary force. The Marine Corps has a wariness and distrust of reliance on its sister services and towards joint operations in general.[27] Supporting Establishment[edit] The Supporting Establishment includes the Combat Development Command, the Logistics Command, the Systems Command, the Recruiting Command, the Installations Command, the Marine Band, and the Marine Drum and Bugle Corps.[citation needed] Marine Corps bases and stations[edit] Main article: List of United States Marine Corps installations The Marine Corps operates many major bases, 14 of which host operating forces, several support and training installations, as well as satellite facilities.[101] Marine Corps bases are concentrated around the locations of the Marine Expeditionary Forces, though reserve units are scattered throughout the United States. The principal bases are Camp Pendleton on the West Coast, home to I Marine Expeditionary Force; Camp Lejeune on the East Coast, home to II Marine Expeditionary Force; and Camp Butler in Okinawa, Japan, home to III Marine Expeditionary Force.[citation needed] Other important bases include air stations, recruit depots, logistics bases, and training commands. Marine Corps Air Ground Combat Center Twentynine Palms in California is the Marine Corps' largest base and home to the Corps' most complex, combined-arms, live-fire training. Marine Corps Base Quantico in Virginia is home to Marine Corps Combat Development Command and nicknamed the "Crossroads of the Marine Corps".[102][103] The Marine Corps maintains a significant presence in the National Capital Region, with Headquarters Marine Corps scattered amongst the Pentagon, Henderson Hall, Washington Navy Yard, and Marine Barracks, Washington, D.C. Additionally, Marines operate detachments at many installations owned by other branches to better share resources, such as specialty schools. Marines are also present at and operate many forward bases during expeditionary operations.[citation needed] Marine Forces Reserve[edit] Marine Forces Reserve (MARFORRES/USMCRR) consists of the Force Headquarters Group, 4th Marine Division, 4th Marine Aircraft Wing, and the 4th Marine Logistics Group. The MARFORRES/USMCR is capable of forming a 4th Marine Expeditionary Force or reinforcing/augmenting active-duty forces.[citation needed] Special Operations[edit] Main article: United States Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command See also: Marine Raider Regiment and United States Marine Corps Special Operations Capable Forces Marine Raiders conducting CQB training Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command (MARSOC) includes the Marine Raider Regiment, the Marine Raider Support Group, and the Marine Raider Training Center (MRTC). Both the Raider Regiment and the Raider Support Group consist of a headquarters company and three operations battalions. MRTC conducts screening, assessment, selection, training and development functions for MARSOC units. Marine Corps Special Operations Capable forces include: Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Companies, the Chemical Biological Incident Response Force, the Marine Division Reconnaissance Battalions, Force Reconnaissance Companies, Maritime Special Purpose Force, and Special Reaction Teams. Additionally, all deployed MEUs are certified as "Special Operations Capable", viz. "MEU(SOC)", however Special Operations Capable forces are not considered to be special operations forces.[citation needed] Although the notion of a Marine special operations forces contribution to the United States Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) was considered as early as the founding of USSOCOM in the 1980s, it was resisted by the Marine Corps. Commandant Paul X. Kelley expressed the belief that Marines should only support Marines and that the Corps should not fund a special operations capability that would not directly support Marine operations.[104] However, much of the resistance from within the Corps dissipated when Marine leaders watched the Corps' 15th and 26th MEU(SOC)s "sit on the sidelines" during the very early stages of Operation Enduring Freedom while other conventional units and special operations units from the Army, Navy, and Air Force actively engaged in operations in Afghanistan.[105] After a three-year development period, the Corps agreed in 2006 to supply a 2,500-strong unit, Marine Forces Special Operations Command, which would answer directly to USSOCOM.[106] Personnel[edit] See also: List of notable United States Marines and List of historically notable United States Marines Leadership[edit] David Berger, Commandant of the Marine Corps Gary L. Thomas, Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Troy E. Black, Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps The Commandant of the Marine Corps is the highest-ranking officer of the Marine Corps, unless a Marine is either the chairman or vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The commandant has the U.S. Code Title 10 responsibility to staff, train, and equip the Marine Corps and has no command authority. The commandant is a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and reports to the Secretary of the Navy.[107] The Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps acts as the chief deputy to the commandant. The Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is the senior enlisted Marine and acts as an adviser to the commandant. Headquarters Marine Corps comprises the rest of the commandant's counsel and staff, with deputy commandants that oversee various aspects of the Corps assets and capabilities. The current and 38th Commandant is David Berger, who assumed the position on 11 July 2019.[108][109] The 35th and current Assistant Commandant is Gary L. Thomas, while the 19th and current Sergeant Major is Troy E. Black.[citation needed] Women[edit] Opha Johnson (far right) in 1946, with Katherine Towle (far left). They are looking at Opha Johnson's uniform being worn by PFC Muriel Albert. Main article: Women in the United States Marines Two of the first female graduates of the School of Infantry-East's Infantry Training Battalion course, 2013 Women have served in the United States Marine Corps since 1918.[110] The first woman to have enlisted was Opha May Johnson (1878–1955).[111][112] In January 2017, three women joined an infantry battalion at Camp Lejeune. Women had not served as infantry Marines prior to this.[113] In 2017, the Marines released a recruitment advertisement that focused on women for the first time.[114] As of October 2019[update], female Marines make up 7.8% of the force.[citation needed] In December 2020, the Marine Corps began a trial program to have females integrated into the training companies at their recruit depot in San Diego as Congress has mandated an end to the male-only program there. For the 60 female recruits, scheduled to begin training in San Diego in February 2021, the Corps will transfer female drill instructors from their recruit depot in Parris Island, which already has a coed program.[115] Rank structure[edit] Main article: United States Marine Corps rank insignia As in the rest of the United States Armed Forces (excluding the Air Force and Space Force, which do not currently appoint warrant officers), Marine Corps ranks fall into one of three categories: commissioned officer, warrant officer, and enlisted, in decreasing order of authority. To standardize compensation, each rank is assigned a pay grade.[116] Commissioned officers[edit] Commissioned officers are distinguished from other officers by their commission, which is the formal written authority, issued in the name of the President of the United States, that confers the rank and authority of a Marine officer. Commissioned officers carry the "special trust and confidence" of the President of the United States.[19] Marine Corps commissioned officers are promoted based on an "up or out" system in accordance with the Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980.[citation needed] US DoD Pay Grade O-1 O-2 O-3 O-4 O-5 O-6 O-7 O-8 O-9 O-10 NATO Code OF-1 OF-2 OF-3 OF-4 OF-5 OF-6 OF-7 OF-8 OF-9 Insignia Service Uniform Insignia Title Second lieutenant First lieutenant Captain Major Lieutenant colonel Colonel Brigadier general Major general Lieutenant general General Abbreviation 2ndLt 1stLt Capt Maj LtCol Col BGen MajGen LtGen Gen Warrant officers[edit] See also: Warrant officer (United States) Warrant officers are primarily formerly enlisted experts in a specific specialized field and provide leadership generally only within that speciality. US DoD Pay Grade W-1 W-2 W-3 W-4 W-5 NATO Code WO-1 WO-2 WO-3 WO-4 WO-5 Insignia Title Warrant officer 1 Chief warrant officer 2 Chief warrant officer 3 Chief warrant officer 4 Chief warrant officer 5 Abbreviation WO CWO2 CWO3 CWO4 CWO5 Enlisted[edit] Enlisted Marines in the pay grades E-1 to E-3 make up the bulk of the Corps' ranks. Although they do not technically hold leadership ranks, the Corps' ethos stresses leadership among all Marines, and junior Marines are often assigned responsibility normally reserved for superiors. Those in the pay grades of E-4 and E-5 are non-commissioned officers (NCOs).[117] They primarily supervise junior Marines and act as a vital link with the higher command structure, ensuring that orders are carried out correctly. Marines E-6 and higher are staff non-commissioned officers (SNCOs), charged with supervising NCOs and acting as enlisted advisers to the command.[citation needed] The E-8 and E-9 levels have two and three ranks per pay grade, respectively, each with different responsibilities. The first sergeant and sergeant major ranks are command-oriented, serving as the senior enlisted Marines in a unit, charged to assist the commanding officer in matters of discipline, administration, and the morale and welfare of the unit. Master sergeants and master gunnery sergeants provide technical leadership as occupational specialists in their specific MOS. The Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps also E-9, is a billet conferred on the senior enlisted Marine of the entire Marine Corps, personally selected by the commandant. It is possible for an enlisted Marine to hold a position senior to Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps which was the case from 2011 to 2015 with the appointment of Sergeant Major Bryan B. Battaglia to the billet of Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman, who is the most senior enlisted member of the United States military, serving in the Joint Chiefs of Staff.[citation needed] US DoD Pay Grade E-1 E-2 E-3 E-4 E-5 E-6 E-7 E-8 E-9 NATO Code OR-1 OR-2 OR-3 OR-4 OR-5 OR-6 OR-7 OR-8 OR-9 Dress Uniform Insignia No Insignia Title Private Private first class Lance corporal Corporal Sergeant Staff sergeant Gunnery sergeant Master sergeant First sergeant Master gunnery sergeant Sergeant major Sergeant major of the Marine Corps Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman Abbreviation Pvt PFC LCpl Cpl Sgt SSgt GySgt MSgt 1stSgt MGySgt SgtMaj SMMC SEAC Military Occupational Specialty[edit] Main articles: Military Occupational Specialty and List of United States Marine Corps MOS The Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) is a system of job classification. Using a four digit code, it designates what field and specific occupation a Marine performs. Segregated between officer and enlisted, the MOS determines the staffing of a unit. Some MOSs change with rank to reflect supervisory positions; others are secondary and represent a temporary assignment outside of a Marine's normal duties or special skill.[citation needed] Initial training[edit] Main articles: United States Marine Corps Recruit Training and Officer Candidates School (United States Marine Corps) Every year, over 2,000 new Marine officers are commissioned, and 38,000 recruits are accepted and trained.[33] All new Marines, enlisted or officer, are recruited by the Marine Corps Recruiting Command.[118] Marine recruits at Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego Commissioned officers are commissioned mainly through one of three sources: Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps, Officer Candidates School, or the United States Naval Academy. Following commissioning, all Marine commissioned officers, regardless of accession route or further training requirements, attend The Basic School at Marine Corps Base Quantico. At The Basic School, second lieutenants, warrant officers, and selected foreign officers learn the art of infantry and combined arms warfare.[19] Marine recruits on a Squad Rush course Enlisted Marines attend recruit training, known as boot camp, at either Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego or Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island. Historically, the Mississippi River served as a dividing line that delineated who would be trained where, while more recently, a district system has ensured a more even distribution of male recruits between the two facilities. All recruits must pass a fitness test to start training; those who fail will receive individualized attention and training until the minimum standards are reached. Marine recruit training is the longest among the American military services; it is 13 weeks long including processing and out-processing.[119] U.S. Marines in training Following recruit training, enlisted Marines then attend The School of Infantry at Camp Geiger or Camp Pendleton. Infantry Marines begin their combat training, which varies in length, immediately with the Infantry Training Battalion. Marines in all other MOSs train for 29 days in Marine Combat Training, learning common infantry skills, before continuing on to their MOS schools, which vary in length.[120] Uniforms[edit] Main article: Uniforms of the United States Marine Corps An illustration of U.S. Marines in various uniform setups. From left to right: A U.S. Marine in a Marine Corps Combat Utility Uniform with full combat load circa 2003, a U.S. Marine in a (full) blue dress uniform, a U.S. Marine officer in a service uniform, and a U.S. Marine general in an evening dress uniform. The Marine Corps has the most stable and most recognizable uniforms in the American military; the Dress Blues dates back to the early 19th century[33] and the service uniform to the early 20th century. Only a handful of skills (parachutist, air crew, explosive ordnance disposal, etc.) warrant distinguishing badges, and rank insignia is not worn on uniform headgear (with the exception of an officer's garrison service cover). While other servicemembers commonly identify with a sub-group as much as or more than their service (Ranger, submariner, aircrew, etc.), Marine uniforms do not reflect such division.[citation needed] Marines have four main uniforms: dress, service, utility, and physical training. These uniforms have a few minor but very distinct variations from enlisted personnel to commissioned and non-commissioned officers. The Marine Corps dress uniform is the most elaborate, worn for formal or ceremonial occasions. There are four different forms of the dress uniform. The variations of the dress uniforms are known as "Alphas", "Bravos", "Charlies", or "Deltas". The most common being the "Blue Dress Alphas or Bravos", called "Dress Blues" or simply "Blues". It is most often seen in recruiting advertisements and is equivalent to black tie. There is a "Blue-White" Dress for summer, and Evening Dress for formal (white tie) occasions. Versions with a khaki shirt in lieu of the coat (Blue Dress Charlie/Delta) are worn as a daily working uniform by Marine recruiters and NROTC staff.[121] The service uniform was once the prescribed daily work attire in garrison; however, it has been largely superseded in this role by the utility uniform. Consisting of olive green and khaki colors, it is commonly referred to as "Greens". It is roughly equivalent in function and composition to a business suit.[121][failed verification] The utility uniform, currently the Marine Corps Combat Utility Uniform, is a camouflage uniform intended for wear in the field or for dirty work in garrison, though it has been standardized for regular duty. It is rendered in MARPAT pixelated camouflage that breaks up the wearer's shape. In garrison, the woodland and desert uniforms are worn depending on the Marine's duty station.[122][better source needed] Marines consider the utilities a working uniform and do not permit their wear off-base, except in transit to and from their place of duty and in the event of an emergency.[121] Culture[edit] Main article: Culture of the United States Marine Corps Official traditions and customs[edit] As in any military organization, the official and unofficial traditions of the Marine Corps serve to reinforce camaraderie and set the service apart from others. The Corps' embrace of its rich culture and history is cited as a reason for its high esprit de corps.[19] An important part of the Marine Corps culture is the traditional seafaring naval terminology derived from its history with the Navy. Marines are not "soldiers" or "sailors".[123] The Eagle, Globe and Anchor along with the U.S. flag, the Marine Corps flag and the Commandant's flag The Marine Corps emblem is the Eagle, Globe, and Anchor, sometimes abbreviated "EGA", adopted in 1868.[124] The Marine Corps seal includes the emblem, also is found on the flag of the United States Marine Corps, and establishes scarlet and gold as the official colors.[125] The Marine motto Semper Fidelis means Always Faithful in Latin, often appearing as Semper Fi. The Marines' Hymn dates back to the 19th century and is the oldest official song in the United States armed forces. Semper Fi is also the name of the official march of the Corps, composed by John Philip Sousa. The mottos "Fortitudine" (With Fortitude); By Sea and by Land, a translation of the Royal Marines' Per Mare, Per Terram; and To the Shores of Tripoli were used until 1868.[126] Marines' Hymn The "Marines' Hymn" performed in 1944 by the Boston Pops. Problems playing this file? See media help. Semper Fidelis March John Philip Sousa's "Semper Fidelis March", the official march of the U.S. Marine Corps. Performed by the U.S. Marine Band in June 1909. Problems playing this file? See media help. Two styles of swords are worn by Marines: the officers' Mameluke Sword, similar to the Persian shamshir presented to Lt. Presley O'Bannon after the Battle of Derna, and the Marine NCO sword.[33] The Marine Corps Birthday is celebrated every year on 10 November in a cake-cutting ceremony where the first slice of cake is given to the oldest Marine present, who in turn hands it off to the youngest Marine present. The celebration includes a reading of Commandant Lejeune's Birthday Message.[127] Close Order Drill is heavily emphasized early on in a Marine's initial training, incorporated into most formal events, and is used to teach discipline by instilling habits of precision and automatic response to orders, increase the confidence of junior officers and noncommissioned officers through the exercise of command and give Marines an opportunity to handle individual weapons.[128] Unofficial traditions and customs[edit] A recruiting poster making use of the "Teufel Hunden" [sic] nickname Marines have several generic nicknames: Devil Dog: German soldiers during the First World War said that at Belleau Wood the Marines were so vicious that the German infantrymen called them Teufel Hunden – 'devil dogs'.[129][130][131][132] Gyrene: commonly used between fellow Marines.[133] Leatherneck: refers to a leather collar formerly part of the Marine uniform during the Revolutionary War period.[134] Jarhead has several oft-disputed explanations.[135] Some other unofficial traditions include mottos and exclamations: Oorah is common among Marines, being similar in function and purpose to the Army and Air Force's hooah and the Navy's hooyah cries. Many possible etymologies have been offered for the term.[136] Semper Fi is a common greeting among serving and veteran Marines. Improvise, Adapt and Overcome has become an adopted mantra in many units.[137] Veteran Marines[edit] The Corps encourages the idea that "Marine" is an earned title, and most Marine Corps personnel take to heart the phrase "Once a Marine, Always a Marine". They reject the term "ex-Marine" in most circumstances. There are no regulations concerning the address of persons who have left active service, so a number of customary terms have come into common use.[69] An honorably discharged Marine is a "Marine". The title "Marine Corps Veteran" is also acceptable. There are no honorably discharged "Former" or "Ex" Marines. "Retired Marine" is generally reserved for those who have completed 20 or more years of service are called "Lifers" and formally retired or those who have been medically retired. According to one of the "Commandant's White letters" from Commandant Alfred M. Gray, Jr., referring to a Marine by their last earned rank is appropriate.[138] Martial arts program[edit] Marines training in martial arts Main article: Marine Corps Martial Arts Program In 2001, the Marine Corps initiated an internally designed martial arts program, called Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP). Because of an expectation that urban and police-type peacekeeping missions would become more common in the 21st century, placing Marines in even closer contact with unarmed civilians, MCMAP was implemented to provide Marines with a larger and more versatile set of less-than-lethal options for controlling hostile, unarmed individuals. It is a stated aim of the program to instill and maintain the "Warrior Ethos" within Marines.[139] The MCMAP is an eclectic mix of different styles of martial arts melded together. MCMAP consists of punches and kicks from Taekwondo and Karate, opponent weight transfer from Jujitsu, ground grappling involving joint locking techniques and chokes from Brazilian jiu-jitsu, and a mix of knife and baton/stick fighting derived from Eskrima, and elbow strikes and kick boxing from Muay Thai. Marines begin MCMAP training in boot camp, where they will earn the first of five available belts.The belts begin at tan and progress to black and are worn with standard utility uniforms.[140] Equipment[edit] Main pages: Category:United States Marine Corps equipment and List of United States Marine Corps individual equipment As of 2013, the typical infantry rifleman carries $14,000 worth of gear (excluding night-vision goggles), compared to $2,500 a decade earlier. The number of pieces of equipment (everything from radios to trucks) in a typical infantry battalion has also increased, from 3,400 pieces of gear in 2001 to 8,500 in 2013.[141] Infantry weapons[edit] Main article: List of weapons of the United States Marine Corps Marines firing MEU(SOC) pistols while garrisoned aboard a ship The basic infantry weapon of the Marine Corps has been M16A4 service rifle. Most non-infantry Marines have been equipped with the M4 Carbine[142] and Colt 9mm SMG.[143] The standard side arm is the M9A1 pistol. The Colt M1911 is also being put back into service as the M45A1 Close Quarter Battle Pistol (CQBP) in small numbers. Suppressive fire is provided by the M27 IAR, M249 SAW, and M240 machine guns, at the squad and company levels respectively. In 2018, the M27 IAR was selected to be the standard issue rifle for the Corps.[citation needed] Indirect fire is provided by the M203 grenade launcher and the M32 grenade launcher in fireteams, M224 60 mm mortar in companies, and M252 81 mm mortar in battalions. The M2 .50 caliber heavy machine gun and MK19 automatic grenade launcher (40 mm) are available for use by dismounted infantry, though they are more commonly vehicle-mounted. Precision firepower is provided by the M40 series and the Barrett M107, while designated marksmen use the DMR (being replaced by the M39 EMR), and the SAM-R.[144] Marine Amphibious Assault Vehicles emerge from the surf onto the sand of Freshwater Beach, Australia The Marine Corps utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an offensive and defensive anti-armor capability. The SMAW and AT4 are unguided rockets that can destroy armor and fixed defenses (e.g., bunkers) at ranges up to 500 meters. The smaller and lighter M72 LAW can destroy targets at ranges up to 200 meters.[145][146] The Predator SRAW, FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles. The Javelin can utilize top-attack profiles to avoid heavy frontal armor. The Predator is a short-range fire-and-forget weapon; the Javelin and TOW are heavier missiles effective past 2,000 meters that give infantry an offensive capability against armor.[147] The USMC is currently[needs update] seeking to purchase commercial off-the-shelf bullet-trap or shoot-through rifle-grenades.[148] These grenades will provide individual Marines additional firepower and will allow indirect fire against targets in defilade, behind walls and buildings or rooftops and elevated positions at ranges between 30 and 150 meters.[148] Ground vehicles[edit] Main article: List of vehicles of the United States Marine Corps The Corps operates the same HMMWV as does the Army, which is in the process of being replaced by the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV). However, for its specific needs, the Corps uses a number of unique vehicles. The LAV-25 is a dedicated wheeled armored personnel carrier, similar to the Army's Stryker vehicle, used to provide strategic mobility.[149] Amphibious capability is provided by the AAV-7A1 Assault Amphibious Vehicle, an armored tracked vehicle that doubles as an armored personnel carrier, due to be replaced by the Amphibious Combat Vehicle, a faster vehicle with superior armor and weaponry. The threat of land mines and improvised explosive devices in Iraq and Afghanistan has seen the Corps begin purchasing heavy armored vehicles that can better withstand the effects of these weapons as part of the Mine Resistant Ambush Protected vehicle program.[150] [151] The Marines operate the M777 155 mm howitzer, including the High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS), a truck-mounted rocket artillery system. Both are capable of firing guided munitions.[152] In 2020, the Marine Corps retired its M1A1 Abrams tanks and eliminated all of its tank units. General David Berger explained the decision describing the long-serving Marine weapons system as "operationally unsuitable for our highest-priority challenges." The move leaves the Army as the sole operator of American tanks.[153] Aircraft[edit] Marine parachutists jumping from an MV-22 Osprey at 10,000 feet Main article: United States Marine Corps Aviation See also: List of active United States military aircraft The organic aviation capability of the Marine Corps is essential to its amphibious mission. The Corps operates both rotary-wing and fixed-wing aircraft mainly to provide Assault Support and close air support to its ground forces. Other aircraft types are used in a variety of support and special-purpose roles. The light transport and attack capabilities are provided by the Bell UH-1Y Venom and Bell AH-1Z Viper.[154] Medium-lift squadrons utilize the MV-22 Osprey tiltrotor. Heavy-lift squadrons are equipped with the CH-53E Super Stallion helicopter, which are being replaced with the upgraded CH-53K.[155] A Marine AH-1Z Viper landing on USS Makin Island in 2010 Marine attack squadrons fly the AV-8B Harrier II; while the fighter/attack mission is handled by the single-seat and dual-seat versions of the F/A-18 Hornet strike-fighter aircraft. The AV-8B is a V/STOL aircraft that can operate from amphibious assault ships, land air bases and short, expeditionary airfields, while the F/A-18 can only be flown from land or aircraft carriers. Both are slated to be replaced by 340 of the STOVL B version of the F-35 Lightning II[156] and 80 of the carrier F-35C versions for deployment with Navy carrier air wings.[157][158][159][160] A Marine Corps F-35B, the vertical-landing version of the F-35 Lightning II multirole fighter landing aboard USS Wasp The Corps operates its own organic aerial refueling assets in the form of the KC-130 Hercules; however it also receives a large amount of support from the U.S. Air Force. The Hercules doubles as a ground refueler and tactical-airlift transport aircraft. The USMC electronic warfare plane, the EA-6B, was retired in 2019. The Marines operate unmanned aerial vehicles: the RQ-7 Shadow and Scan Eagle for tactical reconnaissance.[161][162] Marine Fighter Training Squadron 401 (VMFT-401), operates F-5E, F-5F and F-5N Tiger II aircraft in support of air combat adversary (aggressor) training. Marine Helicopter Squadron One (HMX-1) operates the VH-3D Sea King and VH-60N Whitehawk helicopters in the VIP transport role, most notably Marine One, but are due to be replaced. A single Marine Corps C-130 Hercules aircraft, "Fat Albert", is used to support the U.S. Navy's flight demonstration team, the "Blue Angels". McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet of Marine Fighter Attack Squadron 212 (VMFA-212) over the South China Sea Relationship with other services[edit] In general, the Marine Corps shares many resources with the other branches of the United States Armed Forces. However, the Corps has consistently sought to maintain its own identity with regard to mission, funding, and assets, while utilizing support available from the larger branches. While the Marine Corps has far fewer installations both in the U.S. and worldwide than the other branches, many Army posts, Naval stations, and Air Force bases have a Marine presence. They also cross-train with other countries.[citation needed] United States Navy[edit] This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Assault Amphibious Vehicles approaching the well deck of USS Bonhomme Richard The Marine Corps's counterpart under the Department of the Navy is the United States Navy. As a result, the Navy and Marine Corps have a close relationship, more so than with other branches of the military. Whitepapers and promotional literature have commonly used the phrase "Navy-Marine Corps Team",[163][164] or refer to "the Naval Service". Both the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) and Commandant of the Marine Corps report directly to the Secretary of the Navy. Operationally, the Marine Corps provides the Fleet Marine Forces for service with the Navy's fleets, including the forward-deployed Marine Expeditionary Units embarked aboard Navy amphibious warships. The Corps also contributes some Marine Aviation fixed-wing fighter/attack assets (aircraft squadrons and related aircraft maintenance augmentation units) as part of the Carrier Air Wings deployed aboard aircraft carriers. The Marine Corps Security Force Regiment provides infantry-based security battalions and Fleet Anti-terrorism Security Team companies to guard and defend high-priority and overseas Navy bases. Security for the Presidential Retreat located aboard the Naval Support Activity Thurmont, viz., Camp David is provided by the Marine infantry battalion stationed as part of the garrison aboard Marine Barracks Washington. Cooperation between the two services includes the training and instruction of some future Marine Corps officers (most are trained and commissioned through Marine Corps OCS), all Marine Corps Naval Aviators (aircraft pilots) and Naval Flight Officers (airborne weapons and sensor system officers), and some Navy and Marine Corps enlisted personnel. The Corps receives a significant portion of its officers from the United States Naval Academy (USNA) and Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps (NROTC). USNA and NROTC staff and faculty includes Marine Corps instructors. Marine Corps aviators and flight officers are trained in the Naval Air Training Command (NATRACOM) and are designated, or winged as Naval Aviators or Naval Flight Officers. The Marine Corps provides flight instructors to the Naval Air Training Command as well as drill instructors to the Navy's Officer Candidate School. Many enlisted Marines, particularly those in the aviation maintenance specialties, are trained at Navy technical training centers. The Marine Corps also provides ground combat training support to various Navy field medical (Hospital Corpsmen), Naval Construction Force (Seabee), and Navy Expeditionary Warfare personnel, units, and commands. A Marine and sailor training with rifles in Iraq Training alongside each other is viewed as critical, as the Navy provides transport, logistical, and combat support to put Marine units into the fight, such as maritime prepositioning ships and naval gunfire support. Most Marine aviation assets ultimately derive from the Navy, with regard to acquisition, funding, and testing, and Navy aircraft carriers typically deploy with a Marine squadron alongside Navy squadrons. Marines do not recruit or train noncombatants such as chaplains or medical/dental personnel; naval personnel fill these roles. Some of these sailors, particularly Hospital corpsmen and Religious program specialists, generally wear Marine uniforms emblazoned with Navy insignia. Conversely, the Marine Corps is responsible for conducting land operations to support naval campaigns, including the seizure of naval bases. Both services operate a network security team in conjunction. Marines and sailors share many naval traditions, especially terminology and customs. Marine Corps Medal of Honor recipients wear the Navy variant of this and other awards;[24] and with few exceptions, the awards and badges of the Navy and Marine Corps are identical. Much of testing for new Marine Corps aircraft is done at Naval Air Station Patuxent River. The Navy's Blue Angels flight demonstration team is staffed by both Navy and Marine officers and enlisted men.[24] In 2007, the Marine Corps joined with the Navy and Coast Guard to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raises the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war.[165] This new strategy charts a course for the Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent regional crises, man-made or natural, from occurring or reacting quickly should one occur to avoid negative impacts to the United States. United States Army[edit] A soldier from the 1st Infantry Regiment provides security for a joint Army-Marine patrol in Rawa in 2006. The shoulder sleeve insignia has the logo of the 2nd Marine Division. The Marine Corps combat capabilities overlap with those of the United States Army, the latter having historically viewed the Corps as encroaching on the Army's capabilities and competing for funding, missions, and renown. The attitude dates back to the founding of the Continental Marines, when General George Washington refused to allow the initial Marine battalions to be drawn from among his Continental Army. Most significantly, in the aftermath of World War II, Army efforts to restructure the American defense establishment included the dissolution of the Corps and the folding of its capabilities into the other services. Leading this movement were such prominent Army officers as General Dwight D. Eisenhower and Army Chief of Staff George C. Marshall.[69] Nonetheless, during the Korean War, the Marines received the admiration of such Army officers as General Douglas MacArthur and Major General Frank E. Lowe. More recently, with most of the 2000s spent in operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates voiced concerns that the Marines are becoming a "second Army".[31] Doctrinally, the Marine Corps' focus is on being expeditionary and independent, and places emphasis on amphibious mobility and combined arms; these make it a much lighter force than many units of the Army. However, the Army maintains much larger and diverse combat arms (infantry, armor, artillery, special operations), ground transport, and logistics, while the Marines have a more diverse aviation arm (which constitutes a larger percentage of forces) and is usually organic to the MAGTF. Marines operate as expeditionary units and are completely amphibious. The Marine Corps focus is on standardized infantry units with the other arms in support roles, as the "Every Marine a rifleman" creed shows. This commitment to standardized units can be seen in the short-lived experiment of the Marine Raiders. Widely known as the first American special operations unit, created during World War II (February 1941[166]), was seen as controversial, because the thought of ‘an elite unit, within an elite unit’ was not in the Marine Corps interest.[167] While the U.S. Army's 75th Ranger Regiment, also created in World War II (December 1941), enjoys high prestige to this day because of its continuous service. In 2003 the Marine Corps, by the insistence of Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld,[168] were to create the present-day successors to the Marine Raiders and join them to Special Operations Command starting with the establishment of MCSOCOM Detachment One.[105] Culturally, Marines and soldiers share most of the common U.S. military slang and terminology, but the Corps utilizes a large number of naval terms and traditions incompatible with army lifestyle, as well as their own unique vernacular. Many Marines regard their culture to have a deep warrior tradition, with the ethos that "Every Marine a rifleman" and emphasis on cross-training and combat readiness despite the actual military occupation, be it infantry or otherwise. Doctrinally, Marines tend to decentralize and push leadership to lower ranks, while fostering initiative to a greater degree.[169] United States Air Force[edit] Marines unloading CH-46 Sea Knight helicopters from an Air Force C-5 Galaxy While some of Marine Corps Aviation assets ultimately derive from the Navy, a large amount of support is drawn from the United States Air Force. The Marine Corps makes extensive use of the USAF Air Mobility Command to airlift Marines and equipment, along with utilizing close air support from the Air Force. The Air Force may also attach Tactical Air Control Party units to conventional Marine ground forces to provide coordination for close air support.[170] The Air Force traditionally provides the Joint Force Air Component Commander (JFACC) who controls "sorties for air defense, and long range interdiction and reconnaissance" while the MAGTF commander retains control of the Marines' organic aviation assets, however Marine Aviation missions not directly in the support of the MAGTF will be typically controlled by the JFACC.[171][172][173] United States Coast Guard[edit] The Marine Corps shares a sphere of operation with units of the United States Coast Guard, including operation of the Joint Maritime Training Center (JMTC) (previously known as the Special Missions Training Center (SMTC)), a joint Coast Guard, Navy, and Marine Corps training facility located on the Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune in Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.[citation needed] Budget[edit] According to the Department of the Navy (from whence the Marine Corps receives its funding), for FY 2019, the Marine Corps received $43.2B in funding.[174] Appropriation Summary – United States Marine Corps (in millions of dollars)[175] Area FY2018 FY2019 Military Personnel 13,197 13,888 Reserve Personnel 763 785 Medicare-Eligible Retiree Health Fund Contribution 903 831 Medicare-Eligible Retiree Health Fund Contribution, Reserves 81 74 Operation and Maintenance 8,118 7,843 Operation and Maintenance, Reserve 287 275 Procurement 2,019 2,858 Procurement of Ammunition, Navy/Marine Corps 1,038* 1,182* Military Construction, Navy and Marine Corps 1,993* 2,593* Total Appropriated 28,399 30,329 * not exact since certain fields are combined with Navy expenditures In 2013, the USMC became the first American military branch to ever have a fully audited annual budget.[176] See also[edit] Marine Corps Key Volunteer Network United States Marine Corps Women's Reserve List of United States Marine Corps acronyms and expressions Notes[edit] ^ Variations also used as a "Branch of Service Insignia" on Marine Corps uniforms[11] ^ See: 17th Marines, 18th Marines, 19th Marines, and 20th Marines References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ "Marine Corps Decade Timeline | Marine Corps history". Marines.com. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. ^ Marine Corps Association & Foundation–21st Century Combined Arms, retrieved 10 November 2020 ^ "ARMED FORCES STRENGTH FIGURES FOR SEPTEMBER 30, 2020". ^ a b "Department of Defense (DoD) Releases Fiscal Year 2017 President's Budget Proposal". U.S. Department of Defense. 9 February 2016. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016. ^ "World Air Forces 2018". Flightglobal: 17. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018. ^ Macias, Amanda (10 April 2013). "Marine One upgrade: The next presidential helicopter fleet is getting closer to its debut". Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018. ^ Lejeune, Erich E. (18 April 1925). "Marine Corps Order No. 4 (Series 1925)". Commandant of the Marine Corps. United States Marine Corps History Division. Archived from the original on 5 October 2010. Retrieved 2 February 2010. ^ "Color Palette" (PDF). United States Marine Corps Brand Guide. 16 July 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. ^ Loredo-Agostini, Heidi E. (30 July 2009). "Ready for the Corps: Marines recruit latest mascot from South Texas". Recruiting Station San Antonio. Castroville, Texas: United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 20 March 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2010. ^ Dobbs, Chris (25 July 2008). "Marine Barracks' mascot, Chesty the XII, retires after more than 40 'dog years' of faithful service". Marine Barracks, Washington, D.C.: United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2010. ^ "Marine Corps Order P1020.34G W/CH 1–5: Marine Corps Uniform Regulations, Chapter 4: Insignia and Regulations For Wear, Paragraph 4001. Branch of Service Insignia, Pages 4–7" (PDF). marines.mil. 31 March 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2018. ^ a b c Charles C. Krulak (1996). Operational Maneuver from the Sea (PDF) (Report). Headquarters Marine Corps. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 August 2006. Retrieved 28 July 2006. ^ Hoffman, Colonel Jon T., USMC: A Complete History, Marine Corps Association, Quantico, VA, (2002), p. 57. ^ John Pike. "Tactical Aviation Integration". globalsecurity.org. Archived from the original on 5 April 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. ^ "U.S. Marine Corps Decade Timeline". Archived from the original on 1 October 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2013. ^ Hough, Frank O.; Ludwig, Verle E.; Shaw, Henry I. Jr. "Part I, Chapter 2: Evolution of Modern Amphibious Warfare, 1920–1941". Pearl Harbor to Guadalcanal. History of U.S. Marine Corps Operations in World War II, Volume I. Historical Branch, HQMC, United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 30 May 2007. Retrieved 2 June 2007. ^ Garand, George W. & Truman R. Strobridge (1971). "Part II, Chapter 1: The Development of FMFPac". Western Pacific Operations. History of U.S. Marine Corps Operation in World War II, Volume IV. Historical Branch, HQMC, United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 25 July 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Frank, Benis M & Henry I. Saw, Jr. (1968). "Part VI, Chapter 1: Amphibious Doctrine in World War II". Victory and Occupation. History of U.S. Marine Corps Operations in World War II, Volume V. Historical Branch, HQMC, United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ a b c d Estes, Kenneth W. (2000). The Marine Officer's Guide, 6th Edition. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-55750-567-5. ^ Clinton, William J. (2000). "Remarks Celebrating the 200th Anniversary of the United States Marine Corps Band 10 July 1998". In Office of the Federal Register (ed.). Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, William J. Clinton, 1998, Book 2: July 1 to December 31, 1998. Government Printing Office. p. 1217. ISBN 978-1-4034-4551-3. The Marine Band played at Thomas Jefferson's Inauguration in 1801 and hasn't missed a single one since. Jefferson was a violin player who loved music almost as much as he loved freedom. He named the band "The President's Own". ^ Hearn, Chester G. (2007). Marines: An Illustrated History: The United States Marine Corps from 1775 to the 21st Century. Zenith Imprint. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-7603-3211-5. ^ Keller, Scott (2004). Marine Pride: A Salute to America's Elite Fighting Force. Citadel Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-8065-2603-4. ^ "The Role of Marines in Embassy Security". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2015. ^ a b c d Lawliss, Chuck (1988). The Marine Book: A Portrait of America's Military Elite. New York: Thames and Hudson. ^ "A Chronology of the United States Marine Corps Historical Reference Pamphlet" (PDF). Marines.mil. 1947–1964. ^ Battistella, Edwin (7 May 2014). "The Art of the Political Apology". Politico.com. Retrieved 29 April 2020. ^ a b c Warren, James A. (2005). American Spartans: The U.S. Marines: A Combat History From Iwo Jima to Iraq. New York: Free Press, Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-87284-6. ^ Milks, Keith A. (8 May 2003). Ensuring 'Every Marine a Rifleman' is more than just a catch phrase. Marine Corps News. 22 MEU, USMC. Story ID # 20071230234422. Archived from the original on 24 December 2007. ^ Lieutenant Colonel R.D. Heinl, Jr., USMC (1947). "Marines in WWII Historical Monograph: The Defense of Wake". Historical Section, Division of Public Information, Headquarters, USMC. Archived from the original on 2 October 2006. Retrieved 28 August 2006. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Lind, William S.; Wyly, Michael, Col. (1985). Maneuver Warfare Handbook. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. ISBN 0-86531-862-X. ^ a b Kevin Baron (12 August 2010). "Gates: Time has come to re-examine future of Marine Corps". Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 20 September 2010. ^ Patrick, Capt Timothy (10 December 2010). "Marines return to their amphibious roots". II Marine Expeditionary Force. United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 25 December 2010. Retrieved 22 December 2010. ^ a b c d e f Chenoweth, H. Avery, Colonel, USMCR (Ret.); Nihart, Brooke, Colonel, USMC (Ret.) (2005). Semper fi: The Definitive Illustrated History of the U.S. Marines. New York: Main Street. ISBN 1-4027-3099-3. ^ "Marine Corps Expeditionary Energy Office." Archived 1 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Marines.mil. ^ Upton, Lt. Col. Stewart (6 November 2014). "First Marine Corps Leader All About Institution, Not Self". www.imef.marines.mil. U.S. Marine Corps. Retrieved 29 July 2020. During this time of the late 1760s and into the 1770s leading up to the War for our Independence … Samuel Nicholas would spend time aboard super-cargo merchant ships traveling to and from China. At the time of his nomination by (future U.S. President) John Adams to lead the Continental Marines in Nov. of 1775, he would have been well known in the community of Philadelphia for his maritime knowledge and experience. ^ a b "Marines at the Battle of Princeton". The American Battlefield Trust. American Battlefield Trust. Retrieved 28 July 2020. ^ U.S. Congress (11 July 1798). "An Act for Establishing and Organizing a Marine Corps". Archived from the original on 10 June 2010. Retrieved 6 August 2008. ^ Captain John Barry (9 February 1798). "Muster Roll of Officers, Petty Officers, Seamen, and Marines, on the Frigate United States". Archived from the original on 27 August 2009. Retrieved 16 May 2009. ^ U.S. Congress (18 March 1794). "Act to provide a Naval Armament". NARA. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011. Retrieved 16 May 2009. ^ Richard Leiby, Terrorists by Another Name: The Barbary Pirates Archived 10 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The Washington Post, 15 October 2001 ^ a b c d e Simmons, Edwin H. (2003). The United States Marines: A History, Fourth Edition. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-59114-790-5. ^ Roosevelt, Theodore, The Naval War of 1812, Random House, New York, ISBN 0-375-75419-9 ^ Sharp, John G., Register of Patients at Naval Hospital Washington DC 1814 With The Names of American Wounded from the Battle of Bladensburg, Naval History and Heritage Command, 2018, https://www.history.navy.mil/research/library/online-reading-room/title-list-alphabetically/r/register-patients-naval-hospital-washington-dc-1814.html ^ U.S. Congress (30 June 1834). "An Act for the Better Organization of the United States Marine Corps". Archived from the original on 7 October 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Eisenhower, John S. D (26 September 2018). "So far from God: the U.S. war with Mexico 1846–1848". Easton Press. Retrieved 26 September 2018. ^ Moskin, J. Robert (1987). The U.S. Marine Corps Story. New York: McGraw-Hill. ^ Elliott, Daniel T. (2008). "Archaeological Reconnaissance at the Drudi Tract, Tybee Island, Chatham County, Georgia" (PDF). Savannah, Georgia: LAMAR Institute Publication Series. p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2011. ^ Hoffman, Colonel Jon T., USMC: A Complete History, Marine Corps Association, Quantico, VA, (2002), p. 92. ^ Reference Branch (2016). "Marine Corps Casualties: 1775–2015". Frequently Requested. USMC History Division. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2016. ^ Ellsworth, Harry Allanson (1934). One Hundred Eighty Landings of United States Marines 1800–1934. Washington, D.C.: History and Museums Division, HQ, USMC. ^ "Report on Marine Corps Duplication of Effort between Army and Navy". U.S. Marine Corps. 17 December 1932. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)Contains a very detailed account of almost all the actions of the Continental Marines and USMC until 1932. It is available in scanned TIFF format from the archives of the Marine Corps University. ^ "History of Marine Corps Aviation – World War One". AcePilots.com. Archived from the original on 11 January 2006. ^ Chad L. Williams, Torchbearers of Democracy: African American Soldiers in the World War I Era. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press, 2010; p. 6. ^ Hewitt, Linda J. (1974). Women Marines in World War I (1974). United States Marine Corps History and Museums Division. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2014. ^ "Women Marines". Usmcpress.com. Archived from the original on 19 August 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2015. ^ Mitchell, John Ames (1918). "Teufel-Hunden". Life. 72: 759. Retrieved 7 October 2011. ^ Ballendorf, Dirk Anthony (1997). Pete Ellis: an amphibious warfare prophet, 1880–1923. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ^ "Expanding the Size of the U.S. Military in World War II". warfarehistorynetwork.com. 26 June 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2019. ^ Derrick Wright and Jim Laurier, Iwo Jima 1945: The Marines raise the flag on Mount Suribachi (2012) ^ Chenoweth (2005), pp. 270–71 ^ Smith Jr., Thomas W., "Rivalry at Normandy", National Review, 4 June 2004 ^ "Marines in World War II Commemorative Series". Marine Corps Historical Center. Archived from the original on 8 February 2008. Retrieved 17 January 2008. ^ Owens, Ron (2004). Medal of honor: historical facts & figures. Turner Publishing Company. p. 110. ISBN 978-1-56311-995-8. ^ Battle Orders – US Marine Corps Pacific Theater of Operations 1943–44, Gordon L Rottman, Osprey Publishing, p. 13 Archived 12 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. ^ "Seabees with the Marines, U.S. Navy Seabee Museum Archives, Port Hueneme, CA 93043" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 May 2017. ^ Rottman, Gordon L. (2002). U.S. Marine Corps World War II Order of Battle: Ground and Air units in the Pacific War, 1939–1945. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-31331-906-8. ^ Warren, James A. (2007). American Spartans: The U.S. Marines: A Combat History from Iwo Jima to Iraq. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 70. ISBN 978-1-4165-3297-2. ^ Clancy, Tom (1996). Marine: A Guided Tour of a Marine Expeditionary Unit. Penguin Group US. p. 670. ISBN 978-1-4295-2009-6. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 6 June 2018. ^ a b c Krulak, Victor H. (1984). First To Fight: An Inside View of the U.S. Marine Corps. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 0-87021-785-2. Chapter 7, The Marines' Push Button pp. 113–119. ^ Fehrenbach, T. R. (1994). This Kind of War: The Classic Korean War History. Brassey's. ISBN 1-57488-259-7. ^ "Fast Facts on the Korean War". History Division, U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. ^ Millet, Alan R. (1991). Semper Fidelis: The History of the United States Marine Corps. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 605. ISBN 978-0-02-921596-8. ^ Casualties: U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Archived 5 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine, United States Navy. ^ Official Navy figures number the Marine deaths at 13,091. This source provides a number of 14,837. "U.S. Military Casualties in Southeast Asia". The Wall-USA. 31 March 1997. Archived from the original on 2 September 2006. ^ "Casualties: U.S. Navy and Marine Corps Personnel Killed and Wounded in Wars, Conflicts, Terrorist Acts, and Other Hostile Incidents". Naval Historical Center, Department of the Navy. 7 August 2006. Archived from the original on 5 June 2007. ^ "Marines Awarded the Medal of Honor". United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. ^ Simmons, 247. Roughly 800,000 Marines served in Vietnam, as opposed to 600,000 in World War II. ^ "The preannounced landing of U.S. Marines was witnessed by millions of U.S. primetime television viewers" (PDF). United States Naval Aviation, 1910–1995. U.S. Navy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 October 2001. (PDF file, see "1992, 9 December" on p. 16) ^ "Address to Congress". Whitehouse. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ "Gates Announces Major Pentagon Priority Shifts". CNN. 9 April 2009. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 14 April 2009. ^ Shanker, Thom (8 May 2010). "Gates Takes Aim at Pentagon Spending". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 May 2010. Retrieved 9 May 2010. ^ Jaffe, Greg (9 May 2010). "Gates: Cuts in Pentagon bureaucracy needed to help maintain military force". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 9 May 2010. Retrieved 9 May 2010. ^ Smith, Rich (13 November 2010). "Marines Under Fire From Pentagon Cuts". Money Times. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 14 November 2010. ^ "Amos: America Needs a Robust Crisis Response Force". Defense One. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. ^ "Gen. Amos: 174,000 force would mean 11 fewer battalions, 14 fewer squadrons". Military Times. Archived from the original on 23 January 2016. Retrieved 1 April 2015. ^ "War Against Terror Will Involve Amorphous Front Lines". CNN. 1 October 2001. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 27 April 2007. ^ "Marines land in Afghanistan". International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on 22 May 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ “A few weeks before I arrived, his Rangers had pulled a gutsy night raid against a remote dirt strip called Rhino, ninety miles outside Kandahar. He recommended that I land my Marines there.” Gen. James Mattis, in his book Call Sign Chaos (p. 56). Random House Publishing Group. ^ "Marines launch attack on Taliban in Helmand". The Telegraph. 29 April 2008. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 13 December 2010. ^ "7,000 Marines Join Fight in Afghanistan". Camp Leatherhead (sic): CBS News. Associated Press. 8 June 2009. Archived from the original on 4 August 2009. Retrieved 3 November 2009. ^ Gal Perl Finkel, Back to the ground? Archived 17 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Israel Hayom, 8 November 2015. ^ West, Bing; General Ray L. Smith (September 2003). The March Up: Taking Baghdad with the 1st Marine Division. New York: Bantam Books. p. 17. ISBN 0-553-80376-X. ^ West, Bing (October 2005). No True Glory: A Frontline Account of the Battle for Fallujah. New York: Bantam Dell. pp. 111–113. ISBN 978-0-553-80402-7. ^ "Marines face charges in Haditha killings". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 January 2007. Retrieved 27 April 2007. ^ White, Josh; Geis, Sonya (22 June 2006). "8 Troops Charged in Death of Iraqi". CNN. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Burns, Robert (25 January 2010). "Are Marines Out of Iraq for Good?". Military.com. Associated Press. Retrieved 28 January 2010. ^ "U.S. to Send 275 Marines to Iraq, Won't Rule Out Cooperation With Iran". KTLA. Retrieved 1 April 2015. ^ "Fact Sheet – CJTF-HOA". Combined Joint Task Force – Horn of Africa. Archived from the original on 3 January 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ "USMC.mil – 26th MEU in HOA". United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 10 December 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ United States Marine Corps (2007). Marine Corps Operations. Cosimo, Inc. p. 19. ISBN 978-1-60206-062-3. ^ Williams, BGen Willie J. (October 2004). "Bases and Stations Are They Relevant?". Marine Corps Gazette. Marine Corps Association. 88 (10): 12–16. ^ "About MCB Quantico". Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. ^ "About Marine Corps University". U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2007. ^ Smith, Jr., W Thomas (2005). "Marines, Navy SEALs Forge New Special Operations Team; An exclusive interview with U.S. Navy SEAL Commander Mark Divine". Military.com. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ a b Priddy, Maj. Wade (2006). "Marine Detachment 1: Opening the door for a Marine force contribution to USSOCom". Marine Corps Gazette. Marine Corps Association. 90 (6): 58–59. ^ Graham, Bradley (2 November 2005). "Elite Marine Unit to Help Fight Terrorism, Force to Be Part of Special Operations". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Estes (1986), p. 60 ^ "Leaders". marines.mil. Retrieved 11 July 2019. ^ "Dunford Replaces Amos as New Marine Corps Commandant". Military.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. ^ "Women Marines Association". Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. ^ "Girl Joins Devil Dogs". Evening Star. 14 August 1918. Retrieved 24 October 2019. ^ Dvorak, Petula (22 September 2017). "The first woman Marine: In 1918, she couldn't vote but rushed to serve". The Washington Post. Retrieved 24 October 2019. ^ Tatum, Sophie. "Military welcomes first women infantry Marines". CNN. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. ^ "Marines Release First-Ever Ad Spotlighting Woman in Combat Position". NPR. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. ^ Harkins, Gina (14 December 2020). "Female Recruits to Train at Marines' All-Male San Diego Boot Camp in Historic First". Military.com. Retrieved 14 December 2020. ^ "DoD Defense Insignia". Archived from the original on 31 August 2006. Retrieved 28 August 2006. ^ "Marine Corps Ranks". ^ Clancy, Tom (1996). Marine: a guided tour of a Marine expeditionary unit. Penguin. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-425-15454-0. ^ Bernard L. DeKoning, ed. (2006). Recruit Medicine: Textbooks of Military Medicine. Government Printing Office. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-16-076718-0. ^ Ricks, Thomas E. (2007). Making the Corps: 10th Anniversary Edition with a New Afterword by the Author (10 ed.). Simon and Schuster. p. 239. ISBN 978-1-4165-4450-0. ^ a b c "Mco p1020.34g". United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 8 October 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2005. ^ ALMAR 007/08 Archived 13 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine directing seasonal uniform changes ^ "Don't call a Marine a soldier or sailor". The News-Times. Danbury, CT. 25 September 2005. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 26 May 2017. ^ "U.S. Marine Corps Emblem". U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 7 January 2008. ^ "Marine Corps Emblem and Seal". Customs and Traditions. Reference Branch, History Division, United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 19 February 2007. Retrieved 11 October 2008. ^ "USMC Customs and Traditions". History Division, U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 4 March 2007. ^ "Marine Corps Birthday Celebration". USMC History Division. Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. ^ "Drill a Platoon Sized Unit". Student Handout. Marine Corps University. Archived from the original on 10 July 2007. ^ "Marine Corps History, Customs, and Courtesies". U.S. Marine Guidebook. United states Marine Corps. 2010. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-60239-941-9. Marines fought like teufel hunden, legendary wild, devil dogs that at one time roamed the forests of northern Germany ^ Myers, Thomas (1988). "Hearts of Darkness". Walking Point: American Narratives of Vietnam. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 114. ISBN 978-0-19-505351-7. He reminds his charges that "at Belleau Wood the Marines were so vicious that the German infantrymen called them Teufel-Hunden – 'devil dogs' ^ Waseleski, Michael (2009). To Lead by the Unknowing, to Do the Unthinkable. AuthorHouse. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-4389-5676-3. the 5th and 6th Marine Regiments earned the nickname of "Teufel Hunden" (devil dog) by the Germans in World War I during the 1918 Château-Thierry campaign near the French village of Bouresches, the Battle of Belleau Wood ^ "6th Marine Regiment > Units > 1st Battalion > History". www.6thmarines.marines.mil. Retrieved 20 May 2019. ^ Rottman, Gordon (2011). "GI and Gyrene Jargon US Army and Marine Corps Slang". FUBAR F***ed Up Beyond All Recognition: Soldier Slang of World War II. Osprey Publishing. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-84908-653-0. based on Chinese pronunciation of Marine ^ "Marine Corps History, Customs, and Courtesies". U.S. Marine Guidebook. United states Marine Corps. 2010. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-60239-941-9. In 1804 the Secretary of the Navy ordered Marines to wear black leather stock collars when on duty ^ Rottman, Gordon (2011). "GI and Gyrene Jargon US Army and Marine Corps Slang". FUBAR F***ed Up Beyond All Recognition: Soldier Slang of World War II. Osprey Publishing. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-84908-653-0. Most likely it was the pillbox cap and high stiff collar making a Marine appear similar to a Mason jar ^ Hiresman III, LCpl. Paul W. "The meaning of 'Oorah' traced back to its roots". Marine Corps News. United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 24 December 2007. ^ Santamaria, Jason A.; Vincent Martino; Eric K. Clemons (2005). The Marine Corps Way: Using Maneuver Warfare to Lead a Winning Organization. McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 149. ISBN 978-0-07-145883-2. Long before Hollywood popularized it, Marines used the phrase to reflect their preference for being a fluid, loosely reined force that could spontaneously react to rapidly changing situations, rather than a rigid outfit that moved in a specific direction with a precise plan. ^ Freedman, David H. (2000). Corps Business: The 30 Management Principles of the U.S. Marines. New York: Collins. ^ Yi, Capt. Jamison, USMC. "MCMAP and the Warrior Ethos", Military Review, November–December 2004. ^ Franck, Loren (2003). "The Few and the Proud: A Tradition of Excellence Fuels the US Marine Corps Martial Arts Program". Black Belt. 41 (7): 70. ^ Corps to Industry: Prepare for the Worst Archived 28 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine – DoDBuzz.com, 26 September 2013 ^ "Top Marine Glad to Have M16A4 Standard". Kit Up!. Military.com. 25 March 2010. Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. Retrieved 27 April 2010. ^ "NAVMC DIRECTIVE 3500.90: MARINE CORPS SECURITY GUARD BATTALION TRAINING AND READINESS MANUAL, (SHORT TITLE: MSGBN T&R MANUAL)" (PDF). Headquarters Marine Corps. 4 April 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 January 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2014. ^ "M40A1 Sniper Rifle". USMC Fact File. U.S. Marine corps. Archived from the original on 25 February 2007. ^ John Antal "Packing a Punch: America's Man-Portable Antitank Weapons" page 88 Military Technology 3/2010 ISSN 0722-3226 ^ "Light Assault Weapon (LAW)". FBO.gov. Archived from the original on 14 February 2012. Retrieved 20 January 2012. ^ "Tube Launched, Optically Tracked, Wire Guided (TOW) Missile Weapon System". USMC Fact File. U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007. ^ a b 13-Ammunition and Explosives – M6785412I1003 (Archived) – Federal Business Opportunities: Opportunities Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Fbo.gov (9 November 2011). ^ "Light Armored Vehicle-25 (LAV-25)". USMC Fact File. U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 28 April 2003. ^ "U.S. Marine Corps Orders More Force Protection Vehicles". Force Protection, Inc. – In the News. Force Protection, Inc. August 2006. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2007. ^ Lamothe, Dan (22 October 2009). "First LVSR truck arrives in Afghanistan". Marine Corps Times. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 23 October 2009. ^ Lewis, Maj. J Christopher (July 2006). "The Future Artillery Force...Today". Marine Corps Gazette. Marine Corps Association (July 2006): 24–25. ^ "A farewell to armor: Marine Corps shuts down tank units, hauls away M1A1s". Stars and Stripes. Retrieved 23 November 2020. ^ "AH-1W Super Cobra Helicopter". USMC Fact File. U.S. Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ "Marine Corps Rotary Wing". Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 29 October 2015. ^ "F-35 Joint Strike Fighter Program". Department of Defense. Archived from the original on 27 October 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Daniel, Lisa (14 March 2011). "Plan Improves Navy, Marine Corps Air Capabilities". American Forces Press Service. United States Department of Defense. Archived from the original on 29 May 2011. Retrieved 23 March 2011. ^ Cavas, Christopher P. (14 March 2011). "More Marines to fly carrier-variant JSFs". Marine Corps Times. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 23 March 2011. ^ Cifuentes, Michael S. (14 March 2011). "Marine Corps continues flying with Joint Strike Fighter program". Headquarters Marine Corps. Archived from the original on 1 March 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2014. ^ "U.S. Marine Corps Received Its First F-35C Lightning II Carrier Variant". 29 January 2015. Archived from the original on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 4 February 2015. ^ Talton, Trista. "U.S. Marines' Shadow UAV Sees First Combat". Defensenews.com. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Scully, Megan. "Army assumes Navy, Marine UAV training". Seapower. Archived from the original on 2 April 2008. Retrieved 6 December 2007. ^ Clark, Adm. Vern; Hinton, Don (October 2002). "Sea Power 21". Proceedings. Naval Institute Press. 130 (October 2002): 3005. doi:10.1090/S0002-9939-02-06392-X. Archived from the original on 3 March 2007. Retrieved 28 July 2006. ^ Lt. Col. James Kuhn (2 November 2005). Enduring Freedom (Film). Department of the Navy. Archived from the original on 24 July 2006. ^ Jim Garamone (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. Archived from the original on 5 March 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2008. ^ Fred Pushies (3 December 2012). "Marine Corps Special Operations: A Brief History". Archived from the original on 8 March 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2018. ^ Rottman, Gordon L. Rottman (2006). "Raider Units". US Special Warfare Units in the Pacific Theater 1941–45: Scouts, Raiders, Rangers and Reconnaissance Units. Osprey Publishing. ^ Bradley Graham (3 November 2005). "Elite Marine Unit to Help Fight Terrorism". Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. ^ Connable, Maj Ben (2008). "Culture Warriors: Marine Corps Organizational Culture and Adaptation to Cultural Terrain" (PDF). Small Wars Journal. Small Wars Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2010. ^ "U.S. Air Force – Career Detail – Tactical Air Control Party Specialist (TACP)". airforce.com. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2017. ^ "Purpose of JFACC (archived)". Archived from the original on 19 November 2005. Retrieved 28 January 2010.CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link). U.S. Air Force ^ United States Marine Corps (2005). Expeditionary Operations (Marine Corps Doctrinal Publication 3). Willside Press LLC. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-55742-371-9. ^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2014.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) ^ "Highlights of the Department of the Navy FY 2019 Budget" (PDF). 23 May 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2018. ^ Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Budget) (12 March 2019). "RESOURCE SUMMARY". Highlights of the Department of the Navy – FY 2020 Budget (PDF). United States Department of the Navy (Report). p. 11. Retrieved 8 December 2020. ^ Sisk, Richard (7 February 2014). "Corps Becomes First Service to Pass Audit". dodbuzz.com. Military Advantage, A Monster Company. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 7 February 2014. Sources[edit]  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Marine Corps. Further reading[edit] Library resources about API Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Foster, Douglas (2006). Braving the Fear: The True Story of Rowdy US Marines in the Gulf War. Frederick, Maryland: PublishAmerica. ISBN 1-4137-9902-7. Archived from the original on 20 April 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2017. Martinez, Marco (2007). Hard Corps: From Gangster to Marine Hero. New York: Crown Forum. ISBN 978-0-307-38304-4. Ricks, Thomas E. (1997). Making the Corps. New York: Scribner. ISBN 1-4165-4450-X. Ulbrich, David J. (2011). Preparing for Victory: Thomas Holcomb and the Making of Modern Marine Corps, 1935–1943. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-903-3. External links[edit] Listen to this article (2 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 17 April 2007 (2007-04-17), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles) United States Marine Corpsat Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Wikimedia Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Marines.mil – Official site Official USMC recruitment site Marine Corps recruitment video Marine Corps History Division A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower Marine Corps Heritage Foundation Online Marine community Members of the USMC on RallyPoint An Unofficial Dictionary for Marines v t e  United States Marine Corps Leadership Secretary of the Navy Under Secretary of the Navy Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Military Secretary to the Commandant of the Marine Corps Marine Corps generals US Congress House Armed Services Committee Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee Senate Armed Services Committee Seapower subcommittee Major commands Organization of the Marine Corps Headquarters Marine Corps Marine Forces Command II Marine Expeditionary Force Marine Forces Pacific I Marine Expeditionary Force III Marine Expeditionary Force Marine Forces Reserve Fleet Marine Force Atlantic Pacific Marine Corps Combat Development Command Training & Education Command (TECOM) United States Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory Marine Corps Systems Command Auxiliary Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Structure Marine Air-Ground Task Force Bases Battalions Regiments Brigades Divisions MEF/Corps Marine aviation Marine expeditionary unit Special Operations Marine Raiders Marine Raider Regiment Recon Force Division Personnel and training Personnel Rank insignia MOS Notable Marines Historical Marines Marine Astronauts Criminal Investigation Division Judge Advocate Division Chaplain of the Marine Corps Associated organizations Training Recruit Training School of Infantry Officer Candidates School The Basic School Martial Arts Program Uniforms and equipment Uniforms Awards Badges Weapons Vehicles and aircraft Individual equipment History and traditions History Culture Acronyms and terms Birthday Ball Color Sergeant of the Marine Corps Eagle, Globe, and Anchor Flag Marine Band Drum and Bugle Corps Marine One Silent Drill Platoon White House Sentries Service Numbers Marine Corps War Memorial Marine Detachments "Marines' Hymn" Oorah National Museum Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima Rifleman's Creed Semper Fidelis march History of Hispanics in the USMC History of women in the USMC Women's Reserve Honorary Marine Toys for Tots Gung-ho Category v t e  United States Armed Forces Military budget of the United States Category A MC N AF SF CG Navbox A MC N AF SF CG Leadership Commander-in-chief: President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff: Chairman Vice Chairman United States Congress: Committees on Armed Services: Senate House Active duty four-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Organization Military departments Department of Defense (Secretary): Department of the Army (Secretary) Department of the Navy (Secretary) Department of the Air Force (Secretary) Department of Homeland Security (Secretary) Service branches and heads Army (Chief of Staff) Marine Corps (Commandant) Navy (Chief of Naval Operations) Air Force (Chief of Staff) Space Force (Chief of Space Operations) Coast Guard (Commandant) Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard: A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified Combatant Command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History: A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II By ancestry African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Pakistani Americans Sikh Americans History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies: A (prep) MC/N (prep) AF/SF (prep) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer: A MC MEPS ASVAB Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms: A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations: Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges: Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Office Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers: A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty/Rating/Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System/TRICARE Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains: A MC N AF CG Equipment A MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles (active) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N (active) AF CG MSC Weapons: N CG Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active Aircraft designation Missiles Helicopter arms Other Nuclear football Electronics (designations) Flags: A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs: Nuclear Biological Chemical Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Lloyd Austin, Secretary of Defense Kathleen Hicks, Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including Defense Agencies and DoD Field Activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Economic Adjustment Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Microelectronics Activity Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency Space Development Agency Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity (Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute * Defense Travel Management Office * Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service) Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency (White House Communications Agency) National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service (Director/Chief) Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity (American Forces Press Service, American Forces Radio and Television Service, Stars and Stripes, The Pentagon Channel) General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services (White House Military Office) Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisitions) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps: Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations: Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat: Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff: Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff: Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service v t e NATO Allied Maritime Command Structure Standing NATO Maritime Group 1 Standing NATO Maritime Group 2 Standing NATO Mine Countermeasures Group 1 Standing NATO Mine Countermeasures Group 2 NATO maritime forces Albanian Naval Force Belgian Maritime Component Bulgarian Navy Royal Canadian Navy Croatian Navy Royal Danish Navy Estonian Navy French Navy German Navy Hellenic Navy Icelandic Coast Guard Italian Navy Latvian Naval Forces Lithuanian Naval Force Montenegrin Navy Royal Netherlands Navy Royal Norwegian Navy Polish Navy Portuguese Navy Romanian Naval Forces Slovenian Navy Spanish Navy Turkish Naval Forces Royal Navy United States Navy United States Marine Corps United States Coast Guard v t e Uniformed services of the United States Armed Forces United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Non-armed uniformed services National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125