This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) University of Oklahoma Press Parent company University of Oklahoma Founded 1929 Founder William Bennett Bizzell Country of origin United States Headquarters location Norman, Oklahoma Distribution self-distributed[1] Publication types Books Official website www.oupress.com The University of Oklahoma Press (OU Press) is the publishing arm of the University of Oklahoma. Founded in 1929 by the fifth president of the University of Oklahoma, William Bennett Bizzell, it was the first university press to be established in the American Southwest.[2] The OU Press is one of the leading presses in the region, and is primarily known for its titles on the American West and Native Americans, though the press publishes texts on other subjects as well, ranging from wildlife to ancient languages.[3] Tornadoes and severe weather are another focus. The press releases around 80 books every year. A profile of the University of Oklahoma Press from 2018 quotes OU President David Boren as saying: "The OU Press is one of the crown jewels of the University of Oklahoma.”[4] The Arthur H. Clark Company (founded 1902) was a major printer of publications related to the history of the Western United States. In July 2006, the company was acquired by the University of Oklahoma Press and relocated to Norman, Oklahoma, where it continues as an imprint. Notes[edit] ^ "Fulfillment Services". Retrieved 2017-12-25. ^ The Oklahoma University Press website, [1]. ^ Oklahoma Historical Society's Encyclopaedia of Oklahoma History and Culture, [2] Archived 2008-01-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ https://soonermag.oufoundation.org/stories/books-to-believe-in v t e University of Oklahoma Academics Advanced Radar Research Center American Indian Law Review Carl Albert Center Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms Cooperative Institute for Mesoscale Meteorological Studies Institute for U.S.-China Issues Journal of Music Theory Pedagogy Julian P. Kanter Political Commercial Archive K20 Center National Weather Center OU Center for Public Management University of Oklahoma Press Society for Cinema and Media Studies World Literature Today Athletics Facilities Oklahoma Memorial Stadium Lloyd Noble Center L. Dale Mitchell Baseball Park Field House Barry Switzer Center Culture RUF/NEKS Sooner Schooner Boomer and Sooner Bedlam Boomer Sooner Football Seasons Coaches In the NFL Draft Red River Showdown Red River Shootout trophies All-Americans Starting QBs Basketball Men's basketball Women's basketball Coaches Men's seasons In the drafts Current men's season Other sports Baseball Softball Women's gymnastics Campus List of buildings Bizzell Memorial Library Boyd House Carl Albert Center Museum of Art National Weather Center Natural History Museum Student Union Westheimer Airport People List of University of Oklahoma people Schools College of Engineering College of Architecture Price College of Business College of Arts and Sciences Gaylord College of Journalism and Mass Communication College of Atmospheric and Geographic Sciences Mewbourne College of Earth and Energy Jeannine Rainbolt College of Education Weitzenhoffer Family College of Fine Arts University College College of Law College of Medicine College of Dentistry Hudson College of Public Health Student life Oklahoma Daily the WIRE Student Radio Campus Corner The Pride of Oklahoma Army ROTC History 2005 bombing 2015 racism incident‎ Kanter Archives Ledbetter House McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents NCAA v. Board of Regents OU-PRIME Sipuel v. Board of Regents Established: 1890 Endowment: $1.65 billion Students: 30,303 Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This University of Oklahoma-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about a United States publishing company is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This Oklahoma-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e