Publishing unit of the University of Toronto This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) API Parent company University of Toronto Founded 1901 Country of origin Canada Headquarters location Toronto Distribution UTP Distribution (most of world) NBN International (Europe) Viva Books (India) MHM Limited (Japan)[1] Publication types Scholarly Books and Journals Imprints Scholarly Publishing, Journals, UTP Higher Education, Rotman-UTP Publishing Official website No URL found. Please specify a URL here or add one to Wikidata. , https://utpjournals.press, https://utpdistribution.com The University of Toronto Press is a Canadian scholarly publisher and book distributor founded in 1901.[2] See also[edit] Dictionary of Canadian Biography University of Toronto Press Publications List of book distributors References[edit] ^ Ordering Books ^ Pound, Richard W. (2005). Fitzhenry and Whiteside Book of Canadian Facts and Dates. Fitzhenry and Whiteside. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. No URL found. Please specify a URL here or add one to Wikidata. Dictionary of Canadian Biography/Dictionnaire biographique du Canada. University of Toronto Press. v t e University of Toronto Colleges Innis Knox Massey New Regis St. Michael's Trinity University Victoria Emmanuel Woodsworth Wycliffe Academics Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering Institute for Aerospace Studies Faculty of Architecture, Landscape and Design Faculty of Arts and Science Department of Computer Science Department of Mathematics Dunlap Institute for Astronomy & Astrophysics Munk School of Global Affairs Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering Dalla Lana School of Public Health Faculty of Dentistry Fields Institute Faculty of Information Faculty of Law Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies Faculty of Medicine Faculty of Music Faculty of Pharmacy School of Public Policy and Governance Ontario Institute for Studies in Education Institute of Child Study Rotman School of Management Toronto School of Theology Libraries Gerstein Mississauga Robarts Thomas Fisher Related Press Schools Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics Koffler Scientific Reserve SciNet Consortium University Health Network Unity Health Toronto Places Annesley Hall Back Campus Fields Bahen Centre Chestnut Residence Convocation Hall Goldring Centre Graduate House Hart House Koffler Student Centre Massey Building Newman Centre Philosopher's Walk President's Estate Queen's Park Soldiers' Tower 1 Spadina Crescent Stewart Observatory Toronto Pan Am Sports Centre Varsity Arena Varsity Stadium Culture Coat of arms Students' Union The Varsity The Newspaper The Medium The Underground Massey Lectures Watts Lectures CIUT-FM Hart House Theatre Hart House Review Varsity Blues Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Rowing Club Football Jennings Cup Blue Sky Solar Racing Toronto School Karate Club People Alumni Faculty Presidents Chancellors University of Toronto Scarborough University of Toronto Mississauga Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This Canadian university, college, or tertiary institution–related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e