Greek mythological figure For other uses, see API (disambiguation). Urania, a restored Roman copy after a Greek original of the 4th century BC, Hadrian's Villa. Urania (/jʊəˈreɪniə/ yoor-AY-nee-ə; Ancient Greek: Οὐρανία, romanized: Ouranía; modern short name Ράνια Ránia; meaning "heavenly" or "of heaven") was, in Greek mythology, the muse of astronomy, and in later times, of Christian poetry. Contents 1 Family 2 Function and representation 3 Urania as Muse 4 In popular culture 4.1 Urania in Astronomy and Navigation 4.2 Other uses of "Urania" 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Family[edit] Urania was the daughter of Zeus by Mnemosyne and also a great granddaughter of Uranus.[1][2] Some accounts list her as the mother of the musician Linus[3] by Apollo[4] or Hermes[5] or Amphimarus,[6] son of Poseidon. Hymenaeus is also said to have been a son of Urania.[7] Function and representation[edit] Urania is often associated with Universal Love and the Holy Spirit. Sometimes identified as the eldest of the divine sisters, Urania inherited Zeus' majesty and power and the beauty and grace of her mother Mnemosyne. Urania dresses in a cloak embroidered with stars and keeps her eyes and attention focused on the Heavens. She is usually represented with a celestial globe to which she points with a little staff.[8] She is able to foretell the future by the arrangement of the stars.[9] Urania as Muse[edit] Those who are most concerned with philosophy and the heavens are dearest to her. Those who have been instructed by her she raises aloft to heaven, for it is a fact that imagination and the power of thought lift men's souls to heavenly heights.[10] Urania, o'er her star-bespangled lyre, With touch of majesty diffused her soul; A thousand tones, that in the breast inspire, Exalted feelings, o er the wires'gan roll— How at the call of Jove the mist unfurled, And o'er the swelling vault—the glowing sky, The new-born stars hung out their lamps on high, And rolled their mighty orbs to music's sweetest sound. —From An Ode To Music by James G. Percival During the Renaissance, Urania began to be considered the Muse for Christian poets. In the invocation to Book 7 of John Milton's epic poem Paradise Lost, the poet invokes Urania to aid his narration of the creation of the cosmos, though he cautions that it is "[t]he meaning, not the name I call" (7.5) In popular culture[edit] A monumental conical pendulum clock by Eugène Farcot depicting the Greek goddess, 1862. Urania in Astronomy and Navigation[edit] The planet Uranus, though mostly named after the Greek god personifying the sky, is also partially named after Urania.[11][12] Urania is the namesake for astronomical observatories in Berlin, Budapest, Bucharest, Vienna, Zürich, Antwerp and Uraniborg on the island of Hven. The main belt asteroid 30 Urania was also named after her. There is Polish astronomical magazine Urania - Postępy Astronomii, which emerged from "Urania" and "Postępy Astronomii" magazines. In University of São Paulo, the logo of the Institute of Astronomy, Geophysics and Atmospheric Sciences used to bear Urania. The official seal of the U.S. Naval Observatory portrays Urania. Hr.Ms. Urania is a sail training vessel for the Royal Netherlands Naval College. There has been a Hr. Ms. Urania in the Royal Netherlands Navy since 1832. Urania was depicted on the box cover of Urania's Mirror, a set of 32 astronomical star chart cards, first published in November 1824. Urania Cove in Antarctica is named after the muse. Other uses of "Urania"[edit] Main article: Urania (disambiguation) Urania is the name traditionally given to the eighth book of Herodotus' Histories. Urania is often an epithet given to Aphrodite in contrast with her other aspect Aphrodite Pandemos.[13] In the novel A Few Days in Athens, Aphrodite Urania is the patroness of Epicurean philosophers, and of the Epicurean Garden (School). Urania Cottage was a refuge for fallen women established by the writer Charles Dickens in Lime Grove, Shepherd's Bush, London in the late 1840s. The funding was provided by millionaire and philanthropist Angela Burdett-Coutts, of the well-known banking family. Some of the inmates may have provided inspiration for certain of the female characters in Dickens' novels. At Columbia University, toward the end of 18th century, the Urania Society was created for the improvement of oratory and literary skills. DeWitt Clinton was a member. Urania Street is situated between Polymnia ("Polyhymnia") and Felicity streets in New Orleans. Urania is a name of the sports hall in Olsztyn (Poland). Muse magazine, until 2015 when the magazine was revamped, featured Urania as one of the characters in the "Kokopelli and Co." comic strip by Larry Gonick published in each issue of the magazine. She was the only original muse who remained among the "New Muses" featured in the magazine. The other Old Muses were said to be living in a retirement home. Urania is the name of a popular female-fronted rock band in Honduras. Urania is used as the muse in Paradise Lost books 7 and 9. Urania is invoked in Shelley's "Adonais." 'To Urania' is a poem, and a book of poetry by Joseph Brodsky nytimes Urania is the title character in Lady Mary Wroth's 17th-century novel The Countess of Montgomery's Urania. Urania is an Italian science fiction magazine published since 10 October 1952. The USS Urania is a faster-than-light spacecraft in the audio drama podcast Wolf 359. American singer songwriter, Andrew Gold included a song entitled "Oh Urania (Take Me Away)" about the Greek goddess, on his 1978 album, All This and Heaven Too. "Urania" was the title of a journal published by Eva Gore-Booth, Esther Roper, and Irene Clyde beginning in 1916, which challenged the ideology of binary gender and pioneered progressive views of gender and sexuality. Notes[edit] ^ Hesiod, Theogony 78 ^ Ovid, Fasti v. 55. ^ Suidas s.v. Linos ^ Hyginus, Fabulae 161 ^ Suda, lambda, 568 ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece 9. 29. 5 ^ Catullus lxi. 2. ^ Hirt, Mythol. Bilderb. p. 210. ^ Statius, Thebaid 8. 548 ff ^ Diodorus, Bibliotheca historica 4. 7. 1 ^ Wood, Janet (31 January 2007). Nuclear Power. ISBN 9780863416682. ^ https://sites.uni.edu/morgans/astro/course/Notes/section4/new21.html ^ "APHRODITE TITLES & EPITHETS - Ancient Greek Religion". www.theoi.com. Retrieved 3 May 2017. References[edit]  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:  Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Urania 1.". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Urania. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) Urania: Goddess Muse of Astronomy, Theoi Project Britannica Online Encyclopedia Facebook Page for Urania Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 50 images of Urania) v t e The Nine Muses Muses Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Related Zeus (father) Mnemosyne (mother) Pierian Spring Muses in popular culture Les Neuf Sœurs v t e Ancient Greek deities by affiliation Primordial deities Achlys Aether Aion/Chronos Ananke Chaos Erebus Eros/Phanes Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus/Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Fates Atropos Clotho Lachesis Titan deities Titanes (male) Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Oceanus Titanides (female) Dione Mnemosyne Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Children of Hyperion Eos Helios Selene Children of Coeus Asteria Leto Children of Crius Astraeus Pallas Perses Children of Iapetus Atlas Epimetheus Menoetius Prometheus Olympian deities Dodekatheon Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Theoi Olympioi Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Mousai (Muses) Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaea Antheia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelos Aquatic deities Sea Gods Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus The Ichthyocentaurs Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites The Nesoi Oceanus Phorcys Pontus/Thalassa Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Amalthea Asia Callirrhoe Ceto Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Zeuxo Nereides Amphitrite Arethusa Dynamene Galatea Galene Psamathe Thetis Potamoi Achelous Almo Alpheus Anapos Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Clitumnus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Rivers of the Underworld Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Sangarius Scamander Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Kleodora Melaina Tiasa Chthonic deities Theoi Chthonioi Angelos Gaia Hades Hecate The Lampads Macaria Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Erinyes (Furies) Alecto Megaera Tisiphone Earthborn Cyclopes Gigantes Hecatonchires Kouretes Meliae Telchines Typhon Apotheothenai Trophonius Triptolemus Orpheus Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Logoi Children of Nyx Achlys Apate Dolos Eleos Elpis Epiphron Eris Geras Hesperides Hybris Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Sophrosyne Thanatos Children of Phorcys Echidna The Graeae Deino Enyo Pemphredo The Gorgones Euryale Medusa Stheno The Sirenes Aglaopheme Leucosia Ligeia Molpe Parthenope Peisinoe Thelxiepeia Children of Thaumas The Harpiae Aello Celaeno Ocypete Podarge Iris Children of other gods Aergia Aidos Alala Aletheia Angelia Arete Astraea Caerus The Younger Charites Eucleia Eupheme Euthenia Philophrosyne Corus Deimos The Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Hymen Ersa Eupraxia Hedone Homonoia Iacchus The Litae Homonoia Peitho Phobos Tyche Others Adephagia Alala Alke Amechania Anaideia Alastor Apheleia The Arae Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eusebeia Gelos Heimarmene Homados Horme Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Other deities Sky The Anemoi The Astra Planeti Stilbon Hesperus Phosphorus Pyroeis Phaethon Phaenon Aura Chione The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Agriculture Aphaea Demeter Despoina Eunostus Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis The Anthousai Aristaeus Attis The Auloniads Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimeliades Hecaterus Leuce Ma The Maenades The Meliae The Napaeae The Nymphai Hyperboreioi The Oreads Adrasteia Echo Helice Iynx Nomia Oenone Pitys The Pegasides Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Alexiares and Anicetus Aphroditus Enyalius Palaestra Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125