Study of the history, symbolism and usage of flags For the Deadmau5 album of the same name, see Vexillology (deadmau5 album). The flag of the International Federation of Vexillological Associations depicts a sheet bend. Vexillology (/ˌvɛksɪˈlɒlədʒi/) is the study of the history, symbolism and usage of flags or, by extension, any interest in flags in general.[1] The word is a synthesis of the Latin word vexillum (which refers to a kind of square flag which was carried by Roman cavalry[2]) and the Greek suffix -logia ("study").[3] The first known usage of the word vexillology was in 1959.[4] A person who studies flags is a vexillologist, one who designs flags is a vexillographer, and the art of flag-designing is called vexillography. One who is a hobbyist or general admirer of flags is a vexillophile. Contents 1 History 2 Modern Interest 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links History[edit] This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (March 2018) The study of flags, or vexillology, was formalized by the U.S. scholar and student of flags Whitney Smith in 1961 with the publication of The Flag Bulletin.[5] During his lifetime, Smith organized various flag organizations and meetings including the first International Congress of Vexillology (ICV), the North American Vexillological Association, and the International Federation of Vexillological Associations (FIAV).[6] Smith, who is acknowledged as conceiving the term "vexillology" in 1957, wrote "[w]hile the use of flags goes back to the earliest days of human civilization, the study of that usage in a serious fashion is so recent that the term for it ... did not appear in print until 1959."[7] Before this time, study of flags was generally considered a part of heraldry. Involvement in vexillology includes academic work in fields such as sociology, history or design, professional or otherwise, contributions from the flag industry, and interest from those simply passionate about flags. ICV and local vexillological meetings often cover a wide range of interest in flags. Since 1969, an International Congress of Vexillology has been organized every two years under the auspices of FIAV; papers presented at an ICV are published afterwards as the Congress's Proceedings.[5] Modern Interest[edit] The study of vexillology and interest in flags in general has expanded onto the internet, with communities such as the subreddit r/vexillology having a large influence over flag-related discussion online. Communities based around flags have also sprung up on other social media websites, such as Youtube, Instagram and Twitter. See also[edit] Heraldry and Vexillology portal Glossary of vexillology Vexillological symbol Vexillum Vexilloid Flags of the World List of vexillologists Heraldry List of national flags by design Similarities in flags References[edit] ^ Smith, Whitney. Flags Through the Ages and Across the World New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975. Print. ^ "Vexillum". www.merriam-webster.com. Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 15 September 2020. ^ "About Vexillology - The Flag Institute". The Flag Institute. Retrieved 2018-06-01. ^ "Vexillology". www.merriam-webster.com. Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 15 September 2020. ^ a b "CONSIDER VEXILLOLOGY. – SemiotiX". semioticon.com. Retrieved 2018-04-01. ^ Vulliamy, Elsa (December 15, 2015). "Which flag is it? Take our quiz to find out". Retrieved March 13, 2016. ^ "Vexillology". www.crwflags.com. Retrieved 2017-11-03. Further reading[edit] Leepson, Marc. Flag: An American Biography. New York: Thomas Dunne Books, 2005. Smith, Whitney. Flags Through the Ages and Across the World. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975. Marshall, Tim. "A Flag Worth Dying For: The Power and Politics of Flag." 2016. External links[edit] Media related to Application programming interfaces at Wikimedia Commons v t e Vexillology Basic topics Vexillography Glossary of vexillology Heraldry Tincture Vexilloid Design features British ensign Canadian pale Canton Chevron Heraldic flag Nordic cross Pride flag Saltire Southern cross Spanish fess Triband Tricolour Color schemes Pan-African Pan-Arab Pan-Slavic Tinctures in heraldry Organizations Argentina Vexillology Association Australian National Flag Association Croatian Heraldic and Vexillological Association Flag Institute Flags of the World Genealogical Society of Ireland Great Waters Association of Vexillology International Federation of Vexillological Associations Italian Centre of Vexillological Studies Macedonian Heraldry Society Nordic Flag Society North American Vexillological Association Southern African Vexillological Association Spanish Society of Vexillology State Council of Heraldry Ukrainian Heraldry Society William Crampton Library v t e Lists of flags Master list Reference list State-related Arab states Civil flag Country Date of Adoption Formerly independent Heads of state Historical flags State flag State flags and ensigns Sovereign Special and fictional Unrecognized Mobile military Armed Forces Army & Ground Forces Air Forces Air Forces Roundels Air Forces Fin Flashes Border & Coast Guard Forces Maritime Ministry of Defense Naval Ensigns Naval Jack Police Flag Mobile civilian Civil air Civil and Merchant Navy Civil ensign Pilot boat flags and ensigns Yacht flags and ensigns Other entities Active autonomist and secessionist movements Cities Country subdivisions Cultural Dependent territories Ethnic Gay pride and Lesbian Bisexual Transgender flags Micronations Political Religious By design By elements Animals Astronomical Bicolor Borders British ensigns Buildings Canton Circles Color by number by combination Crescents Crosses (Nordic) Devices Diamonds Geographical Headgear Inscriptions Arabic English Latin Russian Spanish Nautical Plants Solids Stars Triangles Tribands Two-sided Weapons By shape Non-quadrilateral Proportions By nations Argentina Armenia Australia state governors Austria states Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada lieutenant governors Chile China Hong Kong Macau Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Dem. Rep. Congo Dominican Republic Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France regions Brittany Île-de-France Occitanie French Empire Germany states districts municipalities Georgia Greece Haiti Hungary Iceland India states Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan prefectures municipalities Kazakhstan Kenya Korea North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malaysia Mauritius Mexico Malta Moldova Morocco Montenegro Myanmar Netherlands provinces municipalities New Zealand Nepal North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines provinces Poland naval and maritime voivodeships Portugal Romania Russia federal subjects Sakha Russian Navy Serbia Kosovo Singapore South Africa Soviet Union republics Soviet Navy Spain autonomous communities provinces Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Cornwall Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Turks and Caicos Islands British Empire United States states and territories Puerto Rico CSA Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe (Rhodesia) By continent Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Names in italics indicate non-sovereign (dependent) territories, disputed states and/or former countries. v t e National flags and coats of arms National flags Sovereign states Dependent territories Timeline National coats of arms Sovereign states Dependent territories  Heraldry portal v t e Phaleristics Auxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders, decorations, and medals Distinctions (Lists) By conferee Founts of honour* States and their national/public/official authorities Dynasties heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families Private Ecclesiastical Organisations Commercial (Self-styled order) By type Orders Order of chivalry Military order Colonial order Order of merit Royal family order Titles (Styles, Post-nominal By function Grand master Chancellor Treasurer Assessor Bailiff Prior Chaplain Master of ceremonies Grand Cross/Grand Cordon Commander Officer Hospitaller Knight/Dame Postulant Squire Page Jurisdictions Charter Bailiwick Chapter Commandery Obedience Grand Lodge Lodge Others, by field Military (List) List of highest Campaign medal Law enforcement Civilian (List) Society Peace Intellectual freedom Human rights Law Humanitarianism Politics Volunteer Literature Poetry Art History Music Architecture Theatre Film Science Religions Ecclesiastical Sports Scouting Beauty By insignia (Named after people) For wearing (decorations) Formal Collar Grand Cross/Grand Cordon with sash Medal Necklet Medal bar Medal ribbon Other Rosette Award pin Lapel pin Collar pin Tie pin Badge Heraldic Pilgrim Ring Button Campaign Service Prizes Trophy Plaquette Rosette Money Prizes known as the Nobel of a field Ceremonies and events Accolade Vigil Feoffment Passage fee Festival Vow Collar day Related organisations Fraternity Fraternal order Confraternity Secret society Guild Learned society Fellowship Honor society Hereditary society Club Gentlemen's club International Commission for Orders of Chivalry Related concepts Numismatics Heraldry Vexillology Service flag Battle honour Campaign streamer Nobility Order of precedence Honorary degree Devotional medal Awareness ribbon * = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions Category:Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125