Wawel Cathedral Katedra Wawelska Wawel Cathedral on Wawel Hill: Sigismund's Chapel (right, with a gold dome) and Vasa Dynasty chapel (to the left) Religion Affiliation Roman Catholic Province Archdiocese of Kraków Rite Latin Ecclesiastical or organizational status Royal Arch-cathedral Basilica Status Active Location Location Kraków, Poland Geographic coordinates 50°03′17″N 19°56′07″E﻿ / ﻿50.0546°N 19.9354°E﻿ / 50.0546; 19.9354Coordinates: 50°03′17″N 19°56′07″E﻿ / ﻿50.0546°N 19.9354°E﻿ / 50.0546; 19.9354 Architecture Type Church Style Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque Completed 11th century The Royal Archcathedral Basilica of Saints Stanislaus and Wenceslaus on the Wawel Hill (Polish: Królewska Bazylika Archikatedralna śś. Stanisława i Wacława na Wawelu), also known as the Wawel Cathedral (Polish: Katedra Wawelska), is a Roman Catholic church and cathedral of the Archdiocese of Kraków, located on Wawel Hill in Kraków, Poland. More than 900 years old, it is the Polish national sanctuary and traditionally has served as coronation site of the Polish monarchs. Karol Wojtyla, who in 1978 became Pope John Paul II, the day after his ordination to the priesthood offered his first Mass as a priest in the crypt of the cathedral on 2 November 1946, and was ordained Kraków's auxiliary bishop in the Cathedral on 28 September 1958.[1] The current, Gothic, cathedral is the third edifice on this site: the first was constructed and destroyed in the 11th century; the second one, constructed in the 12th century, was destroyed by a fire in 1305. The construction of the current one began in the 14th century on the orders of bishop Nanker. Contents 1 Interior 1.1 Sigismund's Chapel 2 Royal chapels and crypts 2.1 Crypt of National Poets 3 Notable burials 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Interior[edit] The Cathedral comprises a nave with aisles, transepts with aisles, a choir with double aisles, and an apse with ambulatory and radiating chapels. The main altar, located in the apse, was founded about 1650 by Bishop Piotr Gembicki and created by Giovanni Battista Gisleni. The altar painting of Crucified Christ by Marcin Blechowski is from the 17th century.[2] Over the main altar stands a tall canopy of black marble supported by four pillars, designed by Giovanni Battista Trevano and Matteo Castelli between 1626 and 1629. Underneath the canopy is placed a silver coffin of national patron Stanislaus of Szczepanów (also Stanisław Szczepanowski) created between 1669-1671 after the previous one (donated in 1512 by King Sigismund I the Old) was stolen by the Swedes in 1655.[3] The main gilded altar established in about 1650 Cenotaph of king Władysław of Varna Tomb of king Casimir III the Great Sarcophagus of St. Stanislaus Sacristy King Stephen Báthory's tomb monument Sigismund's Chapel[edit] Further information: Sigismund's Chapel Sigismund's Chapel, or Zygmunt Chapel ("Kaplica Zygmuntowska"),[4] adjoining the southern wall of the cathedral, is one of the most notable pieces of architecture in Kraków and perhaps "the purest example of Renaissance architecture outside Italy."[4] Financed by Sigismund I the Old, it was built between 1517 and 1533 by Bartolommeo Berrecci, a Florentine Renaissance architect, who spent most of his career in Poland. A square-based chapel with a golden dome, it houses the tombs of its founder and those of his children, King Sigismund II Augustus and Anna Jagiellon (Jagiellonka). The iconic three towers: Sigismund Tower, Clock Tower, and Silver Bell Tower Main gate between the Holy Cross Chapel (right) and Holy Trinity Chapel (left) Vasa chapel Holy Cross chapel Entrance to the Wawel cathedral, from the west Sigismund's Chapel Royal chapels and crypts[edit] The Wawel Cathedral has been the main burial site for Polish monarchs since the 14th century. As such, it has been significantly extended and altered over time as individual rulers have added multiple burial chapels. Schematic of Wawel Hill showing the location of the Wawel Cathedral Burial chambers beneath Wawel Cathedral: A-I Royal Crypts (B St. Leonard's Crypt), J Crypt of National Poets, K Crypt of the Archbishops. The crypts beneath the Wawel Cathedral hold the tombs of Polish kings, national heroes, generals and revolutionaries, including rulers of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth such as: Jan III Sobieski and his consort Marie Casimire (Maria Kazimiera); the remains of Tadeusz Kościuszko, the leader of a Polish national insurrection and Brigadier General in the American Revolutionary War; Władysław Sikorski, Prime Minister of the Polish Government in Exile and Commander-in-Chief of the Polish Armed Forces; Marshal Józef Piłsudski, founder of the Second Polish Republic.[5] Pope John Paul II celebrated his first mass in St. Leonard's Crypt. He considered being buried at the Wawel Cathedral also at one point in time, while some of the people of Poland had hoped that, following ancient custom, his heart would be brought there and kept alongside the remains of the great Polish rulers. (John Paul II was buried under St. Peter's Basilica, a papal burial site since antiquity, instead.) Crypt of National Poets[edit] Here are buried the national bards: Adam Mickiewicz (laid to rest there in 1890) and Juliusz Słowacki (1927). Notable burials[edit] Monarchs Saints Władysław I the Elbow-high Casimir III the Great Jadwiga Władysław II Jagiełło Casimir IV John I Albert Sigismund I the Old Sigismund II Augustus Stephen Anna Jagiellonka Sigismund III Władysław IV John II Casimir Michael John III Augustus II the Strong Stanislaus the Martyr Jadwiga Others Elizabeth Bonifacia Adam Stefan Sapieha Tadeusz Kościuszko Józef Piłsudski Władysław Sikorski Józef Poniatowski Adam Mickiewicz Lech Kaczyński and Maria Kaczyńska Juliusz Słowacki Cyprian Norwid (soil from his grave in France) Gallery[edit] The Sigismund's Tower, which contains the Sigismund's Bell The Cathedral's Treasury Stained-glass window in the Holy Trinity Chapel The sarcophagus of Jadwiga of Poland Tadeusz Kościuszko Monument See also[edit] Royal coronations in Poland The Royal Road in Kraków Polish Crown Jewels Szczerbiec Poznań Cathedral Gniezno Cathedral Sigismund Bell St. John's Cathedral, Warsaw List of Gothic Cathedrals in Europe References[edit] Notes ^ George Weigel (2005). Witness to Hope: The Biography of Pope John Paul II. Harper Perennial. p. 81. ISBN 0-06-073203-2. ^ "Wawel". www.integracja.org (in Polish). Retrieved 2010-09-11. ^ (in English and German) Adam Bujak, Stanisław Bogdanowicz (1997). Die polnischen Kathedralen (Polish Cathedrals). Biały Kruk. p. 32. ISBN 83-907760-1-4. ^ a b CODART, an international network of curators of art from the Low Countries, "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2005-12-02. Retrieved 2007-12-23.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Accessed 2007-12-23 ^ Marek Strzala. "Royal tombs" (in Polish). Krakow-info.com. Retrieved 2010-09-11. External links[edit] Media related to Wawel Cathedral Warning: Commons link does not match Wikidata– please check (this message is shown only in preview) at Wikimedia Commons Wawel Cathedral official website v t e Wawel Wawel Castle National Art Collection Jagiellonian tapestries Polish Crown Jewels Szczerbiec Wawel Cathedral Sigismund's Chapel St. Leonard's Crypt Sigismund Bell John Paul II Cathedral Museum Other sights Stanisław Borek House St. George's Chapel St. Michael's Chapel Tadeusz Kościuszko Monument Wawel Dragon's den and statue Legend and history Wawel Dragon Wawel Chakra Evacuation of Polish National Treasures during World War II v t e Kraków Districts Stare Miasto (I) Grzegórzki (II) Prądnik Czerwony (III) Prądnik Biały (IV) Krowodrza (V) Bronowice (VI) Zwierzyniec (VII) Dębniki (VIII) Łagiewniki-Borek Fałęcki (IX) Swoszowice (X) Podgórze Duchackie (XI) Bieżanów-Prokocim (XII) Podgórze (XIII) Czyżyny (XIV) Mistrzejowice (XV) Bieńczyce (XVI) Wzgórza Krzesławickie (XVII) Nowa Huta (XVIII) Neighborhoods: Old Town Wawel Kleparz Kazimierz Bielany Attractions Wawel Kazimierz National Museum Sigismund Bell Sukiennice Basilica of Saint Mary Museums Wawel Castle Czartoryski Museum Dworek Jana Matejki w Krzesławicach Historical Museum of Kraków Manggha Museum of Insurances in Kraków Archaeological Museum of Kraków Muzeum Archidiecezjalne w Krakowie Muzeum Czynu Niepodległościowego Muzeum Czynu Zbrojnego Muzeum Etnograficzne im. Seweryna Udzieli w Krakowie Muzeum Geologiczne Instytutu Nauk Geologicznych PAN w Krakowie Muzeum Historii Fotografii w Krakowie Muzeum Inżynierii Miejskiej w Krakowie Muzeum Katedralne im. Jana Pawła II na Wawelu National Museum, Kraków Polish Aviation Museum Sukiennice Museum Armia Krajowa Museum in Kraków Museum of Contemporary Art in Kraków Other History of Kraków Timeline Jewish Kraków Ghetto Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125