This article is about the narrative genre. For the video game, see Weird West (video game). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The Wild Wild West television series Fantasy Media Anime Art Artists Authors Comics Films Podcasts Literature Magazines Manga Publishers Light novels Television Webcomics Genre studies Contemporary fantasy Comedy Creatures Fantastic Fantastique Fantasy of manners History Historical fantasy Lovecraftian horror Magic Magic system Magician Races Religious themes Sources Tropes Worlds Subgenres Bangsian fantasy‎ Dark fantasy‎ Dieselpunk‎ Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairy tales‎ Gaslamp fantasy Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction‎ Grimdark Hard fantasy Heroic fantasy High fantasy‎ Historical fantasy‎ Isekai Kaiju‎ LitRPG Low fantasy Magic realism‎ Magical girl‎ Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk Occult detective fiction‎ Romantic fantasy‎ Science fantasy‎ Shenmo fiction‎ Splatterpunk Steampunk‎ Supernatural fiction Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Tokusatsu‎ Urban fantasy‎ Weird fiction‎ Weird West‎ Wuxia‎ Fandom Harry Potter fandom Tolkien fandom Categories Fantasy Awards Subgenres Television Tropes Portal v t e Weird West is a subgenre that combines elements of the Western with another genre,[1] usually horror, occult, fantasy, or science fiction. DC's Weird Western Tales appeared in the early 1970s, and the weird Western was further popularized by Joe R. Lansdale, who is perhaps best known for his tales mixing splatterpunk with alternate history Western. Examples of these cross-genres include Deadlands (Western/horror),[1] The Wild Wild West and its later film adaptation (Western/steampunk),[1] Jonah Hex (Western/supernatural), BraveStarr (Western/science fiction), The Goodbye Family (Gothic Western/macabre comedy), and many others. Contents 1 Background 2 Examples 2.1 Books 2.2 Television series 2.3 Comics 2.4 Films 2.5 Games 2.6 Music 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Background[edit] When supernatural menaces of horror fiction are injected into a Western setting, it creates the horror Western. Writer G. W. Thomas described how the two combine: "Unlike many other cross-genre tales, the weird Western uses both elements but with very little loss of distinction. The Western setting is decidedly 'Western' and the horror elements are obviously 'horror.'"[2][3] Jeff Mariotte's comic book series Desperadoes has been running, off and on, for a decade now and he still remains bullish about the genre:[4] As far as Mariotte is concerned, the potential for Weird West stories is limitless. "The West was a weird place. There are ghost towns and haunted mines and when you bring Native American beliefs into it, then the possibilities are even greater." Examples[edit] Books[edit] The term is of recent coinage, but the idea of crossing genres goes back to at least the heyday of pulp magazines. There was at least one series character who could be classified as a Weird West character. Lee Winters was a deputy whose adventures often involved ghosts, sorcery and creatures from Greek mythology. The Winters stories were written by Lon Williams and published in the 1950s. Around that same time, one of the oddest of all Western characters, Six-Gun Gorilla, appeared. This was an actual gorilla who strapped on a pair of Colts to avenge the death of the kindly prospector who had raised him. His adventures appeared in the British story paper The Wizard.[5] There have also been various Weird West novels including Joe R. Lansdale's Dead in the West. In this book an unjustly lynched Indian shaman curses the town of Mud Creek, Texas. After dark the dead rise and not even the Reverend Jebediah Mercer can save the inhabitants. Examples include: "The Horror from the Mound" (by Robert E. Howard, in Weird Tales, 1932)[6] "Old Garfield's Heart" (by Robert E. Howard, in Weird Tales, 1933) The Circus of Dr. Lao (by Charles G. Finney, 1935) "The Dead Remember" (by Robert E. Howard, in Argosy, 1936) "The Mound" ghostwritten by H.P. Lovecraft for Zealia Bishop in abridged form in Weird Tales, 1940, and in full in 1989.[7] Outer Dark (by Cormac McCarthy, 1968) Yellow Back Radio Broke-Down (by Ishmael Reed, 1969, ISBN 1-56478-238-7) The Hawkline Monster: A Gothic Western (by Richard Brautigan, 1974) Stephen King's Dark Tower saga (1982–2004) The Place of Dead Roads (by William S. Burroughs, 1983, ISBN 0-03-070416-2) Dead in the West (by Joe R. Lansdale, 1986, ISBN 0-917053-04-4, 1994, ISBN 1-892300-00-1, 2005, ISBN 1-59780-014-7)[8] Wolf in Shadow (by David Gemmell, 1987) The Haunted Mesa (by Louis L'Amour, 1987, ISBN 0-553-05182-2) Stinger (by Robert R. McCammon, 1988, ISBN 978-0727817167) Razored Saddles (anthology, edited by Joe R. Lansdale & Pat Lobrutto, 1989, ISBN 978-0380711680) Walking Wolf: A Weird Western (by Nancy A. Collins, 1995, ISBN 0-929480-42-2) Mad Amos (by Alan Dean Foster, 1996, ISBN 0-345-39362-7) A Fist Full O' Dead Guys (anthology, edited by Shane Lacy Hensley, Pinnacle Entertainment, 1999, ISBN 1-889546-65-8) For a Few Dead Guys More (anthology, edited by Shane Lacy Hensley, foreword by Joe R. Lansdale, Pinnacle Entertainment, 1999, ISBN 1-889546-66-6) The "Ned the Seal" trilogy (by Joe R. Lansdale, 2001) The Sundowners series (by James Swallow, 2001) Dead Man's Hand: Five Tales of the Weird West (by Nancy A. Collins, foreword by Joe R. Lansdale, Two Wolf Press, 2004, ISBN 1-58846-875-5) The Crossings (by Jack Ketchum, Cemetery Dance Publications, 2004, ISBN 1-58767-067-4)[9] The Strange Adventures of Rangergirl (by Tim Pratt, 2005, ISBN 0-553-38338-8) Territory (by Emma Bull, 2007, ISBN 0-312-85735-7) Merkabah Rider: Tales of a High Planes Drifter (by Edward M. Erdelac, 2009, ISBN 978-1615720606) Me'ma and the Great Mountain (by Lorin Morgan-Richards, with foreword by Corine Fairbanks, 2012, ISBN 0985044799) The Goodbye Family and the Great Mountain (by Lorin Morgan-Richards, with foreword by Richard-Lael Lillard, 2020, ISBN 9781733287913) Jack the Bastard: A Novella (by Micah Nathan, One Peace Books, 2012, ISBN 1935548220) The Arrivals (by Melissa Marr, William Morrow, 2013) Dead Man's Hand: An Anthology of the Weird West (Edited by John Joseph Adams, Titan Books, 2014, ISBN 1781164509) Deadlands: Ghostwalkers (by Jonathan Maberry, 2015) Deadlands: Thunder Moon Rising (by Jeff Mariotte, 2016) Deadlands: Boneyard (by Seanan McGuire, 2017) Straight Outta Tombstone (Edited by David Boop, Baen Publishing, 2017, ISBN 1481483498)[10] Straight Outta Deadwood (Edited by David Boop, Baen Publishing, 2019, ISBN 148148432X) The Massacre at Yellow Hill (by C.S. Humble, 2018, ISBN 1684330165) Reno Nevada Rides to Hell (by Flash Rivers, 2018, ISBN 978-1520741994)[11] The Sinful Seven: Sci-fi Western Legends of the NCAA (By Spencer Hall, Richard Johnson, Jason Kirk, Alex Kirshner, and Tyson Whiting, 2020, ISBN 978-1-7354926-0-5, 978-1-7354926-3-6, 978-1-7354926-1-2)[12] Television series[edit] In the 1960s, the television series The Wild Wild West brought elements of pulp espionage and science fiction to its Old West setting, and the cartoon adventures of the Lone Ranger followed suit by pitting the famous Western hero against mad scientists and other villains not often found in the Western genre. Additionally, Rod Serling's supernatural anthology series The Twilight Zone featured a handful of Western episodes such as "Showdown with Rance McGrew" and "Mr. Denton on Doomsday." Other examples include: Bonanza: "Hoss and the Leprechauns" (1963) Black Noon (1971) The Hanged Man (1974 Telefilm) Cliffhangers: "The Secret Empire" (1979) Into the Badlands (1991) Wild West C.O.W.-Boys of Moo Mesa (1992–1994) The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr. (1993–1994) Legend (1995) The Lazarus Man (1996) Dead Man's Gun (1997–1999) The Outer Limits: "Heart’s Desire" (1995) Purgatory (1999) Tremors 4: The Legend Begins (2004) Justice League Unlimited: "The Once and Future Thing, Part 1: Weird Western Tales" (2005) Supernatural: "Frontierland" (2011) Strange Empire (2014) Wynonna Earp (2016) Westworld (2016) Comics[edit] The Ghost Rider, number 3, Magazine Enterprises, 1951. Cover art: Frank Frazetta Space Western number 44, Charlton Comics, June 1952. Artist: Stan Campbell. In comic books a number of heroes had adventures involving monsters, aliens, and costumed supervillains. Marvel Comics characters such as Kid Colt, Rawhide Kid, and Two-Gun Kid all had such adventures. Where Marvel went in for supervillains, DC Comics added more of a horror element to their stories such as Jonah Hex, pushed further in three mini-series from Vertigo written by Joe R. Lansdale. The DC character Tomahawk could also be termed a hero of the Weird West, though his adventures were set in the colonies during the time of the American Revolution. Examples include: American Gothic, by Ian Edginton and Mike Collins The Big Book of the Weird Wild West: How the West Was Really Won!, anthology from Paradox Press Big Thunder Mountain Railroad, by Dennis Hopeless Billy the Kid's Old Timey Oddities, by Eric Powell and Kyle Hotz (Dark Horse Comics, 2006, ISBN 1-59307-448-4)[13] Cowboys & Aliens[14][15] "Daisy Kutter: The Last Train", by Kazu Kibuishi El Diablo Dead Irons Desperadoes Djustine by Enrico Teodorani Doc Frankenstein East of West Gunplay by Jorge Vega, with art by Dominic Vivona, Platinum Studios[16] High Moon a werewolf Western webcomic by zuda / DC Comics. Created by David Gallaher and Steve Ellis Iron West, by Doug TenNapel[17] Jonah Hex Justice Riders (DC Comics Elseworlds) by Chuck Dixon and J. H. Williams III "Last Shot" (Image Comics Studio XD) by Locke and Long Vo Lobo Annual #2: "A Fistful of Bastiches" Phantom Rider Preacher Special: Saint of Killers (4-issue mini-series, Preacher spin off, by Garth Ennis). While the origin of the Saint of Killers in the Old West is the only true western element in the comic book Preacher, the series has been described as a "Splatterpunk Western" or a mix of the Western with the Gothic.[18] Pretty Deadly The Rawhide Kid The Sixth Gun Steel Ball Run Strangeways, solicited by Speakeasy Comics before they closed. Will appear as a graphic novel.[19][20] Tex Arcana by John Findley[21] Tex Willer (in some stories) The Goodbye Family The Transformers: Evolutions Weird Western Tales The Wild Wild West: The Night of the Iron Tyrants, #1–4 by Mark Ellis and Darryl Banks, Millennium Publications. The Wicked West[22] Wynonna Earp by Beau Smith. Published by Image Comics / IDW Publishing Zagor (in many stories) Films[edit] In movies, notable Weird West stories include The Valley of Gwangi (1969) which used special effects wizard Ray Harryhausen's talents to pit cowboys against dinosaurs. Billy the Kid Versus Dracula (1966) saw the legendary outlaw Billy the Kid fighting against the notorious vampire. The same year, Jesse James Meets Frankenstein's Daughter paired another famous outlaw with another famous horror character. The Ghoul Goes West was an unproduced Ed Wood film to star Bela Lugosi as Dracula in the Old West. Examples include: The Phantom Empire (serial, 1935) Riders of the Whistling Skull (1937) The Terror of Tiny Town (1938) The Beast of Hollow Mountain (1956) Teenage Monster (1958) Curse of the Undead (1959) 7 Faces of Dr. Lao (1964) Billy the Kid Versus Dracula (1966) Jesse James Meets Frankenstein's Daughter (1966) Django Kill... If You Live, Shoot! (1967) The Valley of Gwangi (1969) Mackenna's Gold (1969) El Topo (1970) Godmonster of Indian Flats (1973) High Plains Drifter (1973) The White Buffalo (1977) Timerider: The Adventure of Lyle Swann (1982) Pale Rider (1985). Eyes of Fire (film) (1983) Tex and the Lord of the Deep (1985) Near Dark (1987) Ghost Town (1988) Back to the Future Part III (1990) Grim Prairie Tales (1990) Tremors (1990) Sundown: The Vampire in Retreat (1991) Mad at the Moon (1992) Dust Devil (1992) Grey Knight (1993) Cannibal! The Musical (1993) Silent Tongue (1994) Blind Justice (1994) Oblivion (1994) Blood Trail (1997) Purgatory (1999) Ravenous (1999) Wild Wild West (1999)[1] From Dusk till Dawn 3: The Hangman's Daughter (2000) Dead Birds (2004) Blueberry (aka Renegade) (2004) Ginger Snaps Back: The Beginning (2004) Dynamite Warrior (2006) Undead or Alive (2007) Left for Dead (2007) Sukiyaki Western: Django (2007) BloodRayne 2: Deliverance (2007) Copperhead (2008) The Burrowers (2009) High Plains Invaders (2009)[23] Survival of the Dead (2009)[24] Bunraku (2010) Jonah Hex (2010) Gallowwalkers (2012) The Warrior's Way (2010) Cowboys & Aliens (2011) Rango (2011) Devil's Deal (2013) Bone Tomahawk (2015) The Ballad of Buster Scruggs (2018) Bacurau (2019) Games[edit] An example of the pen-and-paper variety is the horror-hybrid, Deadlands. Set in an alternate 1870s America, the game draws heavily on gothic horror conventions and old Native American lore to derive its sense of the supernatural. Characters can get involved in situations ranging from banks heists to shoot-outs involving vampires and zombies over the course of their adventures. Another example is the White Wolf Game Studio production, Werewolf: The Wild West, in which players play werewolf characters (called garou) who are charged with fighting a force of spiritual corruption called the Storm-Eater. Video games also use this same motif, one of the earliest horror-Western games being SilverLoad for the PlayStation. The game has a variety of classic horror tropes in it, ranging from werewolves and vampires, to Satanic cults, that the player must contend with nothing more than a trusty six-gun at his hip. In this same vein is the modern PS2/Xbox first-person shooter, Darkwatch, in which the protagonist is himself a vampire, fighting through the west for either his own redemption, or furthering his own damnation. The PC adventure/puzzle game Alone in the Dark 3 takes place in a western setting, albeit in the 1920s, and features a number of "weird west" staples, with magic, monsters, the undead, and some anachronistic sci-fi elements such as references to nuclear weaponry. The PC first-person shooter title, Blood, is an occult-horror-comedy hybrid, and sets the player avatar "Caleb" in approximately 1920 (retroactively dated as 1928 in the game's sequel) as an un-dead gunslinger anti-hero from the late 19th century, who rises from his grave to battle a widespread cult by which he was betrayed and killed when he was a member. Gun play, the undead, horror, the occult, and the underworld are strong elements of the game. The game spawned a sequel, Blood II: The Chosen, although it was much less influenced by the main character's western back-story. One level of its expansion pack, however, is set in a western frontier town. Another weird Western is the Wild ARMs series – video games that mix together high-fantasy magic and science-fiction technology with Old-West-style gunslinging. Each game changes leads and alters settings (though the world's name, Filgaia, remains throughout), but always at the core are the ideas of "drifting" and of one's personalized sense of justice among outlaws. Red Dead Redemption, a Western-themed video game, enters into the genre of Weird West with its Undead Nightmare add-on. The story revolves around an undead outbreak that has spread across the frontier. Other fantasy elements are new weapons such as holy water, and new mythical mounts, which include a unicorn and the Four Horses of the Apocalypse. Its sequel, Red Dead Redemption 2, features a number of minor Easter eggs which the player may discover, such as UFOs and the remains of a giant hominid. Fallout: New Vegas, a post-apocalyptic game set in the Mojave Desert has an additional perk at the beginning of the game named "Wild Wasteland" that adds various strange occurrences to the game. The game itself could also be considered a Weird West game due to its mixing of Western, Horror, Survival, and Science Fiction styles. Call of Duty: Black Ops II includes a map for its Zombies mode called Buried. The map takes place in a subterranean ghost town complete with saloon and general store that is located in Angola due to tectonic plate shifting. Naturally, the zombies are the reanimated town folk, dressed in period attire. Hard West, turn-based tactical game. The game follows standards of the Western genre, like bank robberies, lynching and the gold rush, but with the addition of supernatural elements, such as demons, shamans, satanic cults. West of Loathing, a single-player comedy/adventure RPG, takes place about twenty years after "The Cows Came Home", a mysterious cataclysmic event that caused all cows to transform into demonic monsters, devastating the west. The player character must help with the completion of a transcontinental railroad that will make travel faster and safer for would-be settlers. This involves navigating a variety of obstacles including the aforementioned demonic cows, as well as giant snakes, necromantic cultists, literal ghost towns, murderous rodeo clowns, goblins, malfunctioning robots left behind by a long-dead civilization, and occasionally ordinary bandits. Eternal is an online collectible card game that takes place in a world filled with gunslingers and witches. The 2019 Crytek video game Hunt: Showdown takes place in the Louisiana bayou in 1895 amid a supernatural event. Music[edit] Ghoultown are a Texan psychobilly band with Spaghetti Western influences. They have released albums like 2001's Tales from the Dead West with songs like "Death of Jonah Hex". In turn they produced their own eponymous "vampire-cowboy" comic book, through Bad Moon Studios, which saw an eight-page preview in Texasylum and the first two issues of a planned four-issue miniseries, before the publisher left the comic field.[25][26] "Knights of Cydonia" is a song by English rock band Muse. The video clip is filmed and edited in the style of a spaghetti Western film with post-apocalyptic themes. The 2015 music video for the Brandon Flowers song "Can't Deny My Love" transposes Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1835 story Young Goodman Brown to a Western frontier setting. Flowers plays an unnamed protagonist who leaves his young wife (played by Evan Rachel Wood) for some unknown errand in the desert, despite her pleas that he stay with her "tonight of all nights." On his journey he meets a man with a black staff (played by Richard Butler of The Psychedelic Furs), and later he discovers a group of townspeople carrying out witchcraft-like ceremonies — his wife among them. The protagonist tries to flee when the townspeople notice him, but as they approach the scene instantly vanishes and the man awakes, uncertain whether the previous night's events were real or a dream. See also[edit] Acid Western, often strange counter-cultural Westerns from the 1960s onwards Gothic Western, subculture mixing goth and cowboy lifestyle Cross-genre, of which Weird West is a key example List of steampunk works, as a number of the examples veer into this area Science fiction Western, a Weird West subgenre with science-fiction themes in an Old West setting Space Western, the application of Western themes to a science-fiction frontier setting Western genre in other media References[edit] ^ a b c d "An essential taster of ...The Weird West". Metro. June 2, 2008. Cite journal requires |journal= (help) ^ "gwthomas.org". gwthomas.org. Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ Crossing Horror: Using Horror in Other Genres, by G. W. Thomas ^ How the West was Weird: Mariotte talks “Desperadoes” Return, Comic Book Resources, October 30, 2006 ^ Lamar, Cyriaque. "Read the lost adventures of Six-Gun Gorilla, the greatest cowboy gorilla in fiction". Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ "The Horror from the Mound". gutenberg.net.au. Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ An H. P. Lovecraft Encyclopedia, S.T.Joshi & D.E.Schultz, Hippocampus Press, NY, 2001 p.174 ^ Fantastic Fiction entry ^ Thorpe, Valarie (2003). "Hanging Out in the Weird West with Jack Ketchum". Studies in Modern Horror. 1 (1): 22–31. ^ Straight Outta Tombstone edited by David Boop - Baen Books ^ Reno Nevada Rides to Hell by Flash Rivers ^ "The Sinful Seven: Sci-fi Western Legends of the NCAA". gumroad.com. Retrieved 2020-08-03. ^ Billy the Kid's Old-Timey Oddities TPB, Dark Horse Comics ^ CowboysAndAliens at DrunkDuck ^ Cowboys and Aliens, Comics2Film.com ^ Jorge Vega: Learning To Play With Guns, Comics Bulletin, March 10, 2008 ^ TenNapel Strikes Gold in "Iron West", Comic Book Resources, May 17, 2006 ^ Kitson, Niall (2007). "Rebel Yells: Genre Hybridity and Irishness in Garth Ennis & Steve Dillon's Preacher" (subscription required). Irish Journal of Gothic and Horror Studies. 2. Retrieved May 28, 2007. ^ Meeting at the Strangeways, Newsarama, October 13, 2005 ^ Matt Maxwell on Strangeways: Murder Moon, Newsarama, April 4, 2008 ^ "index". www.texarcana.com. Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ "Welcome to the Wicked West". Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ Uncle Creepy (2 August 2010). "The Old West Gets Scary: High Plains Invaders". dreadcentral.com. Archived from the original on 12 February 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ Tafoya, Scout (30 July 2017). "The Unloved - Survival of the Dead". RogerEbert.com. Ebert Digital LLC. Retrieved 14 March 2021. ^ Thorpe, Valarie (1999–2005). "Ghoultown's Count Lyle Interview". Really Scary. Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved November 17, 2017. ^ "Ghoultown Comic Book". Ghoultown. Angry Planet Enterprises. 2001–2007. Archived from the original on 11 March 2008. Retrieved November 17, 2017. Further reading[edit] Green, Paul (October 2009). Encyclopedia of Weird Westerns: Supernatural and Science Fiction Elements in Novels, Pulps, Comics, Films, Television and Games. McFarland. p. 273. ISBN 978-0-7864-4390-1. v t e Horror fiction Speculative fiction Media Comics Films Magazines Television programs Video games survival Types Body Comedy Zombie comedy Cosmic Dark fantasy Dark romanticism Erotic guro Ghost Giallo Gothic American Southern Southern Ontario Space Suburban Tasmanian Urban Japanese Korean Lovecraftian Monsters Jiangshi Vampire Werewolf Occult detective Organ transplantation Psychological Splatterpunk Survival Techno Weird fiction Weird menace Weird West Zombie apocalypse Related genres Black comedy Fantasy Fantastique Mystery Supernatural Thriller Science fiction Other Grand Guignol Writers Conventions LGBT themes characters Macabre Horror icon Related Pulp magazine Monster erotica Internet Speculative Fiction Database Category Portal v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Action-adventure Heroic Lost world Sword-and-sandal Sword-and-sorcery Wuxia‎ Alternative history Comedy Bangsian Contemporary Occult detective fiction‎ Paranormal romance Urban fantasy Dark fantasy Fairytales Fairy tale parodies‎ Fairytale fantasy‎ Fantastique Fantasy of manners Ghost stories‎ Gothic fiction Grimdark Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai Juvenile Low fantasy Magical realism Mythic Mythopoeia‎ Mythpunk "Retro" Dieselpunk Gaslamp fantasy Steampunk Romantic Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Superhero Shenmo Tokusatsu‎ Kaiju Weird fiction New weird Weird West‎ Media Film and television Anime Films Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels (A–H) (I–R) (S–Z) Newcastle Forgotten Fantasy Library Publishers Magazines Fantastic Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Fandom Art Filk music Harry Potter fandom Inklings Mythopoeic Society Religion Tolkien fandom Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Dragons Elementals Familiars Faeries Jinn Kaiju Lycanthropes Sirens Skin-walkers Spirits Undead Unicorns Vampires Yōkai Zombies Characters Barbarian Caveman Wild man Damsel in distress Dragonslayer Dark Lord Heroes Fairy godmother Magicians Occult detective list Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / Light Love Moon Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Wand Schools Animism Demonology Evocation Incantation Necromancy Shapeshifting Technomancy Witchcraft Fantasy races Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Imps Kobolds Ogres Oni Orcs Tengu Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Related Allegory Dungeons & Dragons Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Fantastic Horror fiction Ghost stories Human–animal hybrid LGBT themes in speculative fiction Magic realism Mecha Mythology Mythic fiction Science fantasy Science fiction Superhero fiction Supernatural fiction Outline Category v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Hard Soft History Timeline The Golden Age New Wave Subgenres Anthropological Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Christian Climate fiction Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Gothic Isekai Libertarian Mecha anime and manga Military Parallel worlds Science fantasy‎ Dying Earth Planetary romance Sword and planet Scientific romance Social Space opera Space Western Superhero Tech noir Techno-thriller Tokusatsu kaiju Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Steampunk Dieselpunk Biopunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines Internet Speculative Fiction Database Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary/art/audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Illustrators of the Future Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers of the Future Zajdel Media Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Film Film history Films India Japanese anime tokusatsu Television TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese anime live-action U.S. Themes Applied Astroengineering AI takeover Artificial intelligence Cloaking device Holography Invisibility Maritime Megastructure Dyson sphere Matrioshka brain Stellar engine Space stations and habitats Mind uploading Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Prosthetics Robots Self-replicating machines Simulated consciousness Simulated reality Space warfare Tachyons Terraforming Technomancy Time viewer Formal Fermi paradox Grandfather paradox Time travel Life Biological warfare Energy being Evolution Extraterrestrials List Genetic engineering Gender Group mind Parasites Sex and sexuality Superhabitable planet Symbiosis Physical v t e Spacetime and spatial anomalies in fiction Spacetime phenomena Black holes Hyperspace Time travel Technologies Faster-than-light Ansible Boom tube Hyperspace Hyperdrive Inertialess Slipstream Space folding Teleportation Warp drive Wormhole Portable hole Stargate Ultrawave Universe Earth Heim theory Force field Multiverse Parallel universes Planets Stars and planetary systems General relativity Faster-than-light communication Wormholes Social Ancient astronauts Alien invasion Alien language Black Cyborgs Evil corporation Feminist First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Libertarian Message from space Political ideas Religious ideas Sci horror Transhumanism Uplifting World government Xenoarchaeology Related topics Alternate history Afrofuturism Fantasy Fictional technology Future Future history Horror Magic realism Rubber science Science and technology studies Science fantasy Speculative fiction Spy-Fi Supernatural Weird Techno-thriller Technology and society Utopian and dystopian fiction Category Portal v t e Film genres By style Action Arthouse Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Survival Art Biographical Christian Comedy Black Commedia all'italiana Commedia sexy all'italiana Bromantic Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Thriller Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Melodrama Korean Erotic Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fairy tale Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Body Cannibal Chinese horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Mumblegore Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Religious Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Mumblecore Mumblegore Musical Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Pop culture fiction Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Parallel universe Planetary romance Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Thriller Comedy Conspiracy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Economic Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Funny animal Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBT Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Jiangshi Kaiju Mummy Vampire Werewolf Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Pirate Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shomin-geki Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Florida Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Space Spaghetti Weird By movement or period Absolute American Eccentric Cinema New Objectivity Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film gris Free Cinema French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Nigerian Golden Age Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New Generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Queer No wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Parallel cinema Persian Film Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi Praška filmska škola Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet Parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Telefoni Bianchi Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Black-and-white Blockbuster Bollywood Masala Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage Grindhouse Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking Interstitial art Live action animation Lollywood Low-budget Major studio Making-of Message picture Meta-film Mockbuster Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Socialist realist Sound Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie v t e Lists of fictional agents Organizations Espionage organizations Secret police and intelligence organizations Detectives Amateur detectives Detectives for younger readers Detective teams Female detectives Historical detectives Male detectives Police detectives Private investigators Science fiction and fantasy detectives Sherlock Holmes inspectors Secret agents Double agents Secret agents Spymasters Related Gentleman detective Special agent