This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Wicked Science Genre Speculative fiction Teen drama Comedy thriller Created by Jonathan M. Shiff Directed by Grant Brown Richard Jasek David Cameron Roger Hodgman Colin Budds Sally-Anne Kerr Jeffrey Walker Starring Andre de Vanny Bridget Neval Benjamin Schmideg Emma Leonard Brook Sykes Saskia Burmeister Robert van Mackelenberg Geneviéve Picot Greta Larkins Composers Ric Formosa Danny Beckermann Country of origin Australia Original language English No. of seasons 2 No. of episodes 52 (list of episodes) Production Executive producers Jonathan M. Shiff Kay Ben M'Rad Producers Jonathan M. Shiff Daniel Scharf Running time 25 minutes Production company Jonathan M. Shiff Productions Distributor ZDF Enterprises Release Original network Network Ten Original release 2 July 2004 (2004-07-02) – 6 April 2006 (2006-04-06) External links Website Infobox instructions (only shown in preview) Warning: Page using Template:Infobox television with unknown parameter "fan-site". See Infobox instructions. (this message is shown only in preview). Wicked Science is an Australian television series, which debuted on 24 February 2004. The series focuses on Toby (played by André de Vanny) and Elizabeth (played by Bridget Neval), two teenagers who are mysteriously turned into wizards of science. The series was originally run on Network Ten from 2004 to 2006 of which it then moved to Disney Channel, Wicked Science has also screened on ABC1 and ABC2 on 7:00am, Thursday. On Disney Channel Asia, it was fully aired until 2007. Toby and Elisabeth are two students in the same grade. Toby is a regular student and Elisabeth is really mean so nobody likes her. One day a ray hits Toby and Elisabeth and they both acquire some scientific superpowers becoming geniuses. Toby is not really happy with his new gift but Elisabeth wants to reveal using his powers to control the high school and Toby is the only one capable to stop her. The boring Sand Bay school is now turned into a chaos with continuous unexplained events. Contents 1 Cast 1.1 Main 2 Episodes 3 External links Cast[edit] Main[edit] André de Vanny as Toby Johnson, Toby Johnson is a normal teenager and the Main protagonist who studies in Sandy Bay High School. He was one of two students involved in an accident following an experiment on a prehistoric rock, which caused him to become a genius. His best friends are Russell Skinner and Dina Demeris. He is also in love with Bianca, a pretty girl in his class. Bridget Neval as Elizabeth Hawke, Elizabeth (The Main Antagonist) was also involved in the accident that turned Toby into a genius. Unlike Toby, she wants to use her newfound genius to take over the school. She dislikes everybody except Toby, whom she is secretly in love with. She is jealous and demonstrates that she will go to any length to get what she wants. Benjamin Schmideg as Russell "Russ" Skinner, Toby's best friend. He likes to skateboard and eat pizza. While not being too clever, he is a loyal and brave friend. Saskia Burmeister as Dina Demiris, Dina is a good friend to Toby and Russ. She is smart, good looking, boys get on her nerves sometimes and she hates Elizabeth. She goes to Hong Kong in season 2 and is replaced by Sasha. Emma Leonard as Verity McGuire, Verity has been Elizabeth's best friend since Primary School and often assists Elizabeth in her schemes. While she knows Elizabeth goes too far, she does not have the confidence to speak up. Brook Sykes as Garth King, the dimwitted school bully. He is often in cahoots with Elizabeth and acts as her spy. He is always up for a fight, especially if it involves Russ. Robert van Mackelenberg as Professor Carl Tesslar, the physics professor at Sandy Bay High School. Geneviéve Picot as Principal Alexa Vyner, Sandy Bay High School's principal. Greta Larkins as Sacha Johnson, Sacha is Toby's cousin, who moves to Sandy Bay in Season 2, the last Season of Wicked Science, before it was finished after the last episode. Episodes[edit] Main article: List of Wicked Science episodes Seasons Episodes Premiere Finale 1 26 2 July 2004 24 December 2004 2 26 19 August 2005 6 April 2006 External links[edit] Wicked Science – ZDF Enterprises promotional website Wicked Science at the Australian Television Information Archive Wicked Science official site Wicked Science at IMDb Wicked Science at the National Film and Sound Archive Wicked Science-TV.Com Wicked Science at TV.com