This article consists almost entirely of a plot summary. It should be expanded to provide more balanced coverage that includes real-world context. Please edit the article to focus on discussing the work rather than merely reiterating the plot. (October 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Willow Creek Theatrical release poster Directed by Bobcat Goldthwait Produced by Sarah de Sa Rego Aimee Pierson Written by Bobcat Goldthwait Starring Alexie Gilmore Bryce Johnson Cinematography Evan Phelan Edited by Stephen Thurston Jason Stewart Production company Jerkschool Productions Distributed by Dark Sky Films Release date April 29, 2013 (2013-04-29) (BIFF) June 6, 2014 (2014-06-06) (United States) Running time 79 minutes Country United States Language English Willow Creek is a 2013 independent found footage horror film written and directed by Bobcat Goldthwait. It stars Alexie Gilmore and Bryce Johnson as a couple who go into the woods of Willow Creek, California looking for material for their documentary on Bigfoot lore. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Release and reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] Set in Humboldt County, California, Jim (Bryce Johnson), a stout believer in Bigfoot, and his girlfriend Kelly (Alexie Gilmore) are traveling to Six Rivers National Forest in Northern California, where Jim plans to shoot his own Bigfoot footage at the site of the Patterson–Gimlin film. The two stop off first in Willow Creek, the Bigfoot capital of the world, where Jim interviews various locals about Bigfoot. At a restaurant, they notice a missing woman on a poster on the wall. While heading into the forest in search of the Patterson–Gimlin filming location, they encounter a man who angrily tells them to leave, but Jim and Kelly ignore him. They set a camp in the middle of the woods, but after return to it from a swim, they find it trashed. That night they are awakened by mysterious sounds echoing through the woods, and whooping vocalizations. The noises grow closer and something hits their tent. Scared, the couple decides to leave at dawn. In the morning, Jim discovers a gray hair. They wander in circles through the thick woods while hearing the same noises they heard the night before. During the night, Jim and Kelly encounter a naked woman. An unseen creature attacks them, killing Jim and moving on to Kelly whose cries for help are heard in the distance. The movie ends with three whooping vocalizations also heard in the distance. Cast[edit] Alexie Gilmore as Kelly Bryce Johnson as Jim Peter Jason as an ex-Forest Ranger (credited as Ranger Troy Andrews) Laura Montagna as Missing Woman Bucky Sinister as Angry Man at Road Timmy Red as Ukulele Singer Steven Streufert as Himself Shaun L. White Guy Sr. as Herself Nita Rowley as Herself Tom Yamarone as Himself Release and reception[edit] The film was premiered at the 2013 Independent Film Festival of Boston, and subsequently screened within such festivals as Maryland Film Festival.[1] Willow Creek has received generally positive reviews from critics. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 86% (based on 51 reviews). The website's consensus states: "Writer-director Bobcat Goldthwait's first foray into horror doesn't break any new ground, but it does wring fresh terror from a well-worn genre formula—and offers a few nasty laughs in the bargain."[2] References[edit] ^ "Willow Creek Trailer, News, Videos, and Reviews". ComingSoon.net. 2014-04-28. Retrieved 2014-05-28. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) ^ "Willow Creek". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved July 16, 2014. CS1 maint: discouraged parameter (link) External links[edit] API at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Films directed by Bobcat Goldthwait Shakes the Clown (1991) Windy City Heat (2003) Sleeping Dogs Lie (2006) World's Greatest Dad (2009) God Bless America (2011) Willow Creek (2013) Patton Oswalt: Tragedy Plus Comedy Equals Time (2014) Call Me Lucky (2015) This article about a 2010s horror film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article about an independent film is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e