Character in Ghostbusters Winston Zeddemore Ghostbusters character Ernie Hudson as Winston Zeddemore in Ghostbusters II (1989) First appearance Ghostbusters (1984) Created by Dan Aykroyd Harold Ramis Portrayed by Ernie Hudson Voiced by Ernie Hudson (Ghostbusters: The Video Game) Arsenio Hall (The Real Ghostbusters; 1986–1988) Buster Jones (The Real Ghostbusters; 1988–1991) (Extreme Ghostbusters; guest star) In-universe information Species Human Gender Male Title Phd Occupation Egyptologist Ghostbuster Religion Christian Nationality American Dr. Winston Zeddemore is a fictional character appearing in the Ghostbusters films, TV series, and video games.[1] He was played by Ernie Hudson in both movies and was voiced by Arsenio Hall in the first three seasons of The Real Ghostbusters. Buster Jones provided Winston's voice in the remaining seasons, and he reprised the role in a cameo on Extreme Ghostbusters. Hudson returned to provide his appearance and voice to Zeddemore in 2009's Ghostbusters: The Video Game. Contents 1 Conception and creation 2 Appearances 2.1 Film 2.1.1 Ghostbusters (1984) 2.1.2 Ghostbusters II (1989) 2.1.3 Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021) 2.1.4 The Real Ghostbusters 2.1.4.1 Zeddemore and the Ecto-1 2.1.5 Extreme Ghostbusters 2.1.6 The Super Mario Bros. Super Show 2.2 Video games 2.2.1 Ghostbusters II (NES) 2.2.2 New Ghostbusters II 2.2.3 Ghostbusters: The Video Game 2.2.4 Beeline's Ghostbusters 2.2.5 Lego Dimensions 3 Name misspelling 4 References 5 Bibliography Conception and creation[edit] In the original script for Ghostbusters, Winston Zeddemore was intended to be part of the Ghostbusters team from the beginning, a former "Air Force major something, a demolitions expert".[1] This was revised in subsequent drafts after Hudson was cast.[2] His character was originally intended to represent the audience, but was rewritten to be "an outsider and a late addition" to the Ghostbusters team.[3] Veteran actor Yaphet Kotto auditioned and was offered the role, but had to drop out due to other commitments.[4] After working with him the previous year on Trading Places, Dan Aykroyd originally wanted Eddie Murphy to play the role of Winston Zeddemore. Aware of his comic abilities, his characterization of Winston would have been in a semi-improvisational style, similar to Bill Murray's performance as Peter Venkman. Murphy was too busy shooting Beverly Hills Cop to commit.[5] Appearances[edit] Film[edit] Ghostbusters (1984)[edit] Main article: Ghostbusters Winston Zeddemore's first on-screen appearance is in the movie Ghostbusters, when he responds to a help-wanted advertisement the team has posted in an attempt to deal with their sizable workload.[2] Questioned extensively during his application by Janine Melnitz as to whether he believes in a large number of supernatural occurrences and beings (such as UFOs, the Loch Ness Monster and the theory of Atlantis among others), Zeddemore replies, "If there's a steady paycheck in it, I'll believe anything you say." Later in the movie, having seen the level of paranormal activity present in the city, he remarks, "This job is definitely not worth eleven-five [$11,500] a year!" Zeddemore is a religious man to some extent, saying in a discussion in Ghostbusters that he believes in God and "loves Jesus' style". While driving the Ecto-1 with Ray, he voices his thoughts that the sudden spike in ghost appearances might be a sign of the apocalypse, pointing out that while they have come to treat capturing ghosts as routine pest control, in a very real sense the dead are literally "rising from the grave". Though Zeddemore has no previous background in paranormal studies and is not initially a firm believer in the existence of the paranormal, he readily accepts the existence of ghosts and the supernatural as he encounters them as a Ghostbuster. However, despite this, he continues to act as an 'everyman' and voice of reason for the team, and when the jailed Ghostbusters seriously proposes asking a U.S. federal judge to release them because they must fight an invading god, Zeddemore reminds the others that no one will believe their claims. Ghostbusters II (1989)[edit] Main article: Ghostbusters II At the start of the sequel Ghostbusters II, the team has been forced out of business due to legal injunctions and property damage lawsuits. Zeddemore and Ray Stantz work as unpopular children's entertainers, but rejoin the team after the ban against them is lifted. Winston helps Ray and Egon investigate the mysterious river of slime under the city, being "hit" by the specter of a train that derailed decades earlier and caused hundreds of deaths. Later, he helps them pilot the Statue of Liberty (suffused with slime charged by positive emotions) through New York City to rally the public and defeat Vigo the Carpathian. Ray remarks that the slime reminds him of Jell-O, a dessert Winston hates. Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021)[edit] Main article: Ghostbusters: Afterlife Hudson confirmed that he will reprise his role as Zeddemore in Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021).[6] The Real Ghostbusters[edit] Main article: The Real Ghostbusters Many details of Zeddemore's personality and character are revealed in episodes of The Real Ghostbusters. The episode "Cry Uncle" clarifies that, in the show's continuity, Winston has no doctorate; he also informs Egon's skeptical Uncle Cyrus that, prior to becoming a Ghostbuster, he too doubted the existence of ghosts. In "Mr. Sandman, Dream Me a Dream," Winston states that, unlike his three colleagues, he is not a scientist, causing him to doubt his ability to resolve a crisis when the Sandman traps the others within their own dreams, but with encouragement from a dream-version of Albert Einstein, he meets the challenge and wins the day. "The Ghostbusters in Paris" reveals that Winston was once a construction worker prior to joining the Ghostbusters. This idea seems to be further reinforced in the episode "The Brooklyn Triangle", when the Ghostbusters respond to a construction site headed by his father; this would indicate that it might have been a family business, until Winston decided to join the Ghostbusters. In the episode "Devil To Pay", Zeddemore mentions having a girlfriend, though she is never seen on screen during the series. In "Night Game", he is shown to love baseball, and his favorite team is the Jaguars. In several other episodes it is shown that Zeddemore loves mystery novels and detective stories, and in "Boodunnit" he is the one who solves the mystery novel left behind by a deceased mystery writer similar to Agatha Christie, allowing her soul to rest. In "Doctor, Doctor" it is revealed that Zeddemore also likes classical literature, including the works of Herman Melville and Charles Dickens. He is also a fan of The Alan Parsons Project. "The Brooklyn Triangle" introduces Winston's father, Ed, who works in construction. Their relationship is shown to have been strained because of Winston choosing to be a Ghostbuster, but they reconcile by the end of the episode. Finally, in the episode "The Moaning Stones", Zeddemore is revealed to be the reincarnation of Shima Buku, a shaman at war with an immortal demon known only as the Undying One. Zeddemore and the Ecto-1[edit] Winston is the primary driver of Ecto-1[7] for more than a few moments in the two films. As a result, he is almost always shown driving the car in The Real Ghostbusters cartoon, and is often seen performing routine maintenance such as oil changes on the vehicle. In an episode of the cartoon where the Ghostbusters are sent back in time to the 1950s, Winston sees Ecto-1 in its original role as a hearse telling the other Ghostbusters he would know the vehicle anywhere, he says to the car, "Hang in there Ecto--better days are ahead for you", illustrating how fond Zeddemore is of the car. Extreme Ghostbusters[edit] Main article: Extreme Ghostbusters Winston only appears in the two-part series finale. After the closing down of the Ghostbusters, Winston got his pilot's license, being the first and only Ghostbuster to be a certified pilot. The Super Mario Bros. Super Show[edit] Main article: The Super Mario Bros. Super Show Ernie Hudson appears as himself in the episode "Slime Busters" of The Super Mario Bros. Super Show.[8] Video games[edit] Ghostbusters II (NES)[edit] Main article: Ghostbusters II (NES) Winston was featured as a playable character in Ghostbusters II for NES. New Ghostbusters II[edit] Main article: New Ghostbusters II Winston was featured as a playable character in New Ghostbusters II for NES and Game Boy. Ghostbusters: The Video Game[edit] Main article: Ghostbusters: The Video Game A likeness of Hudson, circa 1991 (the year in which the game takes place) appears in the Ghostbusters: The Video Game that was released on June 16, 2009. Hudson also reprised his role for the game by voicing him.[9] In the game, between the Vigo incident and Thanksgiving 1991, Winston has acquired his doctorate, is now addressed as "Doctor" along with his colleagues. Zeddemore can be heard quipping "That's Dr. Zeddemore to you, punk!" when defeating enemies. He mentions that he "pretty much lived" in the museum's exhibit on ancient Egypt while in school, revealing that his degree is in Egyptology. On his one day off, Winston went to go see a performance of the Aida opera. However, the Psi Energy Pulse officially cancelled his plans. After Janine delivered the message, Winston left to meet up with the other Ghostbusters at the Sedgewick Hotel. He endured four hours of traffic but made it to the hotel just in time to see the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man. During their final confrontation, Ivo Shandor mocks Winston, saying that he always thought Winston was the "slow" one of the group, much to Winston's surprise. When Shandor is destroyed, everyone flees the mausoleum. Winston carries the exorcised Mayor Mulligan outside until he regains consciousness. Beeline's Ghostbusters[edit] Zeddemore appears in Beeline Interactive's Ghostbusters game for iOS. The game was released on January 24, 2013. Lego Dimensions[edit] Main article: Lego Dimensions Zeddemore appears in Lego Dimensions, with archival audio of Ernie Hudson being used to represent his character. Name misspelling[edit] The name "Zeddemore" is misspelled as "Zeddmore" in the closing credits of Ghostbusters.[10][11] As a result it was also sometimes misspelled in scripts and other sources related to The Real Ghostbusters. The name is spelled correctly on the nametag on Winston's jumpsuit, in the shooting script of Ghostbusters (as published in the book Making Ghostbusters), and in the closing credits of Ghostbusters II. The name is also pronounced correctly (with three syllables) by both Annie Potts and Ernie Hudson in Ghostbusters. References[edit] ^ a b Hudson, Ernie (2015-01-28). "The painful what-if that haunts 'Ghostbuster' Ernie Hudson". EW.com. Retrieved 2016-03-05. ^ a b Freeman, Hadley (October 16, 2014). "Ernie Hudson on being the squeezed Ghostbuster: 'If I blame racism there's nothing I can learn from it'". theguardian.com. The Guardian. Retrieved October 26, 2017. ^ Freeman, Hadley (October 6, 2014). "Ivan Reitman: 'Sigourney Weaver got on all fours and started howling like a dog on my coffee table'". theguardian.com. The Guardian. Retrieved October 26, 2017. ^ Marc Shapiro (Jan 1992). "Yaphet Kotto: Freddy Fighter". Fangoria. Horror Spectacular. No. 5. pp. 28–32. ^ "'Ghostbusters': Five scary facts about the 1984 classic". Usatoday.com. 2014-08-31. Retrieved 2016-03-31. ^ Burwick, Kevin (September 16, 2019). "Dan Aykroyd & Ernie Hudson Confirm Their Return in Ghostbusters 2020". Movieweb. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2019. ^ Plume, Kenneth (September 6, 2000). "Interview with J. Michael Straczynski (Part 2 of 4)". IGN. Archived from the original on July 20, 2010. Retrieved 2007-02-06. ^ "Super Mario Bros. Supershow - Slime Busters". YouTube. 2014-06-03. Retrieved 2016-08-03. ^ Miller, Greg. "IGN: Ghostbusters: The Video Game Review". IGN. Retrieved 2010-08-15. ^ Reitman, Ivan (director) (June 1984). Ghostbusters (motion picture). ^ Lyne, Charlie (9 July 2016). "How nostalgia took over the world (and why that's no bad thing)". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 November 2016. Bibliography[edit] Shay, Don (1985). Making Ghostbusters, New York: New York Zoetrope. ISBN 0-918432-68-5 v t e Ghostbusters Ghost Corps Films Ghostbusters Ghostbusters II Ghostbusters (2016) Ghostbusters: Afterlife Television The Real Ghostbusters episodes Extreme Ghostbusters Comics The Real Ghostbusters Ghostbusters: Legion Video games Ghostbusters (1984) The Real Ghostbusters (1987) Ghostbusters (1990) Ghostbusters II NES Ghostbusters II The Computer Game New Ghostbusters II The Real Ghostbusters (1993) Ghostbusters: The Video Game Ghostbusters: Sanctum of Slime Ghostbusters (2016) Characters Peter Venkman Ray Stantz Egon Spengler Winston Zeddemore Janine Melnitz Stay Puft Marshmallow Man Slimer Music Ghostbusters "Ghostbusters" Ghostbusters II "On Our Own" 2016 soundtrack "Good Girls" "Girls Talk Boys" 2016 score Ghostbusters: Afterlife Related Ghostheads Proton pack Ectomobile 55 Central Park West Firehouse interior Role-playing game Cartoon All-Stars to the Rescue The Earth Day Special Casper Zuul Lego Ghostbusters Category