Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling Directed by Ellory Elkayem Produced by Amy Goldberg Written by Stephen Mazur Starring Oliver James Kristopher Turner Rik Young Music by Thomas Chase Cinematography Thomas L. Callaway Edited by John Gilbert Distributed by Paramount Famous Productions Release date January 13, 2009 (2009-01-13) Running time 87 minutes Country United States Language English Box office $4,422,827 (DVD rentals)[1] Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling is a 2009 direct-to-video spin off of the 2004 film Without a Paddle.[2] Aside from the theme of three men on a river adventure to find something, there is little connection to the first film. None of the original actors return. It was released on DVD on January 13, 2009. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Plot[edit] Two childhood friends (Oliver James and Kristopher Turner) reunite years later to take part in an unusual quest that involves traveling into the woods in search of Ben's high school sweetheart. They are joined by their British rival Nigel (Rik Young) and, as the stakes get higher and the squirrels turn hostile, the hapless trio attempts to navigate a raging river while realizing that sometimes nature isn't all it's cracked up to be. Cast[edit] Oliver James as Ben Reed Kristopher Turner as Zach Howell Rik Young as Nigel Madison Riley as Heather "Earthchild" Bessler Amber McDonald as Thunderstorm Jerry Rice as Hal Gore Cory Bossom as Young Ben Reed Robert Blanche as Massey Ellen Albertini Dow as Mrs. Bessler Reception[edit] Entertainment Weekly called it "the most unnecessary sequel ever".[3] Ryan Keer of DVDTalk gave it half a star out of 5, and recommend viewers "Skip It".[2] References[edit] ^ "Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling". The Numbers. ^ a b Ryan Keefer (January 13, 2009). "Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling". DVD Talk. ^ "'Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling': Most unnecessary sequel ever?". Entertainment Weekly. External links[edit] API at IMDb API at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Films directed by Ellory Elkayem They Nest (2000) Eight Legged Freaks (2002) Return of the Living Dead: Necropolis (2005) Return of the Living Dead: Rave to the Grave (2005) Without a Paddle: Nature's Calling (2009) This film article about a 2000s comedy is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e