The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the English-speaking world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (September 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may be expanded with text translated from the corresponding article in Dutch. (September 2017) Click [show] for important translation instructions. View a machine-translated version of the Dutch article. Machine translation like DeepL or Google Translate is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary Content in this edit is translated from the existing Dutch Wikipedia article at [[:nl:Vrouwenwapen]]; see its history for attribution. You should also add the template {{Translated|nl|Vrouwenwapen}} to the talk page. For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation. Alliance arms of Maria of Loon-Heinsberg. Arms of women were usually depicted on lozenges. Here, her family arms are impaled with those of her husband, Jan IV of Nassau. Due to the differing role of women in past society, special rules grew relating to the blazoning of arms for women. The rules for women and heraldry developed differently from place to place and there is no one single rule that applies everywhere. In general, arms of women were most likely depicted not on shields but on lozenges or ovals. Different rules exist that depend on the woman's marital status and a married woman would also often make use of her husband's arms in addition to those from her family. In both the English[1] and the Scottish[2] systems of heraldry these differences remain active. Contents 1 Characteristics 1.1 Escutcheons, crests, and other heraldic elements 1.2 Transmission 2 By tradition 2.1 British Heraldry 2.1.1 Heraldic Heiresses 2.2 Canadian Heraldry 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References Characteristics[edit] Escutcheons, crests, and other heraldic elements[edit] Heraldry has its origins from associations with warfare and the age of chivalry. The traditional shield was also associated with war and so women did not usually display familial arms on escutcheons. Rather, they could display these on various other shapes: more commonly the lozenge, an oval, or a cartouche. The crest–a device that sits atop the shield on an armorial achievement–likewise was not accorded to heraldic devices of women as these had associations with warfare. Transmission[edit] In many heraldic traditions, arms generally are passed patrilineally. In other nations, in Canadian heraldry for example, women may inherit arms on an equal basis with their brothers (if any). Women in Canada may also transmit their arms to their heirs, regardless of sex.[4] By tradition[edit] British Heraldry[edit] Main articles: English Heraldry, Scottish Heraldry, and Northern Irish heraldry The coat of arms of Baroness Thatcher: in some heraldic traditions, the arms of women are displayed in a lozenge, as opposed to a shield. In English, Scottish and Northern Irish heraldry, a woman may bear arms by inheritance from her father[5] or by grant to herself. When unmarried, she displays her arms on a lozenge (a diamond shape) or on an oval or oval-like shape. Traditionally, a woman does not display her arms on a shield, as the shield originated with knights and warfare, and is thus viewed as fitting for a man, but not a woman.[citation needed] The arms of the Duchess of Cambridge (right) impaled with those of her husband, Prince William, Duke of Cambridge (left) When married, a woman has the option of uniting her arms with those of her husband in what are called marital arms; their arms are impaled, meaning they are placed side by side in the same shield, with those of the man on the dexter (left, as seen from the front) and those of his wife on the sinister (right, as seen from the front).[6] If one spouse belongs to the higher ranks of an order of chivalry, and is thereby entitled to surround his or her arms with a circlet of the order, it is usual to depict them on two separate shields tilted towards one another, this is termed "accollé".[citation needed] Coat of Arms of Birgitte, Duchess of Gloucester who is a heraldic heiress. Depicting her father's arms imposed over those of Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester, her husband. A married woman may also bear either her own arms or her husband's arms alone on a shield with the shield charged with a small lozenge to distinguish her from her husband.[7] A widowed woman usually displays the impaled arms on a lozenge-shaped shield, unless she is a heraldic heiress (see below).[8] Heraldic Heiresses[edit] If the woman is an heraldic heiress, her arms are shown on an inescutcheon of pretence, which is a small shield in the centre of her husband's arms. When widowed, instead of showing the impaled arms on a lozenge, she continues to use her marital arms, but placed on a lozenge or oval.[8] In England and Northern Ireland, if there is more than one surviving daughter, each transmits her father's arms on equal terms.[9] In Scotland however, only the eldest surviving daughter transmits her father's undifferenced arms to her offspring.[10] Canadian Heraldry[edit] Main article: Canadian heraldry In Canadian heraldry, women and men are treated equally for heraldic purpose, reflecting Canadian equality laws.[11] It is therefore common to display the arms of women on shields, rather than on a lozenge or oval, but a woman may still choose to have her arms displayed on a traditional shape. In many systems of heraldry, the arms of each living person must be unique. English heraldry has used armorial variants to distinguish the arms of brothers from their father's arms and from each other since the thirteenth century;[12] this is now normally done by the system of marks or brisures set up by the early Tudor herald John Writhe.[1] Canada adds a unique series of brisures for use by female children who inherit arms. As in other heraldic systems, these cadency marks are not always used;[13] in any case, when the heir succeeds (in Canada, the first child, whether male or female, according to strict primogeniture), the mark of cadency is removed and the heir uses the plain coat of arms.[2] Gallery[edit] Archduke Charles (later Holy Roman Emperor Charles V), aged 2, with his sisters Eleonore and Isabella. Charles's arms are depicted on a shield with a label indicating that he is his father's heir while those of his sisters are on lozenges with half left blank, to be filed with those of their future husbands. Jacqueline, Countess of Hainaut (c. 1435) Jan van Wassenaar (1483–1523) and Josina van Egmond (1485–1538) Arms of Susanna thoe Schwartzenberg The arms of Sophia Sheppard (née Routh) showing the arms impaled, meaning that she survived her husband. See also[edit] Baron and feme Coverture Elizabeth Roads Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coats of arms of women. Warning: Commons category does not match the Commons sitelink on Wikidata – please check (this message is shown only in preview) References[edit] ^ a b "The Law of Arms: The descent of arms". College of Arms. 2004-04-10. Retrieved 2019-09-27. ^ a b "Beginners Heraldry, The Heraldry Society of Scotland – UK Heraldry". The Heraldry Society of Scotland. 2005-04-17. Archived from the original on 2008-10-13. Retrieved 2008-11-06. ^ "Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms – Equality Rights". 6074332 Canada Inc., in association with SailorJones Media Inc. Retrieved 2008-11-06. ^ This system of equality for men and women is a result of provisions in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which guarantee, among other things, freedom from discrimination under the law on the basis of sex.[3] ^ Fox-Davies, Arthur (2007), A Complete Guide to Heraldry, Skyhorse Publishing Inc., p. 546, Every woman is entitled to bear upon a lozenge in her own lifetime the arms, quarterings, and difference marks which belonged to her father. ^ Beddoe, Alan & Galloway, Strome (1981), Beddoe's Canadian heraldry, Mika, p. 171, If her husband is an armiger her arms leave the female lozenge and share her husband's shield, ie, are 'impaled' with his arms, his to the dexter (right) and hers to the sinister (left). ^ Slater, Stephen (2004). The Complete Book of Heraldry. Anness Pub. Co. p. 115. ^ a b Fearn, Jacqueline (1980). Discovering Heraldry. Shire. p. 61. ^ Friar 1993, p. 181. ^ Burnett 1997, p. 46. ^ "Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms - Equality Rights". 6074332 Canada Inc., in association with SailorJones Media Inc. Retrieved 21 June 2012. ^ Boutell, Charles (1914). "Chapter XII". The handbook to English heraldry. Arthur Charles Fox-Davies, ed. Reeves & Turner. p. 176. Boutell Fox Davies. ^ "Heraldry Examination". Royal Heraldry Society of Canada. Retrieved 2008-08-30. v t e Heraldry Armiger Law of heraldic arms Grant of arms Blazon Officials Authorities Officers of arms King of Arms, Herald, Pursuivant Private Officer of Arms Conventional elements of coats of arms Coat of arms (emblazoned onto an escutcheon) Supporter Supporter Slogan (battle cry) Crest Torse Mantling Helmet/Galero Crown/Coronet Compartment Order Motto Heraldic tinctures Types National Dominion Civic Ecclesiastical Papal Burgher Women Socialist Attributed Charges of heraldic achievem -ents (List) See also: Canting Alliance (Courtesy) Funerary Escutcheon (shield) Modern French Field Divisions Variations Charge Chief Lines Ordinary Augmentation Abatement Cadency Distinction Marshalling Quartering Impalement Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron Cross Fess Flaunch Gyron Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Saltire Creatures Attitudes Erasure Beasts Bear Boar Bull/Ox Dog/Hound Camelopard (giraffe) Hind/Stag (deer) Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Bird species Avalerion Black swan Cock Corvus Dove Eagle Martlet Pelican Sea creatures Dolphin Ged Lucy (esox) Scallop Legendary creatures Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Woodwose Wyvern Yale Others Reremouse Bee Crapaudy (toad) Emmet (ant) Serpent Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Medici Morvillier Ormonde/Wake Savoy Shakespeare Stafford Trafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rules Tricking Hatching Fimbriation (with black and white rendering) Metals     Argent (white)     Or (gold) Colours     Gules (red)     Sable (black)     Azure (blue)     Vert (green)     Purpure (purple) Furs Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains     Murrey (mulberry)     Sanguine (blood red)     Tenné Non-tra ditional1 Metals   Copper   Buff (treated as a metal in United States heraldry) Colours     Bleu celeste   Brunâtre (brown)   Buff (treated as a color in Canadian heraldry)   Carnation   Cendrée   Ochre   Orange   Rose External Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Helmet Mantling And pavilion Motto Slogan Supporter Torse Applications Clothing (Tabard) Flag (Banner of arms) Badge Jewellery Seal Equestrian Bookplate Trophy of arms See also Roll of arms Phaleristics List of oldest heraldry Vexillology Mon Emblem Logotype 1 Non-traditional, rarely used traditions in italic (typically regional or modern, sometimes considered unheraldic)  Heraldry portal Portal:Heraldry/Web resources