Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort Official DVD cover Directed by Valeri Milev Produced by Jeffery Beach Phillip Roth Written by Frank H. Woodward Based on Characters by Alan B. McElroy Starring Anthony Ilott Chris Jarvis Aqueela Zoll Sadie Katz Music by Claude Foisy Cinematography Martin Chichov Edited by Don Adams Cameron Hallenbeck Production companies Regency Enterprises Summit Entertainment Constantin Film Distributed by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment Release date October 21, 2014 (2014-10-21) Running time 91 minutes Country United States Language English Budget $1 million[1] Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort (stylized as Wrong Turn VI in the opening credits) is a 2014 American slasher film directed by Valeri Milev. It is served as a reboot and the sixth installment in the Wrong Turn film series.[2] The film was released on DVD and digitally on October 21, 2014.[3] It was followed by a reboot, titled simply Wrong Turn (2021). Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Release 5 Reception 6 Court case 7 References 8 External links Plot[edit] The Hillicker brothers Three Finger, Saw Tooth, and One Eye murder a pair of bikers Daria and Nick at the bike trail in West Virginia. The brothers are under the care of their demented relatives Jackson and Sally, the caretakers of the local medieval hotel resort Hobbs Springs. Danny attends the resort for a family inheritance along with his girlfriend Toni, her brother Rod and their friends; Vic, Charlie, Bryan, and his girlfriend Jillian. Upon arrival, he is welcomed by Sally and Jackson, his cousins, but unbeknownst to his friends, the cannibals and Jackson murdered elderly hotel guest Agnes Fields at the hallway. Bryan and Jillian, who are shopping for groceries the next day, are informed by Sheriff Doucette concerning the disappearances of the townsfolk including the hotel guests and Agnes. As he drives away, Doucette runs into a roadblock where he is killed by Three Finger. Alarmed by Bryan and Jillian's news of the townsfolk's fate, Danny's friends became suspicious to the nature of his cousins and his interest of staying with his family causing his relationship with the others to deteriorate. Toni sends Vic to find Danny who has gone hunting with Jackson out in the woods. Vic sees Saw Tooth devouring a deer that was killed by Danny during the hunt. When Danny plans on renovating the hotel to re-open next year, his friends reluctantly agree to stay. Jillian and Bryan, however, plan to leave the town and steal items from the hotel for money. While doing so, they discover a hidden door to a basement that leads to an underground bathhouse where the cannibals attack the couple. Jillian is killed, but Sally stops them from killing Bryan. She then drags him to her bedroom and asphyxiates him with her pillow under Jackson's orders. Now turning against his friends during a heated argument with Toni, Danny is introduced by Jackson and Sally to his long-lost cannibalistic relatives at the clearing. They explain to Danny, who is a Hillicker, of their origins. Vic follows them and overhears their conversation. He is then captured by the Hillickers who cut his throat and tear his innards out for the whole clan to eat for the ceremony. As the rest of the group begin to leave the next morning, Toni, Rod and Charlie discover Jackson cooking meals in the kitchen with dismembered corpses of the victims, including Bryan and Jillian. Horrified, they attempt to escape only to run into the cannibals who kill both Charlie and Rod. Toni arms herself with a rifle from the armory and enters the bathhouse to confront Sally about manipulating Danny against his friends. As they fight, Toni disfigures Sally and shoots off her leg with the rifle. Enraged, Jackson orders Danny to kill Toni but he lets her escape. Jackson pursues her until Toni retaliates by stabbing him in the head with the door keys, killing him. The cannibals surround Toni as Danny leaves her to be killed by Three Finger. One year after the reopening of the resort renamed as Hillicker Springs, Danny becomes the new manager and continues the sordid family tradition by having sex with Sally at the bathhouse as the other Hillickers watch. Cast[edit] Anthony Ilott as Danny Chris Jarvis as Jackson Hilliker Aqueela Zoll as Toni Sadie Katz as Sally Hilliker Rollo Skinner as Vic Billy Ashworth as Rod Harry Belcher as Charlie Joe Gaminara as Bryan Roxanne Pallett as Jillian Radoslav Parvanov as Three Finger Danko Jordanov as Saw Tooth Asen Asenov as One Eye Kicker Robinson as Doucette Talitha Luke-Eardley as Daria Luke Cousins as Nick Josie Kidd as Agnes Fields Venetka Georgieva as Overweight Woman Production[edit] Director Declan O'Brien was replaced by director Valeri Milev for the sixth installment in the Wrong Turn franchise.[4][unreliable source?] Originally served as a sequel to Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines (2012) to complete the prequel trilogy, but was scrapped. Shooting for the sixth film was reported to have commenced in March 2014 in Bulgaria.[5][6] Release[edit] Fox Home Entertainment released it on home video on October 21, 2014. It grossed over $1 million in combined DVD and Blu-ray sales in North America.[7] Reception[edit] 28 Days Later Analysis reported on it being ten years "since actress Eliza Dushku played Jessie, a woman chased by a gang of cannibal hillbillies. A ten year run with five sequels makes the Wrong Turn film series one of the longest running horror franchises in recent history".[4][unreliable source?] Joel Harley of Starburst rated it 7/10 stars and wrote, "If anything, this is one of the best entries yet."[8] Steve Barton of Dread Central rated it 1.5/5 stars and called it "all crap with a few good moments", though he praised Sadie Katz's acting.[9] Court case[edit] In October 2014, a court case was filed in Ireland over the unauthorized use of a photo of a woman who went missing in County Wexford. The judge declined to issue a temporary injunction, but the case came back to court in early November 2014. As a result of the lawsuit, distributor 20th Century Fox recalled all DVD and Blu-ray releases of the film with no plan to repress or re-release and have also pulled all online streaming sources.[10] References[edit] ^ "What are the chances of Wrong Turn 7 in 2016?". HorrorSociety.com. Retrieved October 26, 2015. ^ Woods, Kevin (March 10, 2014). "Wrong Turn 6 now in production; House of Bad's Sadie Katz toplining cast". JoBlo. Retrieved March 18, 2014. ^ Miska, Brad (September 8, 2014). "'Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort' Teaser Takes You On a Gory Trip! (Exclusive)". Bloody Disgusting. Retrieved June 13, 2020. ^ a b Allen, Michael (March 12, 2014). "Cannibals Spotted in the Woods of Sophia, Bulgaria in Wrong Turn 6". 28 Days Later Analysis. Retrieved March 18, 2014. ^ "'Wrong Turn 6' Now Filming in Bulgaria!". Bloody-Disgusting. March 7, 2014. Retrieved March 17, 2014. ^ "Fox Takes a Wrong Turn for the Sixth Time; Now Filming!". Dread Central. March 8, 2014. Retrieved March 17, 2014. ^ "Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort (2014)". The Numbers. Retrieved October 26, 2015. ^ Harley, Joel (August 25, 2014). "WRONG TURN 6: LAST RESORT [FRIGHTFEST 2014]". Starburst. Retrieved October 28, 2014. ^ Barton, Steve (October 22, 2014). "Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort (Blu-ray / DVD)". Dread Central. Retrieved October 28, 2014. ^ O'Faolain, Aodhan (October 30, 2014). "Family of late Irish woman bid to have image removed from horror film". Irish Independent. Retrieved October 30, 2014. External links[edit] Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort at IMDb Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Wrong Turn Wrong Turn (2003) Wrong Turn 2: Dead End Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead Wrong Turn 4: Bloody Beginnings Wrong Turn 5: Bloodlines Wrong Turn 6: Last Resort Wrong Turn (2021) Category