Shinto god "Yamagami" redirects here. For other uses, see Yamagami (disambiguation). This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "API" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Shrine in Niigata, Niigata. Yama-no-Kami (山の神) is the name given to a kami of the mountains of the Shinto religion of Japan. These can be of two different types. The first type is a god of the mountains who is worshipped by hunters, woodcutters, and charcoal burners. The second is a god of agriculture who comes down from the mountains and is worshipped by farmers. This kami is generally considered as a goddess, or a female deity. Yama-no-Kami appearing in Japanese mythology include: Ōyamatsumi (大山津見神), the father of Konohanasakuya-hime. Masaka-Yamatsumi (正鹿山津見神) Odo-Yamatsumi (淤縢山津見神) Oku-Yamatsumi (奥山津見神) Kura-Yamatsumi (闇山津見神) Shigi-Yamatsumi (志藝山津見神) Ha-Yamatsumi (羽山津見神) Hara-Yamatsumi (原山津見神) To-Yamatsumi (戸山津見神) Konohanasakuya-hime (木花之開耶姫), the wife of Ninigi-no-Mikoto and great-grandmother of Emperor Jimmu. Ohoyamakui (大山咋神), the god of Mount Hiei. Shirayama-hime (白山比咩神), the goddess of Mount Hakusan. v t e Japanese mythology Mythic texts Kojiki Nihon Shoki Fudoki Kujiki Kogo Shūi Hotsuma Tsutae Nihon Ryōiki Konjaku Monogatarishū Shintōshū Butsuzōzui Japanese creation myth Kotoamatsukami Amenominakanushi Kamiyo (Kamiyonanayo) Kuniumi Kamiumi Izanami Izanagi Kagutsuchi Watatsumi Takamagahara mythology Amaterasu Susanoo Tsukuyomi Ame-no-Uzume Izumo mythology Yamata no Orochi Hare of Inaba Ōkuninushi Kuni-yuzuri Kotoshironushi Takeminakata Hyūga mythology Tenson kōrin Ninigi Konohanasakuya-hime Hoderi Hoori Toyotama-hime Ugayafukiaezu Human age Emperor Jimmu Tagishimimi Kesshi Hachidai Mythical locations Ashihara no Nakatsukuni Amano-Iwato Onogoro Island Ne-no-kuni Ryūgū-jō Takamagahara Yomi Major Buddhist figures Amida Nyorai Daruma Five Tathagatas Seven Lucky Gods Benzaiten Bishamonten Daikokuten Ebisu Fukurokuju Hotei Jurōjin Kisshōten Legendary creatures Dragon Kappa Kitsune Oni Tengu Yōkai Yūrei Other Shinigami Ryukyuan religion Amamikyu Tenson dynasty Ainu mythology Kamuy Kamuy-huci Hasinaw-uk-kamuy Shinto deities Mythology in popular culture Japanese deities Sacred objects Japanese religions Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125 This article relating to Shinto is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e This article relating to Japanese mythology is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. v t e