Japanese dragon "Orochi" redirects here. For other uses, see Orochi (disambiguation). Susanoo slaying the Yamata no Orochi, woodblock print by Toyohara Chikanobu Yamata no Orochi (ヤマタノオロチ, also 八岐大蛇 , 八俣遠呂智 or 八俣遠呂知), or simply Orochi (大蛇), is a legendary eight-headed and eight-tailed Japanese dragon/serpent.[1][2] Contents 1 Mythology 2 Etymology 3 Mythological parallels 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Mythology[edit] Susanoo slaying Yamata no Orochi, woodblock print by Tsukioka Yoshitoshi Yamata no Orochi legends are originally recorded in two ancient texts about Japanese mythology and history. The 680 AD transl. ja – transl. Kojiki transcribes this dragon name as 八岐遠呂智 and the 720 AD Nihon Shoki writes it as 八岐大蛇. In both versions of the Orochi myth, the Shinto storm god Susanoo (or "Susa-no-O") is expelled from Heaven for tricking his sister Amaterasu, the sun goddess. Susanoo slaying Yamata no Orochi, woodblock print by Utagawa Kuniyoshi After expulsion from Heaven, Susanoo encounters two "Earthly Deities" (國神, kunitsukami) near the head of the Hi River (簸川), now called the Hii River (斐伊川), in Izumo Province. They are weeping because they were forced to give the Orochi one of their daughters every year for seven years, and now they must sacrifice their eighth, Kushi-inada-hime (櫛名田比売, "comb/wondrous rice-field princess"), who Susanoo transforms into a kushi (櫛, "comb") for safekeeping. The Kojiki tells the following version: So, having been expelled, [His-Swift-impetuous-Male-Augustness] descended to a place [called] Tori-kami (鳥髪, now 鳥上) at the head-waters of the River Hi in the Land of Idzumo. At this time some chopsticks came floating down the stream. So His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, thinking that there must be people at the head-waters of the river, went up it in quest of them, when he came upon an old man and an old woman, – two of them, – who had a young girl between them, and were weeping. Then he deigned to ask: "Who are ye?" So the old man replied, saying: "I am an Earthly Deity, child of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor. I am called by the name of Foot-Stroking-Elder, my wife is called by the name of Hand-Stroking Elder, and my daughter is called by the name of Wondrous-Inada-Princess." Again he asked: What is the cause of your crying?" [The old man answered] saying: "I originally had eight young girls as daughters. But the eight-forked serpent of Koshi has come every year and devoured [one], and it is now its time to come, wherefore we weep." Then he asked him: "What is its form like?" [The old man] answered, saying: "Its eyes are like akakagachi, it has one body with eight heads and eight tails. Moreover on its body grows moss, and also chamaecyparis and cryptomerias. Its length extends over eight valleys and eight hills, and if one look at its belly, it is all constantly bloody and inflamed." (What is called here akakagachi is the modern hohodzuki [winter-cherry]) Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said to the old man: "If this be thy daughter, wilt thou offer her to me?" He replied, saying: "With reverence, but I know not thine august name." Then he replied, saying: "I am elder brother to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. So I have now descended from Heaven." Then the Deities Foot-Stroking-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder said: "If that be so, with reverence will we offer [her to thee]." So His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, at once taking and changing the young girl into a multitudinous and close-toothed comb which he stuck into his august hair-bunch, said to the Deities Foot-Stroking-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder: "Do you distill some eight-fold refined liquor. Also make a fence round about, in that fence make eight gates, at each gate tie [together] eight platforms, on each platform put a liquor-vat, and into each vat pour the eight-fold refined liquor, and wait." So as they waited after having thus prepared everything in accordance with his bidding, the eight-forked serpent came truly as [the old man] had said, and immediately dipped a head into each vat, and drank the liquor. Thereupon it was intoxicated with drinking, and all [the heads] lay down and slept. Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness drew the ten-grasp saber, that was augustly girded on him, and cut the serpent in pieces, so that the River Hi flowed on changed into a river of blood. So when he cut the middle tail, the edge of his august sword broke. Then, thinking it strange, he thrust into and split [the flesh] with the point of his august sword and looked, and there was a great sword [within]. So he took this great sword, and, thinking it a strange thing, he respectfully informed the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. This is the Herb-Quelling Great Sword. (tr. Chamberlain 1919:71–3) The Nihongi also describes Yamata no Orochi:[3] "It had an eight-forked head and an eight-forked tail; its eyes were red, like the winter-cherry; and on its back firs and cypresses were growing. As it crawled it extended over a space of eight hills and eight valleys." The botanical names used to describe this Orochi are akakagachi or hoozuki (winter cherry or Japanese lantern, Physalis alkekengi), hikage (club moss, Lycopodiopsida), hinoki (Japanese cypress, Chamaecyparis obtusa), and sugi (Japanese cedar, Cryptomeria). The legendary sword Kusanagi-no-Tsurugi, which came from the tail of Yamata no Orochi, along with the Yata no Kagami mirror and Yasakani no Magatama jewel, became the three sacred Imperial Regalia of Japan. Etymology[edit] Look up orochi in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. The Japanese name orochi (大蛇) derives from Old Japanese woröti (with a regular o- from wo- shift,[4] but its etymology is enigmatic. Besides this ancient orochi reading, the kanji, 大蛇, are commonly pronounced daija, "big snake; large serpent". Carr (1990:169) notes that Japanese scholars have proposed "more than a dozen" orochi < woröti etymologies, while Western linguists have suggested loanwords from Austronesian, Tungusic, and Indo-European languages. The most feasible native etymological proposals are Japanese o- from o (尾, "tail"), (which is where Susanoo discovered the sacred sword), ō (大, "big; great"), or oro (峰, "peak; summit"); and -chi, meaning "god; spirit", cognate with the mizuchi river-dragon. Benedict (1985:167) originally proposed woröti "large snake" was suffixed from Proto-Austro-Japanese *(w)oröt-i acquired from Austronesian *[q]uḷəj "snake; worm"; which he later (1990:243) modified to *(u-)orot-i from *[q,ʔ]oḷəj. Miller (1987:647) criticized Benedict for overlooking Old Japanese "worö 'tail' + suffix -ti – as well as an obvious Tungus etymology, [Proto-Tungus] *xürgü-či 'the tailed one'", and notes "this apparently well-traveled orochi has now turned up in the speculation of the [Indo-European] folklorists (Littleton 1981)." Littleton's hypothesis involves the 3-headed monster Trisiras or Viśvarūpa, which has a mythological parallel because Indra killed it after giving it soma, wine, and food, but lacks a phonological connection. Mythological parallels[edit] Main article: Chaoskampf Part of a Mythology series on Chaoskampf or Drachenkampf Comparative mythology of sea serpents, dragons and dragonslayers. Myths Proto-Indo-European mythology Perkwunos vs. the Sea serpent Jewish mythology YHWH vs. Leviathan YHWH vs. the Tannin Gabriel vs. Rahab Christian mythology Christ vs. Satan Saint George vs. the Dragon Saint Michael vs. Herensuge[nb 1] Norse mythology Thor vs. Jörmungandr Slavic mythology Perun vs. Veles Dobrynya Nikitich vs. Zmey Gorynych Hittite mythology Tarhunt vs. Illuyanka Hurrian mythology Teshub vs. Ullikummi Greek mythology Zeus vs. Typhon Heracles vs. the Lernaean Hydra Hindu mythology Indra vs. Vritra Krishna vs. Kāliyā Zoroastrian mythology Θraētaona vs. Aži Dahāka Persian mythology Garshasp vs. Zahhak Romanian mythology Făt-Frumos vs. Balaur Canaanite mythology Baʿal Hadad vs. Yam Baʿal Hadad vs. Lotan Baʿal Hadad vs. the Tannin Chinese mythology Yu the Great vs. Xiangliu of Gong Gong Babylonian mythology Marduk vs. Tiamat Egyptian mythology Ra vs. Apep Atum vs. Nehebkau Japanese mythology Susanoo no Mikoto vs. Yamata no Orochi Aztec mythology Tezcatlipoca and Quetzalcoatl vs. Cipactli ^ Christian-Basque mythology Mythology portal v t e Polycephalic or multi-headed animals are rare in biology, but commonly feature in mythology and heraldry. Multi-headed dragons, like the 8-headed Orochi and 3-headed Trisiras above, are a common motif in comparative mythology. For instance, multi-headed dragons in Greek mythology include the 9-headed Lernaean Hydra and the 100-headed Ladon, both slain by Heracles. Two other Japanese examples derive from Buddhist importations of Indian dragon myths. Benzaiten, the Japanese name of Saraswati, supposedly killed a 5-headed dragon at Enoshima in 552 AD. Kuzuryū (九頭龍, "9-headed dragon"), deriving from the Nagaraja snake-kings Vasuki and Shesha, is worshipped at Togakushi Shrine in Nagano Prefecture. (Compare the Jiutouniao 九頭鳥, "nine-headed bird" in Chinese mythology.) Comparing folklore about polycephalic dragons and serpents, 8-headed creatures are less common than 7- or 9-headed ones. Among Japanese numerals, ya or hachi (八) can mean "many; varied" (e.g., yaoya (八百屋, lit. "800 store"), "greengrocer; jack-of-all-trades"). De Visser (1913:150) says the number 8 is "stereotypical" in legends about kings or gods riding dragons or having their carriages drawn by them. The slaying of the dragon is said to be similar to the legends of Cambodia, India, Persia, Western Asia, East Africa, and the Mediterranean area." Smith (1919:215) identifies the mythic 7- or 8-headed dragons with the 7-spiked Pteria spider shell or 8-tentacled octopus. The myth of a storm god fighting a sea serpent is itself a popular mythic trope potentially originating with the Proto-Indo-European religion[5] and later transmitted into the religions of the Ancient Near East most likely initially through interaction with Hittite speaking peoples into Syria and the Fertile Crescent.[6] This motif, known as chaoskampf (German for "struggle against chaos") represents the clash between order and chaos. Often as these myths evolve from their original source, the role of the storm god (himself often the head of a pantheon) is adopted by culture heroes or a personage symbolizing royalty. In many examples, the serpent god is often seen as multi-headed or multi-tailed. Thor vs. Jörmungandr (Norse) Perun vs. Veles (Slavic) Dobrynya Nikitich vs. Zmey Gorynych (Slavic) Tarhunt vs. Illuyanka (Hittite) Teshub vs. Ullikummi (Hurrian) Zeus vs. Typhon (Greek) Heracles vs. The Lernaean Hydra (Greek) Apollo vs. Python (mythology) (Greek) Indra vs. Vritra (Indian) Krishna vs. Kāliyā (Indian) Θraētaona vs. Aži Dahāka (Zoroastrian) Garshasp vs. Zahhak (Iranian) Saint George vs. The Dragon (Christian) Saint Michael vs. Herensuge (Christian-Basque) Făt-Frumos vs. Balaur (Romanian) Baʿal vs. Yam (Canaanite) Yu the Great vs. Xiangliu or Gong Gong (Chinese) Marduk vs. Tiamat (Babylonian) Ra vs. Apep (Egyptian) Gabriel vs. Rahab (Jewish) Christ vs. Satan (Christian) Mankan vs. Kuzuryū (Japanese Buddhism) Sigurd vs. Fafnir (Norse mythology) Quetzalcoatl vs. Cipactli (Aztec mythology) Benzaiten vs. Gozuryu (Japanese Buddhism) Drangue vs. Kulshedra(Albanian mythology) Vahagn vs. Vishap (Armenian mythology) The fight of a hero (sometimes of extraordinary birth) against a dragon who demands the sacrifice of maidens or princesses is a widespread tale. In folkloristics it falls under the Aarne–Thompson–Uther index type ATU 300, "The Dragonslayer".[7] See also[edit] Fafnir King Ghidorah, fictional kaiju and villain in the Godzilla film franchise inspired by Yamata no Orochi. Leviathan Princess and dragon The Three Treasures Hydreigon References[edit] ^ 日本書紀 卷第一, 頭尾各有八岐 ^ 古事記 上卷并序, 身一有八頭八尾 ^ tr. Aston 1896:1:52–53 ^ Miller 1971:25–7 ^ Watkins, Calvert (1995). How to Kill a Dragon: Aspects of Indo-European Poetics. London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514413-0 ^ Speiser, "An Intrusive Hurro-Hittite Myth", Journal of the American Oriental Society 62.2 (June 1942:98–102) p. 100 ^ Weiss, Michael. "Slaying the Serpent: Comparative Mythological Perspectives on Susanoo's Dragon Fight". In: Journal of Asian Humanities at Kyushu University (JAH-Q). Volume 3. Spring 2018. pp. 1–20. Bibliography[edit] Aston, William George, tr. 1896. Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. 2 vols. Kegan Paul. 1972 Tuttle reprint. Benedict, Paul K. 1985. "Toppakō: Tōnan Ajia no gengo kara Nihongo e 突破口等東南アジアの言語から日本語え," Nishi Yoshio 西義郎, tr. Computational Analyses of Asian and African Languages 25. Benedict, Paul K. 1990. Japanese Austro/Tai. Karoma. Carr, Michael. 1990. "Chinese Dragon Names", Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area 13.2:87–189. Chamberlain, Basil H., tr. 1919. The Kojiki, Records of Ancient Matters. 1981 Tuttle reprint. Littleton, C. Scott. 1981. "Susa-nö-wo versus Ya-mata nö woröti: An Indo-European Theme in Japanese Mythology." History of Religions 20:269-80. Miller, Roy Andrew. 1971. Japanese and the Other Altaic Languages. University of Chicago Press. Miller, Roy Andrew. 1987. "[Review of] Toppakō: Tōnan Ajia no gengo kara Nihongo e … By Paul K. Benedict. Translated by Nishi Yoshio." Language 63.3:643–648. Smith, G. Elliot. 1919. The Evolution of the Dragon. London: Longmans, Green & Company. Visser, Marinus Willern de. 1913. The Dragon in China and Japan. J. Müller. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application programming interfaces. Yamata-no-orochi, Encyclopedia of Shinto Hyakkai Ryūran: Yamata-No-Orochi (in Japanese) Susanoo vs Yamata no Orochi animated depiction v t e Japanese mythology Mythic texts Kojiki Nihon Shoki Fudoki Kujiki Kogo Shūi Hotsuma Tsutae Nihon Ryōiki Konjaku Monogatarishū Shintōshū Butsuzōzui Japanese creation myth Kotoamatsukami Amenominakanushi Kamiyo (Kamiyonanayo) Kuniumi Kamiumi Izanami Izanagi Kagutsuchi Watatsumi Takamagahara mythology Amaterasu Susanoo Tsukuyomi Ame-no-Uzume Izumo mythology Yamata no Orochi Hare of Inaba Ōkuninushi Kuni-yuzuri Kotoshironushi Takeminakata Hyūga mythology Tenson kōrin Ninigi Konohanasakuya-hime Hoderi Hoori Toyotama-hime Ugayafukiaezu Human age Emperor Jimmu Tagishimimi Kesshi Hachidai Mythical locations Ashihara no Nakatsukuni Amano-Iwato Onogoro Island Ne-no-kuni Ryūgū-jō Takamagahara Yomi Major Buddhist figures Amida Nyorai Daruma Five Tathagatas Seven Lucky Gods Benzaiten Bishamonten Daikokuten Ebisu Fukurokuju Hotei Jurōjin Kisshōten Legendary creatures Dragon Kappa Kitsune Oni Tengu Yōkai Yūrei Other Shinigami Ryukyuan religion Amamikyu Tenson dynasty Ainu mythology Kamuy Kamuy-huci Hasinaw-uk-kamuy Shinto deities Mythology in popular culture Japanese deities Sacred objects Japanese religions v t e Japanese folklore Folktales Awa Tanuki Gassen Bunbuku Chagama Hakuzōsu Hanasaka Jiisan Issun-bōshi Kachi-kachi Yama Kasa Jizō Kintarō Kobutori Jiisan Kurozuka Momotarō Nezumi no Sumō Saru Kani Gassen Shita-kiri Suzume Taketori Monogatari Tamamo-no-Mae Tawara Tōda Tsuru no Ongaeshi Urashima Tarō Yamata no Orochi Yotsuya Kaidan Oto-hime Texts Konjaku Monogatarishū Otogi-zōshi Uji Shūi Monogatari Legendary creatures Abura-akago Abura-sumashi Aka Manto Akaname Akashita Akateko Akuma Amabie Amanojaku Amazake-babaa Amefurikozō Ameonna Amikiri Aobōzu Aonyōbō Aosaginohi Ashinagatenaga Ayakashi Azukiarai Bake-kujira Bakeneko Baku Basan Binbōgami Chimimōryō Daidarabotchi Dodomeki Dragon Enenra Funayūrei Furaribi Fūri Futakuchi-onna Gagoze Gashadokuro Goryō Hanako-san Harionago Hibagon Hiderigami Hitogitsune Hitotsume-kozō Hitotsume-nyūdō Hone-onna Hyōsube Ikiryō Ikuchi Inugami Ishinagenjo Isonade Janjanbi Jinmenju Jorōgumo Jubokko Kamaitachi Kamikiri Kappa Kasa-obake Kasha Kawauso Keukegen Kijimuna Kinoko Kirin Kitsune Hakuzōsu Kitsunebi Kodama Komainu Konaki-jiji Korpokkur Koromodako Kotobuki Kuchisake-onna Kuda-gitsune Kudan Kyubi Mikaribaba Mikoshi-nyūdō Miage-nyūdō Misaki Mizuchi Mokumokuren Mononoke Mōryō Mujina Namahage Namazu Nekomata Ningyo Noderabō Noppera-bō Nue Nuppeppō Nurarihyon Nure-onna Nurikabe Nyūdō-bōzu Obake Oboroguruma Oiwa Okiku Ōmukade Oni Ibaraki-dōji Kijo/Onibaba Kidōmaru Rashōmon no oni Shuten-dōji Onibi Onikuma Onryō Ōnyūdō Osaki Otoroshi Ouni Raijū Rokurokubi Samebito Sankai Satori Sazae-oni Shachihoko Shidaidaka Shikigami Shinigami Shiranui Shirime Shiryō Shōjō Shōkera Sōjōbō Sunekosuri Takaonna Tanuki Danzaburou-danuki Inugami Gyōbu Shibaemon-tanuki Yashima no Hage-tanuki Ten Tengu Tennin Tenome Tesso Tōfu-kozō Tsuchigumo Tsuchinoko Tsukumogami Abumi-guchi Bakezōri Biwa-bokuboku Boroboroton Chōchin-obake Ittan-momen Kasa-obake Koto-furunushi Menreiki Ungaikyō Tsurubebi Tsurara-onna Tsurube-otoshi Ubagabi Ubume Umi zatō Umibōzu Ushi-oni Uwan Waira Wanyūdō Yamabiko Yamawaro Yamajijii Yama-uba Yanari Yobuko Yōkai Yōsei Yosuzume Yuki-onna Yume no seirei Yūrei Zashiki-warashi Folklorists Kunio Yanagita Keigo Seki Lafcadio Hearn Shigeru Mizuki Inoue Enryō Mythology in popular culture