Figure in Chinese religion and mythology For other uses, see Huanglong. Portrait of the Hongwu Emperor in a silk yellow dragon robe featuring embroidered the Yellow Dragon Part of a series on Chinese folk religion Concepts Tian—Shangdi Qi Shen Ling Xian ling Yinyang Hundun Mingyun Yuanfen Baoying Wu Theory Chinese theology Chinese gods and immortals Chinese mythology Chinese creation myth Chinese spiritual world concepts Model humanity: Xian Zhenren Wen and wu Practices Fenxiang Jingxiang Feng shui Miaohui Wu shamanism Jitong mediumship Precious scrolls Institutions and temples Associations of good-doing Lineage associations or churches Chinese temple Ancestral shrine Chinese Folk Temples' Association Festivals Qingming Zhongyuan Zhongqiu Jiuhuangye Qixi Duanwu Nian Internal traditions Major cultural forms Chinese ancestral religion Chinese communal deity religion Chinese mother goddess worship Northeast China folk religion Main philosophical traditions: Confucianism (state rites) Taoism Other schools Ritual traditions: Folk ritual masters' orders Jitong mediumship Nuo folk religion Chinese shamanism Devotional traditions: Mazuism Wang Ye worship Salvation churches and sects: De teaching Jiugongdao Luo teaching Maitreya teachings Tiandi teachings Tianxian miaodao Xia teaching Xiantiandao Zaili teaching Qigong Confucian churches and sects: Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Taigu school Related religions Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Miao folk religion Vietnamese folk religion Qiang folk religion Yao folk religion Zhuang folk religion v t e The Yellow Dragon (simplified Chinese: 黄龙; traditional Chinese: 黃龍; pinyin: Huánglóng; Cantonese Yale: Wong4 Lung4 Japanese: Kōryū or Ōryū Korean: Hwang-Ryong Vietnamese: Hoàng Long) is the zoomorphic incarnation of the Yellow Emperor of the center of the universe in Chinese religion and mythology.[1] The Yellow Emperor or Yellow Deity was conceived by a virgin mother, Fubao, who became pregnant after seeing a yellow ray of light turning around the Northern Dipper (in Chinese theology the principal symbol of God). Twenty-four months later, the Yellow Emperor was born and was associated with the color yellow because it is the color of the earth (Dì 地), the material substance in which he incarnated.[1] The Yellow Dragon is a part of Wuxing and the Four Symbols. Contents 1 Myths of Fuxi and Huangdi 2 Other uses 3 See also 4 References 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources Myths of Fuxi and Huangdi[edit] According to legends, the Yellow Dragon already manifested hornless to Fuxi, emerging from the River Luo, and instructed him with the elements of writing. When he appeared before Fuxi, he filled a hole in the sky made by the monster Gonggong. The Yellow Emperor was said to have turned into the form of the Yellow Dragon at the end of his life to ascend to Heaven. Since the Chinese consider him to be their ancestor, they sometimes refer to themselves as "children of the dragon" (also see: Nine sons of the dragon). This legend also contributed towards the use of the Chinese dragon as a symbol of imperial power. The Chinese national flag from 1889–1912 is also called the Yellow Dragon Flag (黄龙旗; 黃龍旗; huánglóng qí). Other uses[edit] In East Asian culture, the Yellow Dragon is the fifth symbol completing the Sixiang (Four Symbols). This deity is the center of the cosmos and it represents the element earth, the Chinese quintessence, as well as the changing of the seasons. The Yellow Dragon does not appear in Japanese mythology: the fifth element in the Japanese elemental system is the void, so there cannot be an animal representing it. However, some consider the Ōryū as the Japanese counterpart of the Yellow Dragon since they share some similarities. See also[edit] Four Symbols Azure Dragon Yinglong References[edit] Citations[edit] ^ a b Tan (2015), p. 2015. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFTan2015 (help) Sources[edit] Tan, Shirley; Beijing Foreign Language Press (2015). Chinese Auspicious Culture. Asiapac Books Pte Ltd. ISBN 978-9812296429. v t e Chinese mythology Overview topics Creation myth Godly world concepts Astrology Dragons Shenmo fiction Gods and immortals Tian Pangu Ghosts Major personages Deities Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Eight Immortals Shennong Yellow Emperor Yan Emperor Chiyou Hou Yi Kuafu Creatures Four Symbols Black Tortoise Azure Dragon White Tiger Vermilion Bird Yellow Dragon Four Benevolent Animals Qilin Fenghuang Yinglong Spirit turtle Huli jing Chinese guardian lions Pixiu (Bixie) Nian Wuzhiqi Yeren Fox spirit Four Perils (Four Evildoers) Places Fusang Penglai Diyu Kunlun Mountain Youdu Longmen Popular literary works Classic of Mountains and Seas Shi Yi Ji The Peach Blossom Spring The Four Journeys Investiture of the Gods Legend of the White Snake The Sorcerer's Revolt Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio Journey to the West Soushen Ji Tian Xian Pei What the Master Would Not Discuss Heavenly Questions (Chu Ci) Huainanzi Records of the Grand Historian v t e Chinese constellations Three Enclosures (三垣) Purple Forbidden enclosure (紫微垣) Supreme Palace enclosure (太微垣) Heavenly Market enclosure (天市垣) Four Symbols (四象) and Twenty-Eight Mansions (二十八宿) East – Azure Dragon (青龍) Horn (角) Neck (亢) Root (氐) Room (房) Heart (心) Tail (尾) Winnowing Basket (箕) South – Vermilion Bird (朱雀) Well (井) Ghost (鬼) Willow (柳) Star (星) Extended Net (張) Wings (翼) Chariot (軫) West – White Tiger (白虎) Legs (奎) Bond (婁) Stomach (胃) Hairy Head (昴) Net (畢) Turtle Beak (觜) Three Stars (參) North – Black Tortoise (玄武) Dipper (斗) Ox (牛) Girl (女) Emptiness (虛) Rooftop (危) Encampment (室) Wall (壁) Center – Yellow Dragon (黃龍) Earth