Part of a series on Zoroastrianism Atar (fire), a primary symbol of Zoroastrianism Primary topics Ahura Mazda Zarathustra Asha Vohu Manah Persia/Iran Faravahar Avestan Divine entities Amesha Spentas Yazatas Ahuras Daevas Angra Mainyu Scripture and worship Avesta Ashem Vohu Ahuna Vairya Yenghe hatam Airyaman ishya Fire Temples 101 Names of Ahura Mazda Adur Burzen-Mihr Adur Farnbag Adur Gushnasp Cypress of Kashmar Gathas Yasna Vendidad Visperad Yashts Khordeh Avesta The Revayats Ab-Zohr Accounts and legends Dēnkard Bundahišn Book of Arda Viraf Book of Jamasp Story of Sanjan Chinvat Bridge Frashokereti History and culture Zurvanism Mazdakism Khurramites Calendar Festivals Marriage Burial Adherents Zoroastrians in India Zoroastrians in Iran Parsis Zoroastrianism in the United States Iranis Persecution of Zoroastrians Related topics Criticism of Zoroastrianism  Religion portal v t e Zoroastrianism in Armenia dates back as far as to the fifth-century BC, notably during the Achaemenid and Parthian periods in the Armenian Highlands. Prior to Armenia's Christianisation, it was a predominantly Zoroastrian-adhering land.[1] The yazatas Mithra (Mihr) and Verethragna (Vahagn) particularly enjoyed a high degree of reverence in the country.[2] Armenian Zoroastrian fire temple in the medieval Bagratid city of Ani Contents 1 History 1.1 Arewordikʿ 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources History[edit] A number of Zoroastrian fire-altars had been discovered in Christian sanctuaries in Armenia.[3] In various parts of Armenia, Zoroastrianism lingered on for several centuries even after the official adoption of Christianity. The Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, under which Armenia eventually would become a Christian nation, were pious Zoroastrians who invoked Mithra as the lord of covenants, as is proper.[4] An episode which illustrates the Armenian Arsacids and their observance of the cult is the famous journey of Tiridates I to Rome in A.D. 65-66. The same aforementioned Tiridates I, brother of Vologases I of Parthia and founder of the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia, was a Zoroastrian magus or priest.[5][6] In A.D. 53 the Parthian Arsacid dynasty came into Armenia, the king, Trdat I, is thought to have done a great amount to spread Zoroastrianism in Armenia.[7] The Arsacid kings legitimized their rule through the authority of the Zoroastrian deity (yazata) Verethragna, the god of victory.[8] According to J. Russel, Zurvanism was the form of Zoroastrianism under Yazdagrird II (438-57), which he promoted in Persian Armenia.[9] The Armenian calendar show influences of the Zoroastrian calendar. An Armenian Christian source, according to which an Zurvanite proselytizer, Mihr Narseh, spoke of the words openly: 'We do not worship, like you, the elements, the sun, the moon, the winds and the fire.'[10] The Armenologist James R. Russell notes that the Armenian Cross incorporates influences from Armenia's Zoroastrian past.[11] As Zoroastrian traditions were very much integrated into Armenian spirital and material culture, they survived the zealotry of the Sasanian priest Kartir (fl. 3rd century) and his successors, and were ultimately incorporated into Armenian Christianity.[11] Russell adds: "The Armenian Cross itself is supported on tongues of flame and has at its center not the body of Christ, but a sunburst".[11] Arewordikʿ[edit] Reports indicate that there were Zoroastrian Armenians in Armenia until the 1920s.[12] This small group of Armenian Zoroastrians that had survived through the centuries, were known as the Arewordikʿ ("Children of the Sun").[11] They had never converted to Christianity, and had survived the late 19th/early 20th century massacres of Armenians in Western Armenia, from the Hamidian Massacres down to the Armenian Genocide.[11] Medieval Armenian sources narrate that the Arewordikʿ were never converted by Gregory the Illuminator, the patron saint and first official head of the Armenian Apostolic Church, and that they had been "infected" by Zradasht (Zoroaster).[11] The Arewordikʿ were specifically distinguished from Christian sects whose adherents were deemed heretics (such as the Paulicians and Tondrakians).[11] The Arewordikʿ had seemingly taught the Paulicians and Tondrakians "to expose the dead on rooftops instead of burying them", which indicates that burial and exposure of the dead was practiced in Armenia as in Iran.[11] The Arewordikʿ spoke the Armenian language and, as James R. Russell notes, revered the poplar and all heliotropic plants.[11] Russell adds: "A tree which is either a poplar or a cypress, probably the latter, which is particularly revered by the Zoroastrians, appears on an Artaxiad coin".[11] The Arewordikʿ Armenians offered sacrifices for the souls of the dead, and the leader of the Arewordikʿ was called the Hazarpet (cf. Iranian Hazarbed).[11] The Arewordikʿ were known to populate four villages in the area of Mardin (present-day southeastern Turkey) in the late 14th century, whereas others inhabited Samosata (modern Samsat, Turkey) and Amida (modern Diyarbakır, Turkey).[11] In the town of Marsovan (modern Merzifon, Turkey), in the early 20th century, the Armenian quarter was known as "Arewordi".[11] Furthermore, a cemetery outside the town was known as "Arewordii grezman", and an Armenian owner of a close by vineyard was named "Arewordean", in other words, Armenian for "Arewordi-son".[11] See also[edit] Battle of Avarayr Armenian mythology Satrapy of Armenia Arsacid dynasty of Armenia Persian Armenia Marzpanate Armenia References[edit] ^ Boyce, Mary. Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices Psychology Press, 2001 ISBN 0415239028 p 84 ^ Curtis 2016, p. 185. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCurtis2016 (help) ^ Zoroastrianism in fifth-century Armenia - Solomon A. Nigosian, Department of Religious Studies, University of Toronto ^ Russell, James R. (1987). Zoroastrianism in Armenia (Harvard Iranian series). Harvard University, Department of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations. ISBN 978-0674968509. The Parthian Arsacids who came to the throne of Armenia in the first century A.D. were pious Zoroastrians who invoked Mithra as the lord of covenants, as is proper. An episode which illustrates their observance of the cult is the famous journey of Tiridates to Rome in A.D. 65-66. (...) ^ Lang, David Marshall (1980). Armenia, cradle of civilization. Allen & Unwin. pp. 84, 141, 149. (..) Though Tiridates was to be a client king of the Romans, Nero rightly judged that his investiture would satisfy the honour of the Parthians as well. Three years later, Tiridates made the journey to Rome. As a magus or priest of the Zoroastrian faith, he had to observe the rites which forbade him to defile water by travelling. (...) ^ Boyce, Mary (2001). Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices. Psychology Press. p. 84. (..) In 62 A.C. the Parthian king Vologases (Valakhsh) put his younger brother Tiridates on the Armenian throne, and this cadet branch of the Arsacids ruled there into the Sasanian period. Tiridates was himself a strictly observant Zoroastrian - Roman sources even call him a Magus - and there is no doubt that during the latter period of the Parthian period Armenia was a predominantly Zoroastrian adhering land. ^ The Heritage of Armenian Literature, Volume I - Agop Jack Hacikyan Gabriel Basmajian Edward S. Franchuk Nourhan Ouzounian, page 70 ^ Garsoian 2004. sfn error: no target: CITEREFGarsoian2004 (help) ^ J. Russell, Zoroastrianism in Armenia, 136-138 ^ On the Orthodoxy of Sasanian Zoroastrianism - Mary Boyce, page 18 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Russell, J. R. (1986). "ARMENIA AND IRAN iii. Armenian Religion". In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.). Encyclopædia Iranica, Volume II/4: Architecture IV–Armenia and Iran IV. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp. 438–444. ISBN 978-0-71009-104-8. ^ Anne Sofie Roald,Anh Nga Longva. Religious Minorities in the Middle East: Domination, Self-Empowerment, Accommodation BRILL, 11 nov. 2011 ISBN 9004216847 p 313;"Later, Armenian Christianity retained some Zoroastrian vocabulary and ritual. Reports indicate that there were Zoroastrian Armenians in Armenia until the 1920s." Sources[edit] Garsoian, Nina (2004). "Armeno-Iranian relations in the pre-Islamic period". Encyclopædia Iranica, online edition. New York. Curtis, Vesta Sarkhosh (2016). "Ancient Iranian Motifs and Zoroastrian Iconography". In Williams, Markus; Stewart, Sarah; Hintze, Almut (eds.). The Zoroastrian Flame Exploring Religion, History and Tradition. I.B. Tauris. pp. 179–203. ISBN 9780857728159. de Jong, Albert (2015). "Armenian and Georgian Zoroastrianism". In Stausberg, Michael; Vevaina, Yuhan Sohrab-Dinshaw; Tessmann, Anna (eds.). The Wiley Blackwell Companion to Zoroastrianism. John Wiley And Sons Ltd. pp. 119–128. La Porta, Sergio (2018). "Zoroastrianism, Armenian". In Nicholson, Oliver (ed.). The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-866277-8. Russell, James R. (1987). Zoroastrianism in Armenia. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674968509.