Örvar-Oddr informs Ingeborg about Hjalmar's death, by August Malmström (1859) Örvar-Oddr (Old Norse Ǫrvar-Oddr, "Arrow-Odd" or "Arrow's Point") is a legendary hero about whom an anonymous Icelander wrote a fornaldarsaga in the latter part of the 13th century. Örvar-Odds saga, the Saga of Örvar-Odd, became very popular and contains old legends and songs. He also appears in Hervarar saga and, concerning the battle on Samsø, in Gesta Danorum. Contents 1 Plot summary 2 Analysis 3 See also 4 References 5 Translations 6 External links Plot summary[edit] Oddr was the son of Grímr Loðinkinni and the grandson of Ketill Hængr (both of whom have their own sagas) of Hålogaland. When he was an infant, a völva predicted that he would be killed by his own horse Faxi, at the place where he was born, at the age of three hundred (which may very well signify 360, as a hundred by the time was a unit of numbers denoting 120, not 100 - which have been called a petty hundred). In order to undo the prediction, he killed his horse, buried it deep in the ground and left his home intending never to return again. As he was leaving, his father gave him some magic arrows (Gusisnautar) which soon earned him the cognomen arrow. After a voyage to Finnmark, Bjarmaland, Holmgård, Constantinople and Jotunheim, he fought successfully against several Vikings. However, when he encountered the Swedish champion Hjalmar, he met his match. The fight was even and the two warriors not only became friends, but entered sworn brotherhood. The two heroes fought many battles together (for more see Hjalmar), until after the famous battle of Samsø against the sons of Arngrim, Örvar-Oddr had to bring the dead Hjalmar (killed by Angantyr) to Uppsala and his betrothed Ingeborg, the daughter of the Swedish king. Örvar-Oddr travelled in the South fighting against the corsairs of the Mediterranean, he was baptised in Sicily, was shipwrecked and arrived alone in the Holy Land. While seeking vengeance against Ogmund Tussock for the murder of his blood-brother Thord, Oddr is accompanied by his giant son Vignir. During their voyage, they encounter two large sea-creatures[1] as described by Vignir:[2] …these were two sea-monsters, one called Sea-Reek, and the other Heather-Back. The Sea-Reek is the biggest monster in the whole ocean. It swallows men and ships, and whales too, and anything else around. It stays underwater for days, then it puts up its mouth and nostrils, and when it does, it never stays on the surface for less than one tide. These creatures later described in an Old Norwegian scientific work Konungs skuggsjá (c. 1250), were to come to be understood as what the Norse regarded as the Kraken. This is seemingly one of the first references to the Kraken. Dressed as an old man, he arrived in Hunaland, where his true identity was soon revealed due to his heroic actions. After defeating the king of Bjalkaland ("pelt country"), who used to pay tribute to the king of Hunaland, he married the princess Silkisif and became the next king. After all this, he became homesick and went back home. Walking over the grave of Faxi, he mocked the old prophecy, but tripped over the skull of a horse from which a snake appeared. The snake bit him and he died. Analysis[edit] The saga includes several stories, such as the voyage of Ottar from Hålogaland to Bjarmaland, the legend of Hjalmar's foster-brother (originally named Söte), Starkaðr, Ketil Höing, Odysseus and Polyphemus, Sigurd Jorsalfare and the Rus' ruler Oleg of Novgorod (the attack on Bjalkaland). The motive of Örvar-Oddr's mocking the prophecy and death has parallels in the Primary Chronicle, which describes the manner of the death of Oleg (also of Varangian origin) in similar terms. Oleg's death from "the skull of a horse" is also the subject of one of the best known ballads in the Russian language, written by Alexander Pushkin in 1826. See also[edit] Hrafnistumannasögur References[edit] ^ Boer, R. C. (1888). Örvar-Odds saga. Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp. 132. OCLC 462860153. ^ Hermann Palsson, Paul Edwards (1985). Seven Viking Romances. 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2: Penguin Books Canada Ltd. pp. 86. ISBN 978-0-14-044474-2.CS1 maint: location (link) Translations[edit] Waggoner, Ben (2012). The Hrafnista Sagas. New Haven, CT: Troth Publications. ISBN 978-0557729418. Arrow-Odd: A Medieval Novel, trans Paul Edwards and Herman Palsson, New York: New York University Press, 1970. SBN: 8147-0458-1. (First English translation) External links[edit] Proverbs and proverbial materials in Örvar-Odds saga The Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus on Orvar-Odd The Old Norse text of the Saga This article contains content from the Owl Edition of Nordisk familjebok, a Swedish encyclopedia published between 1904 and 1926, now in the public domain. v t e Legendary sagas Af Upplendinga konungum Áns saga bogsveigis Ásmundar saga kappabana Bósa saga ok Herrauðs Egils saga einhenda ok Ásmundar berserkjabana Eiríks saga víðförla Frá Fornjóti ok hans ættmönnum Friðþjófs saga frækna Gautreks saga ok Gjafa-Refs Gríms saga loðinkinna Göngu-Hrólfs saga Hálfdanar saga Brönufóstra Hálfdanar saga Eysteinssonar Hálfs saga konungs ok Hálfsrekka Heiðreks saga konungs ok Hervarar Helga þáttr Þórissonar Hjálmþés saga ok Ölvis Hrólfs saga Gautrekssonar Hrólfs saga kraka Hrómundar saga Gripssonar Högna saga Hálfdanarsonar Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra Ingvars saga víðförla Ketils saga hængs Norna-Gests þáttr Ragnars saga loðbrókar Ragnarssona þáttr Sturlaugs saga starfsama Sögubrot af nokkrum fornkonungum í Dana ok Svíaveldi Sörla saga sterka Tóka þáttr Tókasonar Völsunga saga Þjalar-Jóns saga Þorsteins saga Víkingssonar Þorsteins þáttr bæjarmagns Örvar-Odds saga Other saga genres Bishops' sagas Chivalric sagas Contemporary sagas Kings' sagas Sagas of Icelanders Saints' sagas Short tales v t e The Tyrfing Cycle Attestations Hervarar saga Hervararkviða Hlöðskviða Connected by the sword Tyrfing People Angantyr Arngrim Örvar-Oddr Gestumblindi Gizur Heidrek Hervor Hjalmar and Ingeborg Hlöd Svafrlami Dwarves Dvalin Durin Locations Arheimar Bolmsö Gamla Uppsala Glæsisvellir Munarvágr Myrkviðr Reidgotaland Samsø Authority control BNF: cb13337425v (data) GND: 4430243-5 LCCN: sh98004527 MA: 99613125